

===== BOOK: tbow.txt =====



The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

THE BOOK OF WONDER

BY LORD DUNSANY

[1912]

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

CONTENTS

[*Preface]

[*The Bride of the Man-Horse]

[*Distressing Tale of Thangobrind The Jeweller]

[*The House of the Sphinx]

[*Probable Adventure of the Three Literary Men]

[*The Injudicious Prayers of Pombo the Idolater]

[*The Loot of Bombasharna]

[*Miss Cubbidge and the Dragon Of Romance]

[*The Quest of the Queen's Tears]

[*The Hoard of the Gibbelins]

[*How Nuth Would Have Practised His Art Upon the Gnoles]

[*How One Came, As Was Foretold, to the City Of Never]

[*The Coronation of Mr. Thomas Shap]

[*Chu-Bu and Sheemish]

[*The Wonderful Window]

[*Epilogue]

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f00]

PREFACE

Come with me, ladies and gentlemen who are in any wise weary of London: come with me: and those that tire at all of the world we know: for we have new worlds here.

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f01]

THE BRIDE OF THE MAN-HORSE

In the morning of his two hundred and fiftieth year Shepperalk the centaur went to the golden coffer, wherein the treasure of the centaurs was, and taking from it the hoarded amulet that his father, Jyshak, in the year of his prime, had hammered from mountain gold and set with opals bartered from the gnomes, he put it upon his wrist, and said no word, but walked from his mother's cavern. And he took with him too that clarion of the centaurs, that famous silver horn, that in its time had summoned to surrender seventeen cities of Man, and for twenty years had brayed at star-girt walls in the Siege of Tholdenblarna, the citadel of the gods, what time the centaurs waged their fabulous war and were not broken by any force of arms, but retreated slowly in a cloud of dust before the final miracle of the gods that They brought in Their desperate need from Their ultimate armoury. He took it and strode away, and his mother only sighed and let him go.

She knew that today he would not drink at the stream coming down from the terraces of Varpa Niger, the inner land of the mountains, that today he would not wonder awhile at the sunset and afterwards trot back to the cavern again to sleep on rushes pulled by rivers that know not Man. She knew that it was with him as it had been of old with his father, and with Goom the father of Jyshak, and long ago with the gods. Therefore she only sighed and let him go.

But he, coming out from the cavern that was his home, went for the first time over the little stream, and going round the corner of the crags saw glittering beneath him the mundane plain. And the wind of the autumn that was gilding the world, rushing up the slopes of the mountain, beat cold on his naked flanks. He raised his head and snorted.

"I am a man-horse now!" he shouted aloud; and leaping from crag to crag he galloped by valley and chasm, by torrent-bed and scar of avalanche, until he came to the wandering leagues of the plain, and left behind him for ever the Athraminaurian mountains.

His goal was Zretazoola, the city of Sombelene. What legend of Sombelene's inhuman beauty or of the wonder of her mystery had ever floated over the mundane plain to the fabulous cradle of the centaurs' race, the Athraminaurian mountains, I do not know. Yet in the blood of man there is a tide, an old sea-current, rather, that is somehow akin to the twilight, which brings him rumours of beauty from however far away, as driftwood is found at sea from islands not yet discovered; and this springtide of current that visits the blood of man comes from the fabulous quarter of his lineage, from the legendary, of old; it takes him out to the woodlands, out to the hills; he listens to ancient song. So it may be that Shepperalk's fabulous blood stirred in those lonely mountains away at the edge of the world to rumours that only the airy twilight knew and only confided secretly to the bat, for Shepperalk was more legendary even than man. Certain it was that he headed from the first for the city Zretazoola, where Sombelene in her temple dwelt; though all the mundane plain, its rivers and mountains, lay between Shepperalk's home and the city he sought.

When first the feet of the centaur touched the grass of that soft alluvial earth he blew for joy upon the silver horn, he pranced and caracoled, he gambolled over the leagues; pace came to him like a maiden with a lamp, a new and beautiful wonder; the wind laughed as it passed him. He put his head down low to the scent of the flower, he lifted it up to be nearer the unseen stars, he revelled through kingdoms, took rivers in his stride; how shall I tell you, ye that dwell in cities, how shall I tell you what he felt as he galloped? He felt for strength like the towers of Bel-Narana; for lightness like those gossamer palaces that the fairy-spider builds 'twixt heaven and sea along the coasts of Zith; for swiftness like some bird racing up from the morning to sing in some city's spires before daylight comes. He was the sworn companion of the wind. For joy he was as a song; the lightnings of his legendary sires, the earlier gods, began to mix with his blood; his hooves thundered. He came to the cities of men, and all men trembled, for they remembered the ancient mythical wars, and now they dreaded new battles and feared for the race of man. Not by Clio are these wars recorded; history does not know them, but what of that? Not all of us have sat at historians' feet, but all have learned fable and myth at their mothers' knees. And there were none that did not fear strange wars when they saw Shepperalk swerve and leap along the public ways. So he passed from city to city.

By night he lay down unpanting in the reeds of some marsh or forest; before dawn he rose triumphant, and hugely drank of some river in the dark, and splashing out of it would trot to some high place to find the sunrise, and to send echoing eastwards the exultant greetings of his jubilant horn. And lo! the sunrise coming up from the echoes, and the plains new-lit by the day, and the leagues spinning by like water flung from a top, and that gay companion, the loudly laughing wind, and men and the fears of men and their little cities; and, after that, great rivers and waste spaces and huge new hills, and then new lands beyond them, and more cities of men, and always the old companion, the glorious wind. Kingdom by kingdom slipt by, and still his breath was even. "It is a golden thing to gallop on good turf in one's youth," said the young man-horse, the centaur. "Ha, ha," said the wind of the hills, and the winds of the plain answered.

Bells pealed in frantic towers, wise men consulted parchments, astrologers sought of the portent from the stars, the aged made subtle prophecies. "Is he not swift?" said the young. "How glad he is," said the children.

Night after night brought him sleep, and day after day lit his gallop, till he came to the lands of the Athalonian men who live by the edges of the mundane plain, and from them he came to the lands of legend again such as those in which he was cradled on the other side of the world, and which fringe the marge of the world and mix with the twilight. And there a mighty thought came into his untired heart, for he knew that he neared Zretazoola now, the city of Sombelene.

It was late in the day when he neared it, and clouds coloured with evening rolled low on the plain before him; he galloped on into their golden mist, and when it hid from his eyes the sight of things, the dreams in his heart awoke and romantically he pondered all those rumours that used to come to him from Sombelene, because of the fellowship of fabulous things. She dwelt (said evening secretly to the bat) in a little temple by a lone lakeshore. A grove of cypresses screened her from the city, from Zretazoola of the climbing ways. And opposite her temple stood her tomb, her sad lake-sepulchre with open door, lest her amazing beauty and the centuries of her youth should ever give rise to the heresy among men that lovely Sombelene was immortal: for only her beauty and her lineage were divine.

Her father had been half centaur and half god; her mother was the child of a desert lion and that sphinx that watches the pyramids;--she was more mystical than Woman.

Her beauty was as a dream, was as a song; the one dream of a lifetime dreamed on enchanted dews, the one song sung to some city by a deathless bird blown far from his native coasts by storm in Paradise. Dawn after dawn on mountains of romance or twilight after twilight could never equal her beauty; all the glow-worms had not the secret among them nor all the stars of night; poets had never sung it nor evening guessed its meaning; the morning envied it, it was hidden from lovers.

She was unwed, unwooed.

The lions came not to woo her because they feared her strength, and the gods dared not love her because they knew she must die.

This was what evening had whispered to the bat, this was the dream in the heart of Shepperalk as he cantered blind through the mist. And suddenly there at his hooves in the dark of the plain appeared the cleft in the legendary lands, and Zretazoola sheltering in the cleft, and sunning herself in the evening.

Swiftly and craftily he bounded down by the upper end of the cleft, and entering Zretazoola by the outer gate which looks out sheer on the stars, he galloped suddenly down the narrow streets. Many that rushed out on to balconies as he went clattering by, many that put their heads from glittering windows, are told of in olden song. Shepperalk did not tarry to give greetings or to answer challenges from martial towers, he was down through the earthward gateway like the thunderbolt of his sires, and, like Leviathan who has leapt at an eagle, he surged into the water between temple and tomb.

He galloped with half-shut eyes up the temple-steps, and, only seeing dimly through his lashes, seized Sombelene by the hair, undazzled as yet by her beauty, and so haled her away; and, leaping with her over the floorless chasm where the waters of the lake fall unremembered away into a hole in the world, took her we know not where, to be her slave for all centuries that are allowed to his race.

Three blasts he gave as he went upon that silver horn that is the world-old treasure of the centaurs. These were his wedding bells.

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f02]

DISTRESSING TALE OF THANGOBRIND THE JEWELLER

When Thangobrind the jeweller heard the ominous cough, he turned at once upon that narrow way. A thief was he, of very high repute, being patronized by the lofty and elect, for he stole nothing smaller than the Moomoo's egg, and in all his life stole only four kinds of stone--the ruby, the diamond, the emerald, and the sapphire; and, as jewellers go, his honesty was great. Now there was a Merchant Prince who had come to Thangobrind and had offered his daughter's soul for the diamond that is larger than the human head and was to be found on the lap of the spider-idol, Hlo-hlo, in his temple of Moung-ga-ling; for he had heard that Thangobrind was a thief to be trusted.

Thangobrind oiled his body and slipped out of his shop, and went secretly through byways, and got as far as Snarp, before anybody knew that he was out on business again or missed his sword from its place under the counter. Thence he moved only by night, hiding by day and rubbing the edges of his sword, which he called Mouse because it was swift and nimble. The jeweller had subtle methods of travelling; nobody saw him cross the plains of Zid; nobody saw him come to Mursk or Tlun. O, but he loved shadows! Once the moon peeping out unexpectedly from a tempest had betrayed an ordinary jeweller; not so did it undo Thangobrind; the watchman only saw a crouching shape that snarled and laughed: "'Tis but a hyena," they said. Once in the city of Ag one of the guardians seized him, but Thangobrind was oiled and slipped from his hand; you scarcely heard his bare feet patter away. He knew that the Merchant Prince awaited his return, his little eyes open all night and glittering with greed; he knew how his daughter lay chained up and screaming night and day. Ah, Thangobrind knew. And had he not been out on business he had almost allowed himself one or two little laughs. But business was business, and the diamond that he sought still lay on the lap of Hlo-hlo, where it had been for the last two million years since Hlo-hlo created the world and gave unto it all things except that precious stone called Dead Man's Diamond. The jewel was often stolen, but it had a knack of coming back again to the lap of Hlo-hlo. Thangobrind knew this, but he was no common jeweller and hoped to outwit Hlo-hlo, perceiving not the trend of ambition and lust and that they are vanity.

How nimbly he threaded his way thought he pits of Snood!--now like a botanist, scrutinising the ground; now like a dancer, leaping from crumbling edges. It was quite dark when he went by the towers of Tor, where archers shoot ivory arrows at strangers lest any foreigner should alter their laws, which are bad, but not to be altered by mere aliens. At night they shoot by the sound of the strangers' feet. O, Thangobrind, was ever a jeweller like you! He dragged two stones behind him by long cords, and at these the archers shot. Tempting indeed was the snare that they set in Woth, the emeralds loose-set in the city's gate; but Thangobrind discerned the golden cord that climbed the wall from each and the weights that would topple upon him if he touched one, and so he left them, though he left them weeping, and at last came to Theth. There all men worship Hlo-hlo; though they are willing to believe in other gods, as missionaries attest, but only as creatures of the chase for the hunting of Hlo-hlo, who wears Their halos, so these people say, on golden hooks along his hunting-belt. And from Theth he came to the city of Moung and the temple of Moung-ga-ling, and entered and saw the spider-idol, Hlo-hlo, sitting there with Dead Man's Diamond glittering on his lap, and looking for all the world like a full moon, but a full moon seen by a lunatic who had slept too long in its rays, for there was in Dead Man's Diamond a certain sinister look and a boding of things to happen that are better not mentioned here. The face of the spider-idol was lit by that fatal gem; there was no other light. In spite of his shocking limbs and that demoniac body, his face was serene and apparently unconscious.

A little fear came into the mind of Thangobrind the jeweller, a passing tremor--no more; business was business and he hoped for the best. Thangobrind offered honey to Hlo-hlo and prostrated himself before him. Oh, he was cunning! When the priests stole out of the darkness to lap up the honey they were stretched senseless on the temple floor, for there was a drug in the honey that was offered to Hlo-hlo. And Thangobrind the jeweller picked Dead Man's Diamond up and put it on his shoulder and trudged away from the shrine; and Hlo-hlo the spider-idol said nothing at all, but he laughed softly as the jeweller shut the door. When the priests awoke out of the grip of the drug that was offered with the honey to Hlo-hlo, they rushed to a little secret room with an outlet on the stars and cast a horoscope of the thief. Something that they saw in the horoscope seemed to satisfy the priests.

It was not like Thangobrind to go back by the road by which he had come. No, he went by another road, even though it led to the narrow way, night-house and spider-forest.

The city of Moung went towering by behind him, balcony above balcony, eclipsing half the stars, as he trudged away. Though when a soft pittering as of velvet feet arose behind him he refused to acknowledge that it might be what he feared, yet the instincts of his trade told him that it is not well when any noise whatever follows a diamond by night, and this was one of the largest that had ever come to him in the way of business. When he came to the narrow way that leads to spider-forest, Dead Man's Diamond feeling cold and heavy, and the velvety footfall seeming fearfully close, the jeweller stopped and almost hesitated. He looked behind him; there was nothing there. He listened attentively; there was no sound now. Then he thought of the screams of the Merchant Prince's daughter, whose soul was the diamond's price, and smiled and went stoutly on. There watched him, apathetically, over the narrow way, that grim and dubious woman whose house is Night. Thangobrind, hearing no longer the sound of suspicious feet, felt easier now. He was all but come to the end of the narrow way, when the woman listlessly uttered that ominous cough.

The cough was too full of meaning to be disregarded. Thangobrind turned round and saw at once what he feared. The spider-idol had not stayed at home. The jeweller put his diamond gently upon the ground and drew his sword called Mouse. And then began that famous fight upon the narrow way in which the grim old woman whose house was Night seemed to take so little interest. To the spider-idol you saw at once it was all a horrible joke. To the jeweller it was grim earnest. He fought and panted and was pushed back slowly along the narrow way, but he wounded Hlo-hlo all the while with terrible long gashes all over his deep, soft body till Mouse was slimy with blood. But at last the persistent laughter of Hlo-hlo was too much for the jeweller's nerves, and, once more wounding his demoniac foe, he sank aghast and exhausted by the door of the house called Night at the feet of the grim old woman, who having uttered once that ominous cough interfered no further with the course of events. And there carried Thangobrind the jeweller away those whose duty it was, to the house where the two men hang, and taking down from his hook the left-hand of the two, they put that venturous jeweller in his place; so that there fell on him the doom that he feared, as all men know though it is so long since, and there abated somewhat the ire of the envious gods.

And the only daughter of the Merchant Prince felt so little gratitude for this great deliverance that she took to respectability of the militant kind, and became aggressively dull, and called her home the English Riviera, and had platitudes worked in worsted upon her tea-cosy, and in the end never died, but passed away in her residence.

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f03]

THE HOUSE OF THE SPHINX

When I came to the House of the Sphinx it was already dark. They made me eagerly welcome. And I, in spite of the deed, was glad of any shelter from that ominous wood. I saw at once that there had been a deed, although a cloak did all that a cloak may do to conceal it. The mere uneasiness of the welcome made me suspect that cloak.

The Sphinx was moody and silent. I had not come to pry into the secrets of Eternity nor to investigate the Sphinx's private life, and so had little to say and few questions to ask; but to whatever I did say she remained morosely indifferent. It was clear that either she suspected me of being in search of the secrets of one of her gods, or of being boldly inquisitive about her traffic with Time, or else she was darkly absorbed with brooding upon the deed.

I saw soon enough that there was another than me to welcome; I saw it from the hurried way that they glanced from the door to the deed and back to the door again. And it was clear that the welcome was to be a bolted door. But such bolts, and such a door! Rust and decay and fungus had been there far too long, and it was not a barrier any longer that would keep out even a determined wolf. And it seemed to be something worse than a wolf that they feared.

A little later on I gathered from what they said that some imperious and ghastly thing was looking for the Sphinx, and that something that had happened had made its arrival certain. It appeared that they had slapped the Sphinx to vex her out of her apathy in order that she should pray to one of her gods, whom she had littered in the house of Time; but her moody silence was invincible, and her apathy Oriental, ever since the deed had happened. And when they found that they could not make her pray, there was nothing for them to do but to pay little useless attentions to the rusty lock of the door, and to look at the deed and wonder, and even pretend to hope, and to say that after all it might not bring that destined thing from the forest, which no one named.

It may be said I had chosen a gruesome house, but not if I had described the forest from which I came, and I was in need of any spot wherein I could rest my mind from the thought of it.

I wondered very much what thing would come from the forest on account of the deed; and having seen that forest--as you, gentle reader, have not--I had the advantage of knowing that anything might come. It was useless to ask the Sphinx--she seldom reveals things, like her paramour Time (the gods take after her), and while this mood was on her, rebuff was certain. So I quietly began to oil the lock of the door. And as soon as they saw this simple act I won their confidence. It was not that my work was of any use--it should have been done long before; but they saw that my interest was given for the moment to the thing that they thought vital. They clustered round me then. They asked me what I thought of the door, and whether I had seen better, and whether I had seen worse; and I told them about all the doors I knew, and said that he doors of the baptistry in Florence were better doors, and the doors made by a certain firm of builders in London were worse. And then I asked them what it was that was coming after the Sphinx because of the deed. And at first they would not say, and I stopped oiling the door; and then they said that it was the arch-inquisitor of the forest, who is investigator and avenger of all silverstrian things; and from that they said about him it seemed to me that this person was quite white, and was a kind of madness that would settle down quite blankly upon a place, a kind of mist in which reason could not live; and it was the fear of this that made them fumble nervously at the lock of that rotten door; but with the Sphinx it was not so much fear as sheer prophecy.

The hope that they tried to hope was well enough in its way, but I did not share it; it was clear that the thing that they feared was the corollary of the deed--one saw that more by the resignation upon the face of the Sphinx than by their sorry anxiety for the door.

The wind soughed, and the great tapers flared, and their obvious fear and the silence of the Sphinx grew more than ever a part of the atmosphere, and bats went restlessly through the gloom of the wind that beat the tapers low.

Then a few things screamed far off, then a little nearer, and something was coming towards us, laughing hideously. I hastily gave a prod to the door that they guarded; my finger sank right into the mouldering wood--there was not a chance of holding it. I had not leisure to observe their fright; I thought of the back-door, for the forest was better than this; only the Sphinx was absolutely calm, her prophecy was made and she seemed to have seen her doom, so that no new thing could perturb her.

But by mouldering rungs of ladders as old as Man, by slippery edges of the dreaded abyss, with an ominous dizziness about my heart and a feeling of horror in the soles of my feet, I clambered from tower to tower till I found the door that I sought; and it opened on to one of the upper branches of a huge and sombre pine, down which I climbed on to the floor of the forest. And I was glad to be back again in the forest from which I had fled.

And the Sphinx in her menaced house--I know not how she fared--whether she gazes for ever, disconsolate, at the deed, remembering only in her smitten mind, at which the little boys now leer, that she once knew well those things at which man stands aghast; or whether in the end she crept away, and clambering horribly from abyss to abyss, came at last to higher things, and is wise and eternal still. For who knows of madness whether it is divine or whether it be of the pit?

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f04]

PROBABLE ADVENTURE OF THE THREE LITERARY MEN

When the nomads came to El Lola they had no more songs, and the question of stealing the golden box arose in all its magnitude. On the one hand, many had sought the golden box, the receptacle (as the Aethiopians know) of poems of fabulous value; and their doom is still the common talk of Arabia. On the other hand, it was lonely to sit around the camp-fire by night with no new songs.

It was the tribe of Heth that discussed these things one evening upon the plains below the peak of Mluna. Their native land was the track across the world of immemorial wanderers; and there was trouble among the elders of the nomads because there were no new songs; while, untouched by human trouble, untouched as yet by the night that was hiding the plains away, the peak of Mluna, calm in the afterglow, looked on the Dubious Land. And it was there on the plain upon the known side of Mluna, just as the evening star came mouse-like into view and the flames of the camp-fire lifted their lonely plumes uncheered by any song, that that rash scheme was hastily planned by the nomads which the world has named The Quest of the Golden Box.

No measure of wiser precaution could the elders of the nomads have taken than to choose for their thief that very Slith, that identical thief that (even as I write) in how many school-rooms governesses teach stole a march on the King of Westalia. Yet the weight of the box was such that others had to accompany him, and Sippy and Slorg were no more agile thieves than may be found today among vendors of the antique.

So over the shoulder of Mluna these three climbed next day and slept as well as they might among its snows rather than risk a night in the woods of the Dubious Land. And the morning came up radiant and the birds were full of song, but the forest underneath and the waste beyond it and the bare and ominous crags all wore the appearance of an unuttered threat.

Though Slith had an experience of twenty years of theft, yet he said little; only if one of the others made a stone roll with his foot, or, later on in the forest, if one of them stepped on a twig, he whispered sharply to them always the same words: "That is not business." He knew that he could not make them better thieves during a two-days' journey, and whatever doubts he had he interfered no further.

From the shoulder of Mluna they dropped into the clouds, and from the clouds to the forest, to whose native beasts, as well the three thieves knew, all flesh was meat, whether it were the flesh of fish or man. There the thieves drew idolatrously from their pockets each one a separate god and prayed for protection in the unfortunate wood, and hoped therefrom for a threefold chance of escape, since if anything should eat one of them it were certain to eat them all, and they confided that the corollary might be true and all should escape if one did. Whether one of these gods was propitious and awake, or whether all of the three, or whether it was chance that brought them through the forest unmouthed by detestable beasts, none knoweth; but certainly neither the emissaries of the god that most they feared, nor the wrath of the topical god of that ominous place, brought their doom to the three adventurers there or then. And so it was that they came to Rumbly Heath, in the heart of the Dubious Land, whose stormy hillocks were the ground-swell and the after-wash of the earthquake lulled for a while. Something so huge that it seemed unfair to man that it should move so softly stalked splendidly by them, and only so barely did they escape its notice that one word ran and echoed through their three imaginations--"If--if--if." And when this danger was at last gone by they moved cautiously on again and presently saw the little harmless mipt, half fairy and half gnome, giving shrill, contented squeaks on the edge of the world. And they edged away unseen, for they said that the inquisitiveness of the mipt had become fabulous, and that, harmless as he was, he had a bad way with secrets; yet they probably loathed the way that he nuzzles dead white bones, and would not admit their loathing; for it does not become adventurers to care who eats their bones. Be this as it may, they edged away from the mipt, and came almost at once to the wizened tree, the goal-post of their adventure, and knew that beside them was the crack in the world and the bridge from Bad to Worse, and that underneath them stood the rocky house of the Owner of the Box.

This was their simple plan: to slip into the corridor in the upper cliff; to run softly down it (of course with naked feet) under the warning to travellers that is graven upon stone, which interpreters take to be "It Is Better Not"; not to touch the berries that are there for a purpose, on the right side going down; and so to come to the guardian on his pedestal who had slept for a thousand years and should be sleeping still; and go in through the open window. One man was to wait outside by the crack in the World until the others came out with the golden box, and, should they cry for help, he was to threaten at once to unfasten the iron clamp that kept the crack together. When the box was secured they were to travel all night and all the following day, until the cloud-banks that wrapped the slopes of Mluna were well between them and the Owner of the Box.

The door in the cliff was open. They passed without a murmur down the cold steps, Slith leading them all the way. A glance of longing, no more, each gave to the beautiful berries. The guardian upon his pedestal was still asleep. Slorg climbed by a ladder, that Slith knew where to find, to the iron clamp across the crack in the World, and waited beside it with a chisel in his hand, listening closely for anything untoward, while his friends slipped into the house; and no sound came. And presently Slith and Sippy found the golden box: everything seemed happening as they had planned, it only remained to see if it was the right one and to escape with it from that dreadful place. Under the shelter of the pedestal, so near to the guardian that they could feel his warmth, which paradoxically had the effect of chilling the blood of the boldest of them, they smashed the emerald hasp and opened the golden box; and there they read by the light of ingenious sparks which Slith knew how to contrive, and even this poor light they hid with their bodies. What was their joy, even at that perilous moment, as they lurked between the guardian and the abyss, to find that the box contained fifteen peerless odes in the alcaic form, five sonnets that were by far the most beautiful in the world, nine ballads in the manner of Provence that had no equal in the treasuries of man, a poem addressed to a moth in twenty-eight perfect stanzas, a piece of blank verse of over a hundred lines on a level not yet known to have been attained by man, as well as fifteen lyrics on which no merchant would dare to set a price. They would have read them again, for they gave happy tears to a man and memories of dear things done in infancy, and brought sweet voices from far sepulchres; but Slith pointed imperiously to the way by which they had come, and extinguished the light; and Slorg and Sippy sighed, then took the box.

The guardian still slept the sleep that survived a thousand years.

As they came away they saw that indulgent chair close by the edge of the World in which the Owner of the Box had lately sat reading selfishly and alone the most beautiful songs and verses that poet ever dreamed.

They came in silence to the foot of the stairs; and then it befell that as they drew nearer safely, in the night's most secret hour, some hand in an upper chamber lit a shocking light, lit it and made no sound.

For a moment it might have been an ordinary light, fatal as even that could very well be at such a moment as this; but when it began to follow them like an eye and to grow redder and redder as it watched them, then even optimism despaired.

And Sippy very unwisely attempted flight, and Slorg even as unwisely tried to hide; but Slith, knowing well why that light was lit in that secret chamber and who it was that lit it, leaped over the edge of the World and is falling from us still through the unreverberate blackness of the abyss.

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f05]

THE INJUDICIOUS PRAYERS OF POMBO THE IDOLATER

Pombo the idolater had prayed to Ammuz a simple prayer, a necessary prayer, such as even an idol of ivory could very easily grant, and Ammuz has not immediately granted it. Pombo had therefore prayed to Tharma for the overthrow of Ammuz, an idol friendly to Tharma, and in doing this offended against the etiquette of the gods. Tharma refused to grant the little prayer. Pombo prayed frantically to all the gods of idolatry, for though it was a simple matter, yet it was very necessary to a man. And gods that were older than Ammuz rejected the prayers of Pombo, and even gods that were younger and therefore of greater repute. He prayed to them one by one, and they all refused to hear him; nor at first did he think at all of the subtle, divine etiquette against which he had offended. It occurred to him all at once as he prayed to his fiftieth idol, a little green-jade god whom the Chinese know, that all the idols were in league against him. When Pombo discovered this he resented his birth bitterly, and made lamentation and alleged that he was lost. He might have been seen then in any part of London haunting curiosity-shops and places where they sold idols of ivory or of stone, for he dwelt in London with others of his race though he was born in Burmah among those who hold Ganges holy. On drizzly evenings of November's worst his haggard face could be seen in the glow of some shop pressed close against the glass, where he would supplicate some calm, cross-legged idol till policemen moved him on. And after closing hours back he would go to his dingy room, in that part of our capital where English is seldom spoken, to supplicate little idols of his own. And when Pombo's simple, necessary prayer was equally refused by the idols of museums, auction-rooms, shops, then he took counsel with himself and purchased incense and burned it in a brazier before his own cheap little idols, and played the while upon an instrument such as that wherewith men charm snakes. And still the idols clung to their etiquette.

Whether Pombo knew about this etiquette and considered it frivolous in the face of his need, or whether his need, now grown desperate, unhinged his mind, I know not, but Pombo the idolater took a stick and suddenly turned iconoclast.

Pombo the iconoclast immediately left his house, leaving his idols to be swept away with the dust and so to mingle with Man, and went to an arch-idolater of repute who carved idols out of rare stones, and put his case before him. The arch-idolater who made idols of his own rebuked Pombo in the name of Man for having broken his idols--"for hath not Man made them?" the arch-idolater said; and concerning the idols themselves he spoke long and learnedly, explaining divine etiquette, and how Pombo had offended, and how no idol in the world would listen to Pombo's prayer. When Pombo heard this he wept and made bitter outcry, and cursed the gods of ivory and the gods of jade, and the hand of Man that made them, but most of all he cursed their etiquette that had undone, as he said, an innocent man; so that at last that arch-idolater, who made idols of his own, stopped in his work upon an idol of jasper for a king that was weary of Wosh, and took compassion on Pombo, and told him that though no idol in the world would listen to his prayer, yet only a little way over the edge of it a certain disreputable idol sat who knew nothing of etiquette, and granted prayers that no respectable god would ever consent to hear. When Pombo heard this he took two handfuls of the arch-idolater's beard and kissed them joyfully, and dried his tears and became his old impertinent self again. And he that carved from jasper the usurper of Wosh explained how in the village of World's End, at the furthest end of Last Street, there is a hole that you take to be a well, close by the garden wall, but that if you lower yourself by your hands over the edge of the hole, and feel about with your feet till they find a ledge, that is the top step of a flight of stairs that takes you down over the edge of the World. "For all that men know, those stairs may have a purpose and even a bottom step," said the arch-idolater, "but discussion about the lower flights is idle." Then the teeth of Pombo chattered, for he feared the darkness, but he that made idols of his own explained that those stairs were always lit by the faint blue gloaming in which the World spins. "Then," he said, "you will go by Lonely House and under the bridge that leads from the House to Nowhere, and whose purpose is not guessed; thence past Maharrion, the god of flowers, and his high-priest, who is neither bird nor cat; and so you will come to the little idol Duth, the disreputable god that will grant your prayer." And he went on carving again at his idol of jasper for the king who was weary of Wosh; and Pombo thanked him and went singing away, for in his vernacular mind he thought that "he had the gods."

It is a long journey from London to World's End, and Pombo had no money left, and yet within five weeks he was strolling along Last Street; but how he contrived to get there I will not say, for it was not entirely honest. And Pombo found the well at the end of the garden beyond the end house of Last Street, and many thoughts ran through his mind as he hung by his hands from the edge, but chiefest of all those thoughts was one that said the gods were laughing at him through the mouth of the arch-idolater, their prophet, and the thought beat in his head till it ached like his wrists ... and then he found the step.

And Pombo walked downstairs. There, sure enough, was the gloaming in which the world spins, and the stars shone far off in it faintly; there was nothing before him as he went downstairs but that strange blue waste of gloaming, with its multitude of stars, and comets plunging through it on outward journeys and comets returning home. And then he saw the lights of the bridge to Nowhere, and all of a sudden he was in the glare of the shimmering parlour-window of Lonely House; and he heard voices there pronouncing words, and the voices were nowise human, and but for his bitter need he had screamed and fled. Halfway between the voices and Maharrion, whom he now saw standing out from the world, covered in rainbow halos, he perceived the weird grey beast that is neither cat nor bird. As Pombo hesitated, chilly with fear, he heard those voices grow louder in Lonely House, and at that he stealthily moved a few steps lower, and then rushed past the beast. The beast intently watched Maharrion hurling up bubbles that are every one a season of spring in unknown constellations, calling the swallows home to unimagined fields, watched him without even turning to look at Pombo, and saw him drop into the Linlunlarna, the river that rises at the edge of the World, the golden pollen that sweetens the tide of the river and is carried away from the World to be a joy to the Stars. And there before Pombo was the little disreputable god who cares nothing for etiquette and will answer prayers that are refused by all the respectable idols. And whether the view of him, at last, excited Pombo's eagerness, or whether his need was greater than he could bear that it drove him so swiftly downstairs, or whether as is most likely, he ran too fast past the beast, I do not know, and it does not matter to Pombo; but at any rate he could not stop, as he had designed, in attitude of prayer at the feet of Duth, but ran on past him down the narrowing steps, clutching at smooth, bare rocks till he fell from the World as, when our hearts miss a beat, we fall in dreams and wake up with a dreadful jolt; but there was no waking up for Pombo, who still fell on towards the incurious stars, and his fate is even one with the fate of Slith.

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f06]

THE LOOT OF BOMBASHARNA

Things had grown too hot for Shard, captain of pirates, on all the seas that he knew. The ports of Spain were closed to him; they knew him in San Domingo; men winked in Syracuse when he went by; the two Kings of the Sicilies never smiled within an hour of speaking of him; there were huge rewards for his head in every capital city, with pictures of it for identification--and all the pictures were unflattering. Therefore Captain Shard decided that the time had come to tell his men the secret.

Riding off Teneriffe one night, he called them all together. He generously admitted that there were things in the past that might require explanation: the crowns that the Princes of Aragon had sent to their nephews the Kings of the two Americas had certainly never reached their Most Sacred Majesties. Where, men might ask, were the eyes of Captain Stobbud? Who had been burning towns on the Patagonian seaboard? Why should such a ship as theirs choose pearls for cargo? Why so much blood on the decks and so many guns? And where was the Nancy, the Lark, or the Margaret Belle? Such questions as these, he urged, might be asked by the inquisitive, and if counsel for the defence should happen to be a fool, and unacquainted with the ways of the sea, they might become involved in troublesome legal formulae. And Bloody Bill, as they rudely called Mr. Gagg, a member of the crew, looked up at the sky, and said that it was a windy night and looked like hanging. And some of those present thoughtfully stroked their necks while Captain Shard unfolded to them his plan. He said the time was come to quit the Desperate Lark, for she was too well known to the navies of four kingdoms, and a fifth was getting to know her, and others had suspicions. (More cutters than even Captain Shard suspected were already looking for her jolly black flag with its neat skull-and-crossbones in yellow.) There was a little archipelago that he knew of on the wrong side of the Sargasso Sea; there were but thirty islands there, bare, ordinary islands, but one of them floated. He had noticed it years ago, and had gone ashore and never told a soul, but had quietly anchored it with the anchor of his ship to the bottom of the sea, which just there was profoundly deep, and had made the thing the secret of his life, determining to marry and settle down there if it ever became impossible to earn his livelihood in the usual way at sea. When first he saw it, it was drifting slowly, with the wind in the tops of the trees; but if the cable had not rusted away, it should be still where he left it, and they would make a rudder and hollow out cabins below, and at night they would hoist sails to the trunks of the trees and sail wherever they liked.

And all the pirates cheered, for they wanted to set their feet on land again somewhere where the hangman would not come and jerk them off it at once; and bold men though they were, it was a strain seeing so many lights coming their way at night. Even then...! But it swerved away again and was lost in the mist.

And Captain Shard said that they would need to get provisions first, and he, for one, intended to marry before he settled down; and so they should have one more fight before they left the ship, and sack the sea-coast city of Bombasharna and take from it provisions for several years, while he himself would marry the Queen of the South. And again the pirates cheered, for often they had seen seacoast Bombasharna, and had always envied its opulence from the sea.

So they set all sail, and often altered their course, and dodged and fled from strange lights till dawn appeared, and all day long fled southwards. And by evening they saw the silver spires of slender Bombasharna, a city that was the glory of the coast. And in the midst of it, far away though they were, they saw the palace of the Queen of the South; and it was so full of windows all looking toward the sea, and they were so full of light, both from the sunset that was fading upon the water and from candles that maids were lighting one by one, that it looked far off like a pearl, shimmering still in its haliotis shell, still wet from the sea.

So Captain Shard and his pirates saw it, at evening over the water, and thought of rumours that said that Bombasharna was the loveliest city of the coasts of the world, and that its palace was lovelier even than Bombasharna; but for the Queen of the South rumour had no comparison. Then night came down and hid the silver spires, and Shard slipped on through the gathering darkness until by midnight the piratic ship lay under the seaward battlements.

And at the hour when sick men mostly die, and sentries on lonely ramparts stand to arms, exactly half-an-hour before dawn, Shard, with two rowing boats and half his crew, with craftily muffled oars, landed below the battlements. They were through the gateway of the palace itself before the alarm was sounded, and as soon as they heard the alarm Shard's gunners at sea opened upon the town, and before the sleepy soldiery of Bombasharna knew whether the danger was from the land or the sea, Shard had successfully captured the Queen of the South. They would have looted all day that silver sea-coast city, but there appeared with dawn suspicious topsails just along the horizon. Therefore the captain with his Queen went down to the shore at once and hastily re-embarked and sailed away with what loot they had hurridly got, and with fewer men, for they had to fight a good deal to get back to the boat. They cursed all day the interference of those ominous ships which steadily grew nearer. There were six ships at first, and that night they slipped away from all but two; but all the next day those two were still in sight, and each of them had more guns than the Desperate Lark. All the next night Shard dodged about the sea, but the two ships separated and one kept him in sight, and the next morning it was alone with Shard on the sea, and his archipelago was just in sight, the secret of his life.

And Shard saw he must fight, and a bad fight it was, and yet it suited Shard's purpose, for he had more merry men when the fight began than he needed for his island. And they got it over before any other ship came up; and Shard put all adverse evidence out of the way, and came that night to the islands near the Sargasso Sea.

Long before it was light the survivors of the crew were peering at the sea, and when dawn came there was the island, no bigger than two ships, straining hard at its anchor, with the wind in the tops of the trees.

And then they landed and dug cabins below and raised the anchor out of the deep sea, and soon they made the island what they called shipshape. But the Desperate Lark they sent away empty under full sail to sea, where more nations than Shard suspected were watching for her, and where she was presently captured by an admiral of Spain, who, when he found none of that infamous crew on board to hang by the neck from the yard-arm, grew ill through disappointment.

And Shard on his island offered the Queen of the South the choicest of the old wines of Provence, and for adornment gave her Indian jewels looted from galleons with treasure for Madrid, and spread a table where she dined in the sun, while in some cabin below he bade the least coarse of his mariners sing; yet always she was morose and moody towards him, and often at evening he was heard to say that he wished he knew more about the ways of Queens. So they lived for years, the pirates mostly gambling and drinking below, Captain Shard trying to please the Queen of the South, and she never wholly forgetting Bombasharna. When they needed new provisions they hoisted sails on the trees, and as long as no ship came in sight they scudded before the wind, with the water rippling over the beach of the island; but as soon as they sighted a ship the sails came down, and they became an ordinary uncharted rock.

They mostly moved by night; sometimes they hovered off sea-coast towns as of old, sometimes they boldly entered river-mouths, and even attached themselves for a while to the mainland, whence they would plunder the neighbourhood and escape again to sea. And if a ship was wrecked on their island of a night they said it was all to the good. They grew very crafty in seamanship, and cunning in what they did, for they knew that any news of the Desperate Lark's old crew would bring hangmen from the interior running down to every port.

And no one is known to have found them out or to have annexed their island; but a rumour arose and passed from port to port and every place where sailors meet together, and even survives to this day, of a dangerous uncharted rock anywhere between Plymouth and the Horn, which would suddenly rise in the safest track of ships, and upon which vessels were supposed to have been wrecked, leaving, strangely enough, no evidence of their doom. There was a little speculation about it at first, till it was silenced by the chance remark of a man old with wandering: "It is one of the mysteries that haunt the sea."

And almost Captain Shard and the Queen of the South lived happily ever after, though still at evening those on watch in the trees would see their captain sit with a puzzled air or hear him mutter now and again in a discontented way: "I wish I knew more about the ways of Queens."

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f07]

MISS CUBBIDGE AND THE DRAGON OF ROMANCE

This tale is told in the balconies of Belgrave Square and among the towers of Pont Street; men sing it at evening in the Brompton Road.

Little upon her eighteenth birthday thought Miss Cubbidge, of Number 12A Prince of Wales' Square, that before another year had gone its way she would lose the sight of that unshapely oblong that was so long her home. And, had you told her further that within that year all trace of that so-called square, and of the day when her father was elected by a thumping majority to share in the guidance of the destinies of the empire, should utterly fade from her memory, she would merely have said in that affected voice of hers, "Go to!"

There was nothing about it in the daily Press, the policy of her father's party had no provision for it, there was no hint of it in conversation at evening parties to which Miss Cubbidge went: there was nothing to warn her at all that a loathsome dragon with golden scales that rattled as he went would have come up clean out of the prime of romance and gone by night (so far as we know) through Hammersmith, and come to Ardle Mansion, and then had turned to his left, which of course brought him to Miss Cubbidge's father's house.

There sat Miss Cubbidge at evening on her balcony quite alone, waiting for her father to be made a baronet. She was wearing walking-boots and a hat and a lownecked evening dress; for a painter was but just now painting her portrait and neither she nor the painter saw anything odd in the strange combination. She did not notice the roar of the dragon's golden scales, nor distinguish above the manifold lights of London the small, red glare of his eyes. He suddenly lifted his head, a blaze of gold, over the balcony; he did not appear a yellow dragon then, for his glistening scales reflected the beauty that London puts upon her only at evening and night. She screamed, but to no knight, nor knew what knight to call on, nor guessed where were the dragons' overthrowers of far, romantic days, nor what mightier game they chased, or what wars they waged; perchance they were busy even then arming for Armageddon.

* * * * *

Out of the balcony of her father's house in Prince of Wales' Square, the painted dark-green balcony that grew blacker every year, the dragon lifted Miss Cubbidge and spread his rattling wings, and London fell away like an old fashion. And England fell away, and the smoke of its factories, and the round material world that goes humming round the sun vexed and pursued by time, until there appeared the eternal and ancient lands of Romance lying low by mystical seas.

You had not pictured Miss Cubbidge stroking the golden head of one of the dragons of song with one hand idly, while with the other she sometime played with pearls brought up from lonely places of the sea. They filled huge haliotis shells with pearls and laid them there beside her, they brought her emeralds which she set to flash among the tresses of her long black hair, they brought her threaded sapphires for her cloak: all this the princes of fable did and the elves and the gnomes of myth. And partly she still lived, and partly she was one with long-ago and with those sacred tales that nurses tell, when all their children are good, and evening has come, and the fire is burning well, and the soft pat-pat of the snowflakes on the pane is like the furtive tread of fearful things in old, enchanted woods. If at first she missed those dainty novelties among which she was reared, the old, sufficient song of the mystical sea singing of faery lore at first soothed and at last consoled her. Even, she forgot those advertisements of pills that are so dear to England; even, she forgot political cant and the things that one discusses and the things that one does not, and had perforce to contend herself with seeing sailing by huge golden-laden galleons with treasure for Madrid, and the merry skull-and-cross-bones of the pirateers, and the tiny nautilus setting out to sea, and ships of heroes trafficking in romance or of princes seeking for enchanted isles.

It was not by chains that the dragon kept her there, but by one of the spells of old. To one to whom the facilities of the daily Press had for so long been accorded spells would have palled--you would have said--and galleons after a time and all things out-of-date. After a time. But whether the centuries passed her or whether the years or whether no time at all, she did not know. If any thing indicated the passing of time it was the rhythm of elfin horns blowing upon the heights. If the centuries went by her the spell that bound her gave her also perennial youth, and kept alight for ever the lantern by her side, and saved from decay the marble palace facing the mystical sea. And if no time went by her there at all, her single moment on those marvellous coasts was turned as it were to a crystal reflecting a thousand scenes. If it was all a dream, it was a dream that knew no morning and no fading away. The tide roamed on and whispered of master and of myth, while near that captive lady, asleep in his marble tank the golden dragon dreamed: and a little way out from the coast all that the dragon dreamed showed faintly in the mist that lay over the sea. He never dreamed of any rescuing knight. So long as he dreamed, it was twilight; but when he came up nimbly out of his tank night fell and starlight glistened on the dripping, golden scales.

There he and his captive either defeated Time or never encountered him at all; while, in the world we know, raged Roncesvalles or battles yet to be--I know not to what part of the shore of Romance he bore her. Perhaps she became one of those princesses of whom fable loves to tell, but let it suffice that there she lived by the sea: and kings ruled, and Demons ruled, and kings came again, and many cities returned to their native dust, and still she abided there, and still her marble palace passed not away nor the power that there was in the dragon's spell.

And only once did there ever come to her a message from the world that of old she knew. It came in a pearly ship across the mystical sea; it was from an old school-friend that she had had in Putney, merely a note, no more, in a little, neat, round hand: it said, "It is not Proper for you to be there alone."

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f08]

THE QUEST OF THE QUEEN'S TEARS

Sylvia, Queen of the Woods, in her woodland palace, held court, and made a mockery of her suitors. She would sing to them, she said, she would give them banquets, she would tell them tales of legendary days, her jugglers should caper before them, her armies salute them, her fools crack jests with them and make whimsical quips, only she could not love them.

This was not the way, they said, to treat princes in their splendor and mysterious troubadours concealing kingly names; it was not in accordance with fable; myth had no precedent for it. She should have thrown her glove, they said, into some lion's den, she should have asked for a score of venomous heads of the serpents of Licantara, or demanded the death of any notable dragon, or sent them all upon some deadly quest, but that she could not love them--! It was unheard of--it had no parallel in the annals of romance.

And then she said that if they must needs have a quest she would offer her hand to him who first should move her to tears: and the quest should be called, for reference in histories or song, the Quest of the Queen's Tears, and he that achieved them she would wed, be he only a petty duke of lands unknown to romance.

And many were moved to anger, for they hoped for some bloody quest; but the old lords chamberlain said, as they muttered among themselves in a far, dark end of the chamber, that the quest was hard and wise, for that if she could ever weep she might also love. They had known her all her childhood; she had never sighed. Many men had she seen, suitors and courtiers, and had never turned her head after one went by. Her beauty was as still sunsets of bitter evenings when all the world is frore, a wonder and a chill. She was as a sun-stricken mountain uplifted alone, all beautiful with ice, a desolate and lonely radiance late at evening far up beyond the comfortable world, not quite to be companioned by the stars, the doom of the mountaineer.

If she could weep, they said, she could love, they said.

And she smiled pleasantly on those ardent princes, and troubadours concealing kingly names.

Then one by one they told, each suitor prince the story of his love, with outstretched hands and kneeling on the knee; and very sorry and pitiful were the tales, so that often up in the galleries some maid of the palace wept. And very graciously she nodded her head like a listless magnolia in the deeps of the night moving idly to all the breezes its glorious bloom.

And when the princes had told their desperate loves and had departed away with no other spoil than of their own tears only, even then there came the unknown troubadours and told their tales in song, concealing their gracious names.

And there was one, Ackronnion, clothed with rags, on which was the dust of roads, and underneath the rags was war-scarred armour whereon were dints of blows; and when he stroked his harp and sang his song, in the gallery above maidens wept, and even old lords chamberlain whimpered among themselves and thereafter laughed through their tears and said: "It is easy to make old people weep and to bring idle tears from lazy girls; but he will not set a-weeping the Queen of the Woods."

And graciously she nodded, and he was the last. And disconsolate went away those dukes and princes, and troubadours in disguise. Yet Ackronnion pondered as he went away.

King he was of Afarmah, Lool and Haf, over-lord of Zeroora and hilly Chang, and duke of the dukedoms of Molong and Mlash, none of them unfamiliar with romance or unknown or overlooked in the making of myth. He pondered as he went in his thin disguise.

Now by those that do not remember their childhood, having other things to do, be it understood that underneath fairyland, which is, as all men know, at the edge of the world, there dwelleth the Gladsome Beast. A synonym he for joy.

It is known how the lark in its zenith, children at play out-of-doors, good witches and jolly old parents have all been compared--how aptly!--with this very same Gladsome Beast. Only one "crab" he has (if I may use slang for a moment to make myself perfectly clear), only one drawback, and that is that in the gladness of his heart he spoils the cabbages of the Old Man Who Looks After Fairyland,--and of course he eats men.

It must further be understood that whoever may obtain the tears of the Gladsome Beast in a bowl, and become drunken upon them, may move all persons to shed tears of joy so long as he remains inspired by the potion to sing or to make music.

Now Ackronnion pondered in this wise: that if he could obtain the tears of the Gladsome Beast by means of his art, withholding him from violence by the spell of music, and if a friend should slay the Gladsome Beast before his weeping ceased--for an end must come to weeping even with men--that so he might get safe away with the tears, and drink them before the Queen of the Woods and move her to tears of joy. He sought out therefore a humble knightly man who cared not for the beauty of Sylvia, Queen of the Woods, but had found a woodland maiden of his own once long ago in summer. And the man's name was Arrath, a subject of Ackronnion, a knight-at-arms of the spear-guard: and together they set out through the fields of fable until they came to Fairyland, a kingdom sunning itself (as all men know) for leagues along the edges of the world. And by a strange old pathway they came to the land they sought, through a wind blowing up the pathway sheer from space with a kind of metallic taste from the roving stars. Even so they came to the windy house of thatch where dwells the Old Man Who Looks After Fairyland sitting by parlour windows that look away from the world. He made them welcome in his star-ward parlour, telling them tales of Space, and when they named to him their perilous quest he said it would be a charity to kill the Gladsome Beast; for he was clearly one of these that liked not its happy ways. And then he took them out through his back door, for the front door had no pathway nor even a step--from it the old man used to empty his slops sheer on to the Southern Cross--and so they came to the garden wherein his cabbages were, and those flowers that only blow in Fairyland, turning their faces always towards the comet, and he pointed them out the way to the place he called Underneath, where the Gladsome Beast had his lair. Then they manoeuvered. Ackronnion was to go by the way of the steps with his harp and an agate bowl, while Arrath went round by a crag on the other side. Then the Old Man Who Looks After Fairyland went back to his windy house, muttering angrily as he passed his cabbages, for he did not love the ways of the Gladsome Beast; and the two friends parted on their separate ways.

Nothing perceived them but that ominous crow glutted overlong already upon the flesh of man.

The wind blew bleak from the stars.

At first there was dangerous climbing, and then Ackronnion gained the smooth, broad steps that led from the edge to the lair, and at that moment heard at the top of the steps the continuous chuckles of the Gladsome Beast.

He feared then that its mirth might be insuperable, not to be saddened by the most grievous song; nevertheless he did not turn back then, but softly climbed the stairs and, placing the agate bowl upon a step, struck up the chaunt called Dolorous. It told of desolate, regretted things befallen happy cities long since in the prime of the world. It told of how the gods and beasts and men had long ago loved beautiful companions, and long ago in vain. It told of the golden host of happy hopes, but not of their achieving. It told how Love scorned Death, but told of Death's laughter. The contented chuckles of the Gladsome Beast suddenly ceased in his lair. He rose and shook himself. He was still unhappy. Ackronnion still sang on the chaunt called Dolorous. The Gladsome Beast came mournfully up to him. Ackronnion ceased not for the sake of his panic, but still sang on. He sang of the malignity of time. Two tears welled large in the eyes of the Gladsome Beast. Ackronnion moved the agate bowl to a suitable spot with his foot. He sang of autumn and of passing away. The the beast wept as the frore hills weep in the thaw, and the tears splashed big into the agate bowl. Ackronnion desperately chaunted on; he told of the glad unnoticed things men see and do not see again, of sunlight beheld unheeded on faces now withered away. The bowl was full. Ackronnion was desperate: the Beast was so close. Once he thought that its mouth was watering!--but it was only the tears that had run on the lips of the Beast. He felt as a morsel! The Beast was ceasing to weep! He sang of worlds that had disappointed the gods. And all of a sudden, crash! and the staunch spear of Arrath went home behind the shoulder, and the tears and the joyful ways of the Gladsome Beast were ended and over for ever.

And carefully they carried the bowl of tears away leaving the body of the Gladsome Beast as a change of diet for the ominous crow; and going by the windy house of thatch they said farewell to the Old Man Who Looks After Fairyland, who when he heard of the deed rubbed his hands together and mumbled again and again, "And a very good thing, too. My cabbages! My cabbages!"

And not long after Ackronnion sang again in the sylvan palace of the Queen of the Woods, having first drunk all the tears in his agate bowl. And it was a gala night, and all the court were there and ambassadors from the lands of legend and myth, and even some from Terra Cognita.

And Ackronnion sang as he never sang before, and will not sing again. O, but dolorous, dolorous, are all the ways of man, few and fierce are his days, and the end trouble, and vain, vain his endeavor: and woman--who shall tell of it?--her doom is written with man's by listless, careless gods with their faces to other spheres.

Somewhat thus he began, and then inspiration seized him, and all the trouble in the beauty of his song may not be set down by me: there was much of gladness in it, and all mingled with grief: it was like the way of man: it was like our destiny.

Sobs arose at his song, sighs came back along echoes: seneschals, soldiers, sobbed, and a clear cry made the maidens; like rain the tears came down from gallery to gallery.

All round the Queen of the Woods was a storm of sobbing and sorrow.

But no, she would not weep.

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f09]

THE HOARD OF THE GIBBELINS

The Gibbelins eat, as is well known, nothing less good than man. Their evil tower is joined to Terra Cognita, to the lands we know, by a bridge. Their hoard is beyond reason; avarice has no use for it; they have a separate cellar for emeralds and a separate cellar for sapphires; they have filled a hole with gold and dig it up when they need it. And the only use that is known for their ridiculous wealth is to attract to their larder a continual supply of food. In times of famine they have even been known to scatter rubies abroad, a little trail of them to some city of Man, and sure enough their larders would soon be full again.

Their tower stands on the other side of that river known to Homer--ho rhoos okeanoio, as he called it--which surrounds the world. And where the river is narrow and fordable the tower was built by the Gibbelins' gluttonous sires, for they liked to see burglars rowing easily to their steps. Some nourishment that common soil has not the huge trees drained there with their colossal roots from both banks of the river.

There the Gibbelins lived and discreditably fed. Alderic, Knight of the Order of the City and the Assault, hereditary Guardian of the King's Peace of Mind, a man not unremembered among makers of myth, pondered so long upon the Gibbelins' hoard that by now he deemed it his. Alas that I should say of so perilous a venture, undertaken at dead of night by a valourous man, that its motive was sheer avarice! Yet upon avarice only the Gibbelins relied to keep their larders full, and once in every hundred years sent spies into the cities of men to see how avarice did, and always the spies returned again to the tower saying that all was well.

It may be thought that, as the years went on and men came by fearful ends on that tower's wall, fewer and fewer would come to the Gibbelins' table: but the Gibbelins found otherwise.

Not in the folly and frivolity of his youth did Alderic come to the tower, but he studied carefully for several years the manner in which burglars met their doom when they went in search of the treasure that he considered his. In every case they had entered by the door.

He consulted those who gave advice on this quest; he noted every detail and cheerfully paid their fees, and determined to do nothing that they advised, for what were their clients now? No more than examples of the savoury art, and mere half-forgotten memories of a meal; and many, perhaps, no longer even that.

These were the requisites for the quest that these men used to advise: a horse, a boat, mail armour, and at least three men-at-arms. Some said, "Blow the horn at the tower door"; others said, "Do not touch it."

Alderic thus decided: he would take no horse down to the river's edge, he would not row along it in a boat, and he would go alone and by way of the Forest Unpassable.

How pass, you may say, the unpassable? This was his plan: there was a dragon he knew of who if peasants' prayers are heeded deserved to die, not alone because of the number of maidens he cruelly slew, but because he was bad for the crops; he ravaged the very land and was the bane of a dukedom.

Now Alderic determined to go up against him. So he took horse and spear and pricked till he met the dragon, and the dragon came out against him breathing bitter smoke. And to him Alderic shouted, "Hath foul dragon ever slain true knight?" And well the dragon knew that this had never been, and he hung his head and was silent, for he was glutted with blood. "Then," said the knight, "if thou would'st ever taste maiden's blood again thou shalt be my trusty steed, and if not, by this spear there shall befall thee all that the troubadours tell of the dooms of thy breed."

And the dragon did not open his ravening mouth, nor rush upon the knight, breathing out fire; for well he knew the fate of those that did these things, but he consented to the terms imposed, and swore to the knight to become his trusty steed.

It was on a saddle upon this dragon's back that Alderic afterwards sailed above the unpassable forest, even above the tops of those measureless trees, children of wonder. But first he pondered that subtle plan of his which was more profound than merely to avoid all that had been done before; and he commanded a blacksmith, and the blacksmith made him a pickaxe.

Now there was great rejoicing at the rumour of Alderic's quest, for all folk knew that he was a cautious man, and they deemed that he would succeed and enrich the world, and they rubbed their hands in the cities at the thought of largesse; and there was joy among all men in Alderic's country, except perchance among the lenders of money, who feared they would soon be paid. And there was rejoicing also because men hoped that when the Gibbelins were robbed of their hoard, they would shatter their high-built bridge and break the golden chains that bound them to the world, and drift back, they and their tower, to the moon, from which they had come and to which they rightly belonged. There was little love for the Gibbelins, though all men envied their hoard.

So they all cheered, that day when he mounted his dragon, as though he was already a conqueror, and what pleased them more than the good that they hoped he would do to the world was that he scattered gold as he rode away; for he would not need it, he said, if he found the Gibbelins' hoard, and he would not need it more if he smoked on the Gibbelins' table.

When they heard that he had rejected the advice of those that gave it, some said that the knight was mad, and others said he was greater than those what gave the advice, but none appreciated the worth of his plan.

He reasoned thus: for centuries men had been well advised and had gone by the cleverest way, while the Gibbelins came to expect them to come by boat and to look for them at the door whenever their larder was empty, even as a man looketh for a snipe in a marsh; but how, said Alderic, if a snipe should sit in the top of a tree, and would men find him there? Assuredly never! So Alderic decided to swim the river and not to go by the door, but to pick his way into the tower through the stone. Moreover, it was in his mind to work below the level of the ocean, the river (as Homer knew) that girdles the world, so that as soon as he made a hole in the wall the water should pour in, confounding the Gibbelins, and flooding the cellars, rumoured to be twenty feet in depth, and therein he would dive for emeralds as a diver dives for pearls.

And on the day that I tell of he galloped away from his home scattering largesse of gold, as I have said, and passed through many kingdoms, the dragon snapping at maidens as he went, but being unable to eat them because of the bit in his mouth, and earning no gentler reward than a spurthrust where he was softest. And so they came to the swart arboreal precipice of the unpassable forest. The dragon rose at it with a rattle of wings. Many a farmer near the edge of the worlds saw him up there where yet the twilight lingered, a faint, black, wavering line; and mistaking him for a row of geese going inland from the ocean, went into their houses cheerily rubbing their hands and saying that winter was coming, and that we should soon have snow. Soon even there the twilight faded away, and when they descended at the edge of the world it was night and the moon was shining. Ocean, the ancient river, narrow and shallow there, flowed by and made no murmur. Whether the Gibbelins banqueted or whether they watched by the door, they also made no murmur. And Alderic dismounted and took his armour off, and saying one prayer to his lady, swam with his pickaxe. He did not part from his sword, for fear that he meet with a Gibbelin. Landed the other side, he began to work at once, and all went well with him. Nothing put out its head from any window, and all were lighted so that nothing within could see him in the dark. The blows of his pickaxe were dulled in the deep walls. All night he worked, no sound came to molest him, and at dawn the last rock swerved and tumbled inwards, and the river poured in after. Then Alderic took a stone, and went to the bottom step, and hurled the stone at the door; he heard the echoes roll into the tower, then he ran back and dived through the hole in the wall.

He was in the emerald-cellar. There was no light in the lofty vault above him, but, diving through twenty feet of water, he felt the floor all rough with emeralds, and open coffers full of them. By a faint ray of the moon he saw that the water was green with them, and easily filling a satchel, he rose again to the surface; and there were the Gibbelins waist-deep in the water, with torches in their hands! And, without saying a word, or even smiling, they neatly hanged him on the outer wall--and the tale is one of those that have not a happy ending.

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f10]

HOW NUTH WOULD HAVE PRACTISED HIS ART UPON THE GNOLES

Despite the advertisements of rival firms, it is probable that every tradesman knows that nobody in business at the present time has a position equal to that of Mr. Nuth. To those outside the magic circle of business, his name is scarcely known; he does not need to advertise, he is consummate. He is superiour even to modern competition, and, whatever claims they boast, his rivals know it. His terms are moderate, so much cash down when when the goods are delivered, so much in blackmail afterwards. He consults your convenience. His skill may be counted upon; I have seen a shadow on a windy night move more noisily than Nuth, for Nuth is a burglar by trade. Men have been known to stay in country houses and to send a dealer afterwards to bargain for a piece of tapestry that they saw there--some article of furniture, some picture. This is bad taste: but those whose culture is more elegant invariably send Nuth a night or two after their visit. He has a way with tapestry; you would scarcely notice that the edges had been cut. And often when I see some huge, new house full of old furniture and portraits from other ages, I say to myself, "These mouldering chairs, these full-length ancestors and carved mahogany are the produce of the incomparable Nuth."

It may be urged against my use of the word incomparable that in the burglary business the name of Slith stands paramount and alone; and of this I am not ignorant; but Slith is a classic, and lived long ago, and knew nothing at all of modern competition; besides which the surprising nature of his doom has possibly cast a glamour upon Slith that exaggerates in our eyes his undoubted merits.

It must not be thought that I am a friend of Nuth's; on the contrary such politics as I have are on the side of Property; and he needs no words from me, for his position is almost unique in trade, being among the every few that do not need to advertise.

At the time that my story begins Nuth lived in a roomy house in Belgrave Square: in his inimitable way he had made friends with the caretaker. The place suited Nuth, and, whenever anyone came to inspect it before purchase, the caretaker used to praise the house in the words that Nuth had suggested. "If it wasn't for the drains," she would say, "it's the finest house in London," and when they pounced on this remark and asked questions about the drains, she would answer them that the drains also were good, but not so good as the house. They did not see Nuth when they went over the rooms, but Nuth was there.

Here in a neat black dress on one spring morning came an old woman whose bonnet was lined with red, asking for Mr. Nuth; and with her came her large and awkward son. Mrs. Eggins, the caretaker, glanced up the street, and then she let them in, and left them to wait in the drawing-room amongst furniture all mysterious with sheets. For a long while they waited, and then there was a smell of pipe-tobacco, and there was Nuth standing quite close to them.

"Lord," said the old woman whose bonnet was lined with red, "you did make me start." And then she saw by his eyes that that was not the way to speak to Mr. Nuth.

And at last Nuth spoke, and very nervously the old woman explained that her son was a likely lad, and had been in business already but wanted to better himself, and she wanted Mr. Nuth to teach him a livelihood.

First of all Nuth wanted to see a business reference, and when he was shown one from a jeweller with whom he happened to be hand-in-glove the upshot of it was that he agreed to take young Tonker (for this was the surname of the likely lad) and to make him his apprentice. And the old woman whose bonnet was lined with red went back to her little cottage in the country, and every evening said to her old man, "Tonker, we must fasten the shutters of a night-time, for Tommy's a burglar now."

The details of the likely lad's apprenticeship I do not propose to give; for those that are in the business know those details already, and those that are in other businesses care only for their own, while men of leisure who have no trade at all would fail to appreciate the gradual degrees by which Tommy Tonker came first to cross bare boards, covered with little obstacles in the dark, without making any sound, and then to go silently up creaky stairs, and then to open doors, and lastly to climb.

Let it suffice that the business prospered greatly, while glowing reports of Tommy Tonker's progress were sent from time to time to the old woman whose bonnet was lined with red in the labourious handwriting of Nuth. Nuth had given up lessons in writing very early, for he seemed to have some prejudice against forgery, and therefore considered writing a waste of time. And then there came the transaction with Lord Castlenorman at his Surrey residence. Nuth selected a Saturday night, for it chanced that Saturday was observed as Sabbath in the family of Lord Castlenorman, and by eleven o'clock the whole house was quiet. Five minutes before midnight Tommy Tonker, instructed by Mr. Nuth, who waited outside, came away with one pocketful of rings and shirt-studs. It was quite a light pocketful, but the jewellers in Paris could not match it without sending specially to Africa, so that Lord Castlenorman had to borrow bone shirt-studs.

Not even rumour whispered the name of Nuth. Were I to say that this turned his head, there are those to whom the assertion would give pain, for his associates hold that his astute judgment was unaffected by circumstance. I will say, therefore, that it spurred his genius to plan what no burglar had ever planned before. It was nothing less than to burgle the house of the gnoles. And this that abstemious man unfolded to Tonker over a cup of tea. Had Tonker not been nearly insane with pride over their recent transaction, and had he not been blinded by a veneration for Nuth, he would have--but I cry over spilt milk. He expostulated respectfully; he said he would rather not go; he said it was not fair; he allowed himself to argue; and in the end, one windy October morning with a menace in the air found him and Nuth drawing near to the dreadful wood.

Nuth, by weighing little emeralds against pieces of common rock, had ascertained the probable weight of those house-ornaments that the gnoles are believed to possess in the narrow, lofty house wherein they have dwelt from of old. They decided to steal two emeralds and to carry them between them on a cloak; but if they should be too heavy one must be dropped at once. Nuth warned young Tonker against greed, and explained that the emeralds were worth less than cheese until they were safe away from the dreadful wood.

Everything had been planned, and they walked now in silence.

No track led up to the sinister gloom of the trees, either of men or cattle; not even a poacher had been there snaring elves for over a hundred years. You did not trespass twice in the dells of the gnoles. And, apart from the things that were done there, the trees themselves were a warning, and did not wear the wholesome look of those that we plant ourselves.

The nearest village was some miles away with the backs of all its houses turned to the wood, and without one window at all facing in that direction. They did not speak of it there, and elsewhere it is unheard of.

Into this wood stepped Nuth and Tommy Tonker. They had no firearms. Tonker had asked for a pistol, but Nuth replied that the sound of a shot "would bring everything down on us," and no more was said about it.

Into the wood they went all day, deeper and deeper. They saw the skeleton of some early Georgian poacher nailed to a door in an oak tree; sometimes they saw a fairy scuttle away from them; once Tonker stepped heavily on a hard, dry stick, after which they both lay still for twenty minutes. And the sunset flared full of omens through the tree trunks, and night fell, and they came by fitful starlight, as Nuth had foreseen, to that lean, high house where the gnoles so secretly dwelt.

All was so silent by that unvalued house that the faded courage of Tonker flickered up, but to Nuth's experienced sense it seemed too silent; and all the while there was that look in the sky that was worse than a spoken doom, so that Nuth, as is often the case when men are in doubt, had leisure to fear the worst. Nevertheless he did not abandon the business, but sent the likely lad with the instruments of his trade by means of the ladder to the old green casement. And the moment that Tonker touched the withered boards, the silence that, though ominous, was earthly, became unearthly like the touch of a ghoul. And Tonker heard his breath offending against that silence, and his heart was like mad drums in a night attack, and a string of one of his sandals went tap on a rung of a ladder, and the leaves of the forest were mute, and the breeze of the night was still; and Tonker prayed that a mouse or a mole might make any noise at all, but not a creature stirred, even Nuth was still. And then and there, while yet he was undiscovered, the likely lad made up his mind, as he should have done long before, to leave those colossal emeralds where they were and have nothing further to do with the lean, high house of the gnoles, but to quit this sinister wood in the nick of time and retire from business at once and buy a place in the country. Then he descended softly and beckoned to Nuth. But the gnoles had watched him though knavish holes that they bore in trunks of the trees, and the unearthly silence gave way, as it were with a grace, to the rapid screams of Tonker as they picked him up from behind--screams that came faster and faster until they were incoherent. And where they took him it is not good to ask, and what they did with him I shall not say.

Nuth looked on for a while from the corner of the house with a mild surprise on his face as he rubbed his chin, for the trick of the holes in the trees was new to him; then he stole nimbly away through the dreadful wood.

"And did they catch Nuth?" you ask me, gentle reader.

"Oh, no, my child" (for such a question is childish). "Nobody ever catches Nuth."

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f11]

HOW ONE CAME, AS WAS FORETOLD, TO THE CITY OF NEVER

The child that played about the terraces and gardens in sight of the Surrey hills never knew that it was he that should come to the Ultimate City, never knew that he should see the Under Pits, the barbicans and the holy minarets of the mightiest city known. I think of him now as a child with a little red watering-can going about the gardens on a summer's day that lit the warm south country, his imagination delighted with all tales of quite little adventures, and all the while there was reserved for him that feat at which men wonder.

Looking in other directions, away from the Surrey hills, through all his infancy he saw that precipice that, wall above wall and mountain above mountain, stands at the edge of the World, and in perpetual twilight alone with the Moon and the Sun holds up the inconceivable City of Never. To read its streets he was destined; prophecy knew it. He had the magic halter, and a worn old rope it was; an old wayfaring woman had given it to him: it had the power to hold any animal whose race had never known captivity, such as the unicorn, the hippogriff Pegasus, dragons and wyverns; but with a lion, giraffe, camel or horse, it was useless.

How often we have seen that City of Never, that marvel of the Nations! Not when it is night in the World, and we can see no further than the stars; not when the sun is shining where we dwell, dazzling our eyes; but when the sun has set on some stormy days, all at once repentant at evening, and those glittering cliffs reveal themselves which we almost take to be clouds, and it is twilight with us as it is for ever with them, then on their gleaming summits we see those golden domes that overpeer the edges of the World and seem to dance with dignity and calm in that gentle light of evening that is Wonder's native haunt. Then does the City of Never, unvisited and afar, look long at her sister the World. It had been prophecied that he should come there. They knew it when the pebbles were being made and before the isles of coral were given unto the sea. And thus the prophecy came unto fulfilment and passed into history, and so at length to Oblivion, out of which I drag it as it goes floating by, into which I shall one day tumble. The hippogriffs dance before dawn in the upper air; long before sunrise flashes upon our lawns they go to glitter in light that has not yet come to the World, and as the dawn works up from the ragged hills and the stars feel it they go slanting earthwards, till sunlight touches the tops of the tallest trees, and the hippogriffs alight with a rattle of quills and fold their wings and gallop and gambol away till they come to some prosperous, wealthy, detestable town, and they leap at once from the fields and soar away from the sight of it, pursued by the horrible smoke of it until they come again to the pure blue air.

He whom prophecy had named from of old to come to the City of Never, went down one midnight with his magic halter to a lake-side where the hippogriffs alighted at dawn, for the turf was soft there and they could gallop far before they came to a town, and there he waited hidden near their hoofmarks. And the stars paled a little and grew indistinct; but there was no other sign as yet of the dawn, when there appeared far up in the deeps of the night two little saffron specks, then four and five: it was the hippogriffs dancing and twirling around in the sun. Another flock joined them, there were twelve of them now; they danced there, flashing their colours back to the sun, they descended in wide curves slowly; trees down on earth revealed against the sky, jet-black each delicate twig; a star disappeared from a cluster, now another; and dawn came on like music, like a new song. Ducks shot by to the lake from still dark fields of corn, far voices uttered, a colour grew upon water, and still the hippogriffs gloried in the light, revelling up in the sky; but when pigeons stirred on the branches and the first small bird was abroad, and little coots from the rushes ventured to peer about, then there came down on a sudden with a thunder of feathers the hippogriffs, and, as they landed from their celestial heights all bathed with the day's first sunlight, the man whose destiny it was as from of old to come to the City of Never, sprang up and caught the last with the magic halter. It plunged, but could not escape it, for the hippogriffs are of the uncaptured races, and magic has power over the magical, so the man mounted it, and it soared again for the heights whence it had come, as a wounded beast goes home. But when they came to the heights that venturous rider saw huge and fair to the left of him the destined City of Never, and he beheld the towers of Lel and Lek, Neerid and Akathooma, and the cliffs of Toldenarba a-glistening in the twilight like an alabaster statue of the Evening. Towards them he wrenched the halter, towards Toldenarba and the Under Pits; the wings of the hippogriff roared as the halter turned him. Of the Under Pits who shall tell? Their mystery is secret. It is held by some that they are the sources of night, and that darkness pours from them at evening upon the world; while others hint that knowledge of these might undo our civilization.

There watched him ceaselessly from the Under Pits those eyes whose duty it is; from further within and deeper, the bats what dwell there arose when they saw the surprise in the eyes; the sentinels on the bulwarks beheld that stream of bats and lifted up their spears as it were for war. Nevertheless when they perceived that that war for which they watched was not now come upon them, they lowered their spears and suffered him to enter, and he passed whirring through the earthward gateway. Even so he came, as foretold, to the City of Never perched upon Toldenarba, and saw late twilight on those pinnacles that know no other light. All the domes were of copper, but the spires on their summits were gold. Little steps of onyx ran all this way and that. With cobbled agates were its streets a glory. Through small square panes of rose-quartz the citizens looked from their houses. To them as they looked abroad the World far-off seemed happy. Clad though that city was in one robe always, in twilight, yet was its beauty worthy of even so lovely a wonder: city and twilight were both peerless but for each other. Built of a stone unknown in the world we tread were its bastions, quarried we known not where, but called by the gnomes abyx, it so flashed back to the twilight its glories, colour for colour, that none can say of them where their boundary is, and which the eternal twilight, and which the City of Never; they are the twin-born children, the fairest daughters of Wonder. Time had been there, but not to the domes that were made of copper, the rest he had left untouched, even he, the destroyer of cities, by what bribe I know not averted. Nevertheless they often wept in Never for change and passing away, mourning catastrophes in other worlds, and they built temples sometimes to ruined stars that had fallen flaming down from the Milky Way, giving them worship still when by us long since forgotten. Other temples they have--who knows to what divinities?

And he that was destined alone of men to come to the City of Never was well content to behold it as he trotted down its agate street, with the wings of his hippogriff furled, seeing at either side of him marvel on marvel of which even China is ignorant. Then as he neared the city's further rampart by which no inhabitant stirred, and looked in a direction to which no houses faced with any rose-pink windows, he suddenly saw far-off, dwarfing the mountains, an even greater city. Whether that city was built upon the twilight or whether it rose from the coasts of some other world he did not know. He saw it dominate the City of Never, and strove to reach it; but at this unmeasured home of unknown colossi the hippogriff shied frantically, and neither the magic halter nor anything that he did could make the monster face it. At last, from the City of Never's lonely outskirts where no inhabitants walked, the rider turned slowly earthward. He knew now why all the windows faced this way--the denizens of the twilight gazed at the world and not at a greater than them. Then from the last step of the earthward stairway, like lead past the Under Pits and down the glittering face of Toldenarba, down from the overshadowed glories of the gold-tipped City of Never and out of perpetual twilight, swooped the man on his winged monster: the wind that slept at the time leaped up like a dog at their onrush, it uttered a cry and ran past them. Down on the World it was morning; night was roaming away with his cloak trailed behind him, with mists turned over and over as he went, the orb was grey but it glittered, lights blinked surprisingly in early windows, forth over wet, dim fields went cows from their houses: even in this hour touched the fields again the feet of the hippogriff. And the moment that the man dismounted and took off his magic halter the hippogriff flew slanting away with a whirr, going back to some airy dancing-place of his people.

And he that surmounted glittering Toldenarba and came alone of men to the City of Never has his name and his fame among nations; but he and the people of that twilit city well know two things unguessed by other men, they that there is another city fairer than theirs, and he--a deed unaccomplished.

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f12]

THE CORONATION OF MR. THOMAS SHAP

It was the occupation of Mr. Thomas Shap to persuade customers that the goods were genuine and of an excellent quality, and that as regards the price their unspoken will was consulted. And in order to carry on this occupation he went by train very early every morning some few miles nearer to the City from the suburb in which he slept. This was the use to which he put his life.

From the moment when he first perceived (not as one reads a thing in a book, but as truths are revealed to one's instinct) the very beastliness of his occupation, and of the house that he slept in, its shape, make and pretensions, and even the clothes that he wore; from that moment he withdrew his dreams from it, his fancies, his ambitions, everything in fact except that ponderable Mr. Shap that dressed in a frock-coat, bought tickets and handled money and could in turn be handled by the statistician. The priest's share in Mr. Shap, the share of the poet, never caught the early train to the City at all.

He used to take little flights of fancy at first, dwelt all day in his dreamy way on fields and rivers lying in the sunlight where it strikes the world more brilliantly further South. And then he began to imagine butterflies there; after that, silken people and the temples they built to their gods.

They noticed that he was silent, and even absent at times, but they found no fault with his behaviour with customers, to whom he remained as plausible as of old. So he dreamed for a year, and his fancy gained strength as he dreamed. He still read halfpenny papers in the train, still discussed the passing day's ephemeral topic, still voted at elections, though he no longer did these things with the whole Shap--his soul was no longer in them.

He had had a pleasant year, his imagination was all new to him still, and it had often discovered beautiful things away where it went, southeast at the edge of the twilight. And he had a matter-of-fact and logical mind, so that he often said, "Why should I pay my twopence at the electric theatre when I can see all sorts of things quite easily without?" Whatever he did was logical before anything else, and those that knew him always spoke of Shap as "a sound, sane, level-headed man."

On far the most important day of his life he went as usual to town by the early train to sell plausible articles to customers, while the spiritual Shap roamed off to fanciful lands. As he walked from the station, dreamy but wide awake, it suddenly struck him that the real Shap was not the one walking to Business in black and ugly clothes, but he who roamed along a jungle's edge near the ramparts of an old and Eastern city that rose up sheer from the sand, and against which the desert lapped with one eternal wave. He used to fancy the name of that city was Larkar. "After all, the fancy is as real as the body," he said with perfect logic. It was a dangerous theory.

For that other life that he led he realized, as in Business, the importance and value of method. He did not let his fancy roam too far until it perfectly knew its first surroundings. Particularly he avoided the jungle--he was not afraid to meet a tiger there (after all it was not real), but stranger things might crouch there. Slowly he built up Larkar: rampart by rampart, towers for archers, gateway of brass, and all. And then one day he argued, and quite rightly, that all the silk-clad people in its streets, their camels, their wares that come from Inkustahn, the city itself, were all the things of his will--and then he made himself King. He smiled after that when people did not raise their hats to him in the street, as he walked from the station to Business; but he was sufficiently practical for recognize that it was better not to talk of this to those that only knew him as Mr. Shap.

Now that he was King in the city of Larkar and in all the desert that lay to the East and North he sent his fancy to wander further afield. He took the regiments of his camel-guard and went jingling out of Larkar, with little silver bells under the camels' chins, and came to other cities far-off on the yellow sand, with clear white walls and towers, uplifting themselves in the sun. Through their gates he passed with his three silken regiments, the light-blue regiment of the camel-guards being upon his right and the green regiment riding at his left, the lilac regiment going on before. When he had gone through the streets of any city and observed the ways of its people, and had seen the way that the sunlight struck its towers, he would proclaim himself King there, and then ride on in fancy. So he passed from city to city and from land to land. Clear-sighted though Mr. Shap was, I think he overlooked the lust of aggrandizement to which kings have so often been victims; and so it was that when the first few cities had opened their gleaming gates and he saw peoples prostrate before his camel, and spearmen cheering along countless balconies, and priests come out to do him reverence, he that had never had even the lowliest authority in the familiar world became unwisely insatiate. He let his fancy ride at inordinate speed, he forsook method, scarce was he king of a land but he yearned to extend his borders; so he journeyed deeper and deeper into the wholly unknown. The concentration that he gave to this inordinate progress through countries of which history is ignorant and cities so fantastic in their bulwarks that, though their inhabitants were human, yet the foe that they feared seemed something less or more; the amazement with which he beheld gates and towers unknown even to art, and furtive people thronging intricate ways to acclaim him as their sovereign--all these things began to affect his capacity for Business. He knew as well as any that his fancy could not rule these beautiful lands unless that other Shap, however unimportant, were well sheltered and fed: and shelter and food meant money, and money, Business. His was more like the mistake of some gambler with cunning schemes who overlooks human greed. One day his fancy, riding in the morning, came to a city gorgeous as the sunrise, in whose opalescent wall were gates of gold, so huge that a river poured between the bars, floating in, when the gates were opened, large galleons under sail. Thence there came dancing out a company with instruments, and made a melody all around the wall; that morning Mr. Shap, the bodily Shap in London, forgot the train to town.

Until a year ago he had never imagined at all; it is not to be wondered at that all these things now newly seen by his fancy should play tricks at first with the memory of even so sane a man. He gave up reading the papers altogether, he lost all interest in politics, he cared less and less for things that were going on around him. This unfortunate missing of the morning train even occurred again, and the firm spoke to him severely about it. But he had his consolation. Were not Arathrion and Argun Zeerith and all the level coasts of Oora his? And even as the firm found fault with him his fancy watched the yaks on weary journeys, slow specks against the snow-fields, bringing tribute; and saw the green eyes of the mountain men who had looked at him strangely in the city of Nith when he had entered it by the desert door. Yet his logic did not forsake him; he knew well that his strange subjects did not exist, but he was prouder of having created them with his brain, than merely of ruling them only; thus in his pride he felt himself something more great than a king, he did not dare to think what! He went into the temple of the city of Zorra and stood some time there alone: all the priests kneeled to him when he came away.

He cared less and less for the things we care about, for the affairs of Shap, the business-man in London. He began to despise the man with a royal contempt.

One day when he sat in Sowla, the city of the Thuls, throned on one amethyst, he decided, and it was proclaimed on the moment by silver trumpets all along the land, that he would be crowned as king over all the lands of Wonder.

By that old temple where the Thuls worshipped, year in, year out, for over a thousand years, they pitched pavilions in the open air. The trees that blew there threw out radiant scents unknown in any countries that know the map; the stars blazed fiercely for that famous occasion. A fountain hurled up, clattering, ceaselessly into the air armfuls on armfuls of diamonds. A deep hush waited for the golden trumpets, the holy coronation night was come. At the top of those old, worn steps, going down we know not whither, stood the king in the emerald-and-amethyst cloak, the ancient garb of the Thuls; beside him lay that Sphinx that for the last few weeks had advised him in his affairs.

Slowly, with music when the trumpets sounded, came up towards him from we know not where, one-hundred-and-twenty archbishops, twenty angels and two archangels, with that terrific crown, the diadem of the Thuls. They knew as they came up to him that promotion awaited them all because of this night's work. Silent, majestic, the king awaited them.

The doctors downstairs were sitting over their supper, the warders softly slipped from room to room, and when in that cosy dormitory of Hanwell they saw the king still standing erect and royal, his face resolute, they came up to him and addressed him:

"Go to bed," they said--"pretty bed." So he lay down and soon was fast asleep: the great day was over.

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f13]

CHU-BU AND SHEEMISH

It was the custom on Tuesdays in the temple of Chu-bu for the priests to enter at evening and chant, "There is none but Chu-bu."

And all the people rejoiced and cried out, "There is none but Chu-bu." And honey was offered to Chu-bu, and maize and fat. Thus was he magnified.

Chu-bu was an idol of some antiquity, as may be seen from the colour of the wood. He had been carved out of mahogany, and after he was carved he had been polished. Then they had set him up on the diorite pedestal with the brazier in front of it for burning spices and the flat gold plates for fat. Thus they worshipped Chu-bu.

He must have been there for over a hundred years when one day the priests came in with another idol into the temple of Chu-bu and set it up on a pedestal near Chu-bu's and sang, "There is also Sheemish."

And all the people rejoiced and cried out, "There is also Sheemish."

Sheemish was palpably a modern idol, and although the wood was stained with a dark-red dye, you could see that he had only just been carved. And honey was offered to Sheemish as well as Chu-bu, and also maize and fat.

The fury of Chu-bu knew no time-limit: he was furious all that night, and next day he was furious still. The situation called for immediate miracles. To devastate the city with a pestilence and kill all his priests was scarcely within his power, therefore he wisely concentrated such divine powers as he had in commanding a little earthquake. "Thus," thought Chu-bu, "will I reassert myself as the only god, and men shall spit upon Sheemish."

Chu-bu willed it and willed it and still no earthquake came, when suddenly he was aware that the hated Sheemish was daring to attempt a miracle too. He ceased to busy himself about the earthquake and listened, or shall I say felt, for what Sheemish was thinking; for gods are aware of what passes in the mind by a sense that is other than any of our five. Sheemish was trying to make an earthquake too.

The new god's motive was probably to assert himself. I doubt if Chu-bu understood or cared for his motive; it was sufficient for an idol already aflame with jealousy that his detestable rival was on the verge of a miracle. All the power of Chu-bu veered round at once and set dead against an earthquake, even a little one. It was thus in the temple of Chu-bu for some time, and then no earthquake came.

To be a god and to fail to achieve a miracle is a despairing sensation; it is as though among men one should determine upon a hearty sneeze and as though no sneeze should come; it is as though one should try to swim in heavy boots or remember a name that is utterly forgotten: all these pains were Sheemish's.

And upon Tuesday the priests came in, and the people, and they did worship Chu-bu and offered fat to him, saying, "O Chu-bu who made everything," and then the priests sang, "There is also Sheemish"; and Chu-bu was put to shame and spake not for three days.

Now there were holy birds in the temple of Chu-bu, and when the third day was come and the night thereof, it was as it were revealed to the mind of Chu-bu, that there was dirt upon the head of Sheemish.

And Chu-bu spake unto Sheemish as speak the gods, moving no lips nor yet disturbing the silence, saying, "There is dirt upon thy head, O Sheemish." All night long he muttered again and again, "there is dirt upon Sheemish's head." And when it was dawn and voices were heard far off, Chu-bu became exultant with Earth's awakening things, and cried out till the sun was high, "Dirt, dirt, dirt, upon the head of Sheemish," and at noon he said, "So Sheemish would be a god." Thus was Sheemish confounded.

And with Tuesday one came and washed his head with rose-water, and he was worshipped again when they sang "There is also Sheemish." And yet was Chu-bu content, for he said, "The head of Sheemish has been defiled," and again, "His head was defiled, it is enough." And one evening lo! there was dirt on the head of Chu-bu also, and the thing was perceived of Sheemish.

It is not with the gods as it is with men. We are angry one with another and turn from our anger again, but the wrath of the gods is enduring. Chu-bu remembered and Sheemish did not forget. They spake as we do not speak, in silence yet heard of each other, nor were their thoughts as our thoughts. We should not judge them merely by human standards. All night long they spake and all night said these words only: "Dirty Chu-bu," "Dirty Sheemish." "Dirty Chu-bu," "Dirty Sheemish," all night long. Their wrath had not tired at dawn, and neither had wearied of his accusation. And gradually Chu-bu came to realize that he was nothing more than the equal of Sheemish. All gods are jealous, but this equality with the upstart Sheemish, a thing of painted wood a hundred years newer than Chu-bu, and this worship given to Sheemish in Chu-bu's own temple, were particularly bitter. Chu-bu was jealous even for a god; and when Tuesday came again, the third day of Sheemish's worship, Chu-bu could bear it no longer. He felt that his anger must be revealed at all costs, and he returned with all the vehemence of his will to achieving a little earthquake. The worshippers had just gone from his temple when Chu-bu settled his will to attain this miracle. Now and then his meditations were disturbed by that now familiar dictum, "Dirty Chu-bu," but Chu-bu willed ferociously, not even stopping to say what he longed to say and had already said nine hundred times, and presently even these interruptions ceased.

They ceased because Sheemish had returned to a project that he had never definitely abandoned, the desire to assert himself and exalt himself over Chu-bu by performing a miracle, and the district being volcanic he had chosen a little earthquake as the miracle most easily accomplished by a small god.

Now an earthquake that is commanded by two gods has double the chance of fulfilment than when it is willed by one, and an incalculably greater chance than when two gods are pulling different ways; as, to take the case of older and greater gods, when the sun and the moon pull in the same direction we have the biggest tides.

Chu-bu knew nothing of the theory of tides, and was too much occupied with his miracle to notice what Sheemish was doing. And suddenly the miracle was an accomplished thing.

It was a very local earthquake, for there are other gods than Chu-bu or even Sheemish, and it was only a little one as the gods had willed, but it loosened some monoliths in a colonnade that supported one side of the temple and the whole of one wall fell in, and the low huts of the people of that city were shaken a little and some of their doors were jammed so that they would not open; it was enough, and for a moment it seemed that it was all; neither Chu-bu nor Sheemish commanded there should be more, but they had set in motion an old law older than Chu-bu, the law of gravity that that colonnade had held back for a hundred years, and the temple of Chu-bu quivered and then stood still, swayed once and was overthrown, on the heads of Chu-bu and Sheemish.

No one rebuilt it, for nobody dared to near such terrible gods. Some said that Chu-bu wrought the miracle, but some said Sheemish, and thereof schism was born. The weakly amiable, alarmed by the bitterness of rival sects, sought compromise and said that both had wrought it, but no one guessed the truth that the thing was done in rivalry.

And a saying arose, and both sects held this belief in common, that whoso toucheth Chu-bu shall die or whoso looketh upon Sheemish.

That is how Chu-bu came into my possession when I travelled once beyond the hills of Ting. I found him in the fallen temple of Chu-bu with his hands and toes sticking up out of the rubbish, lying upon his back, and in that attitude just as I found him I keep him to this day on my mantlepiece, as he is less liable to be upset that way. Sheemish was broken, so I left him where he was.

And there is something so helpless about Chu-bu with his fat hands stuck up in the air that sometimes I am moved out of compassion to bow down to him and pray, saying, "O Chu-bu, thou that made everything, help thy servant."

Chu-bu cannot do much, though once I am sure that at a game of bridge he sent me the ace of trumps after I had not held a card worth having for the whole of the evening. And chance alone could have done as much as that for me. But I do not tell this to Chu-bu.

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f14]

THE WONDERFUL WINDOW

The old man in the Oriental-looking robe was being moved on by the police, and it was this that attracted to him and the parcel under his arm the attention of Mr. Sladden, whose livelihood was earned in the emporium of Messrs. Mergin and Chater, that is to say in their establishment.

Mr. Sladden had the reputation of being the silliest young man in Business; a touch of romance--a mere suggestion of it--would send his eyes gazing away as though the walls of the emporium were of gossamer and London itself a myth, instead of attending to customers.

Merely the fact that the dirty piece of paper that wrapped the old man's parcel was covered with Arabic writing was enough to give Mr. Sladden the ideas of romance, and he followed until the little crowd fell off and the stranger stopped by the kerb and unwrapped his parcel and prepared to sell the thing that was inside it. It was a little window in old wood with small panes set in lead; it was not much more than a foot in breadth and was under two feet long. Mr. Sladden had never before seen a window sold in the street, so he asked the price of it.

"Its price is all you possess," said the old man.

"Where did you get it?" said Mr. Sladden, for it was a strange window.

"I gave all that I possessed for it in the streets of Baghdad."

"Did you possess much?" said Mr. Sladden.

"I had all that I wanted," he said, "except this window."

"It must be a good window," said the young man.

"It is a magical window," said the old one.

"I have only ten shillings on me, but I have fifteen-and-six at home."

The old man thought for a while. "Then twenty-five-and-sixpence is the price of the window," he said.

It was only when the bargain was completed and the ten shillings paid and the strange old man was coming for his fifteen-and-six and to fit the magical window into his only room that it occurred to Mr. Sladden's mind that he did not want a window. And then they were at the door of the house in which he rented a room, and it seemed too late to explain.

The stranger demanded privacy when he fitted up the window, so Mr. Sladden remained outside the door at the top of a little flight of creaky stairs. He heard no sound of hammering.

And presently the strange old man came out with his faded yellow robe and his great beard, and his eyes on far-off places. "It is finished," he said, and he and the young man parted. And whether he remained a spot of colour and an anachronism in London, or whether he ever came again to Baghdad, and what dark hands kept on the circulation of his twenty-five-and-six, Mr. Sladden never knew.

Mr. Sladden entered the bare-boarded room in which he slept and spent all his indoor hours between closing-time and the hour at which Messrs. Mergin and Chater commenced. To the Penates of so dingy a room his neat frock-coat must have been a continual wonder. Mr. Sladden took it off and folded it carefully; and there was the old man's window rather high up in the wall. There had been no window in that wall hitherto, nor any ornament at all but a small cupboard, so when Mr. Sladden had put his frock-coat safely away he glanced through his new window. It was where his cupboard had been in which he kept his tea-things: they were all standing on the table now. When Mr. Sladden glanced through his new window it was late in a summer's evening; the butterflies some while ago would have closed their wings, though the bat would scarcely yet be drifting abroad--but this was in London: the shops were shut and street-lamps not yet lighted.

Mr. Sladden rubbed his eyes, then rubbed the window, and still he saw a sky of blazing blue, and far, far down beneath him, so that no sound came up from it or smoke of chimneys, a mediaeval city set with towers; brown roofs and cobbled streets, and then white walls and buttresses, and beyond them bright green fields and tiny streams. On the towers archers lolled, and along the walls were pikemen, and now and then a wagon went down some old-world street and lumbered through the gateway and out to the country, and now and then a wagon drew up to the city from the mist that was rolling with evening over the fields. Sometimes folks put their heads out of lattice windows, sometimes some idle troubadour seemed to sing, and nobody hurried or troubled about anything. Airy and dizzy though the distance was, for Mr. Sladden seemed higher above the city than any cathedral gargoyle, yet one clear detail he obtained as a clue: the banners floating from every tower over the idle archers had little golden dragons all over a pure white field.

He heard motor-buses roar by his other window, he heard the newsboys howling.

Mr. Sladden grew dreamier than ever after that on the premises, in the establishment of Messrs. Mergin and Chater. But in one matter he was wise and wakeful: he made continuous and careful inquiries about the golden dragons on a white flag, and talked to no one of his wonderful window. He came to know the flags of every king in Europe, he even dabbled in history, he made inquiries at shops that understood heraldry, but nowhere could he learn any trace of little dragons or on a field argent. And when it seemed that for him alone those golden dragons had fluttered he came to love them as an exile in some desert might love the lilies of his home or as a sick man might love swallows when he cannot easily live to another spring.

As soon as Messrs. Mergin and Chater closed, Mr. Sladden used to go back to his dingy room and gaze though the wonderful window until it grew dark in the city and the guard would go with a lantern round the ramparts and the night came up like velvet, full of strange stars. Another clue he tried to obtain one night by jotting down the shapes of the constellations, but this led him no further, for they were unlike any that shone upon either hemisphere.

Each day as soon as he woke he went first to the wonderful window, and there was the city, diminutive in the distance, all shining in the morning, and the golden dragons dancing in the sun, and the archers stretching themselves or swinging their arms on the tops of the windy towers. The window would not open, so that he never heard the songs that the troubadours sang down there beneath the gilded balconies; he did not even hear the belfries' chimes, though he saw the jackdaws routed every hour from their homes. And the first thing that he always did was to cast his eye round all the little towers that rose up from the ramparts to see that the little golden dragons were flying there on their flags. And when he saw them flaunting themselves on white folds from every tower against the marvelous deep blue of the sky he dressed contentedly, and, taking one last look, went off to his work with a glory in his mind. It would have been difficult for the customers of Messrs. Mergin and Chater to guess the precise ambition of Mr. Sladden as he walked before them in his neat frock-coat: it was that he might be a man-at-arms or an archer in order to fight for the little golden dragons that flew on a white flag for an unknown king in an inaccessible city. At first Mr. Sladden used to walk round and round the mean street that he lived in, but he gained no clue from that; and soon he noticed that quite different winds blew below his wonderful window from those that blew on the other side of the house.

In August the evenings began to grow shorter: this was the very remark that the other employees made to him at the emporium, so that he almost feared that they suspected his secret, and he had much less time for the wonderful window, for lights were few down there and they blinked out early.

One morning late in August, just before he went to Business, Mr. Sladden saw a company of pikemen running down the cobbled road towards the gateway of the mediaeval city--Golden Dragon City he used to call it alone in his own mind, but he never spoke of it to anyone. The next thing that he noticed was that the archers were handling round bundles of arrows in addition to the quivers which they wore. Heads were thrust out of windows more than usual, a woman ran out and called some children indoors, a knight rode down the street, and then more pikemen appeared along the walls, and all the jack-daws were in the air. In the street no troubadour sang. Mr. Sladden took one look along the towers to see that the flags were flying, and all the golden dragons were streaming in the wind. Then he had to go to Business. He took a bus back that evening and ran upstairs. Nothing seemed to be happening in Golden Dragon City except a crowd in the cobbled street that led down to the gateway; the archers seemed to be reclining as usual lazily in their towers, and then a white flag went down with all its golden dragons; he did not see at first that all the archers were dead. The crowd was pouring towards him, towards the precipitous wall from which he looked; men with a white flag covered with golden dragons were moving backwards slowly, men with another flag were pressing them, a flag on which there was one huge red bear. Another banner went down upon a tower. Then he saw it all: the golden dragons were being beaten--his little golden dragons. The men of the bear were coming under the window; what ever he threw from that height would fall with terrific force: fire-irons, coal, his clock, whatever he had--he would fight for his little golden dragons yet. A flame broke out from one of the towers and licked the feet of a reclining archer; he did not stir. And now the alien standard was out of sight directly underneath. Mr. Sladden broke the panes of the wonderful window and wrenched away with a poker the lead that held them. Just as the glass broke he saw a banner covered with golden dragons fluttering still, and then as he drew back to hurl the poker there came to him the scent of mysterious spices, and there was nothing there, not even the daylight, for behind the fragments of the wonderful window was nothing but that small cupboard in which he kept his tea-things.

And though Mr. Sladden is older now and knows more of the world, and even has a Business of his own, he has never been able to buy such another window, and has not ever since, either from books or men, heard any rumour at all of Golden Dragon City.

The Book of Wonder, by Lord Dunsany, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[f15]

EPILOGUE

Here the fourteenth Episode of the Book of Wonder endeth and here the relating of the Chronicles of Little Adventures at the Edge of the World. I take farewell of my readers. But it may be we shall even meet again, for it is still to be told how the gnomes robbed the fairies, and of the vengeance that the fairies took, and how even the gods themselves were troubled thereby in their sleep; and how the King of Ool insulted the troubadours, thinking himself safe among his scores of archers and hundreds of halberdiers, and how the troubadours stole to his towers by night, and under his battlements by the light of the moon made that king ridiculous for ever in song. But for this I must first return to the Edge of the World. Behold, the caravans start.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: tee.txt =====


    
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Evil Eye

 

An Account of this Ancient and Widespread Superstition

 

by Frederick Thomas Elworthy

 

J. Murray; London

 

[1895]

 

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, by John Bruno Hare, February, 2004. This text is in the public domain because it was published prior to 1923.

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

 

CONTENTS

     PAGE 
  CHAPTER I    
  INTRODUCTION  <page 1> 
  CHAPTER II    
  SYMPATHETIC MAGIC  <page 44> 
  CHAPTER III    
  TOTEMS, PORTENTS, TREE-WORSHIP  <page 87> 
  CHAPTER IV    
  SYMBOLS AND AMULETS  <page 115> 
  CHAPTER V    
  THE GORGONEION  <page 158> 
  CHAPTER VI    
  CRESCENTS, HORNS, HORSESHOES  <page 181> 
  CHAPTER VII    
  TOUCH, HANDS, GESTURES  <page 233> 
  CHAPTER VIII    
  THE CROSS  <page 277> 
  CHAPTER IX    
  THE MANO PANTEA  <page 293> 
  CHAPTER X    
  THE CIMARUTA, SIRENE, TABLETS  <page 343> 
  CHAPTER XI    
  CABALISTIC WRITING--MAGICAL FORMULAe  <page 389> 
  CHAPTER XII    
  SPITTING, INCANTATION, AND OTHER PROTECTIVE ACTS--PIXIES  <page 410> 
  APPENDIX 1. THE CELESTIAL MOTHER  <page 226> 
  APPENDIX 2. GURGOYLES  <page 229> 
  APPENDIX 3. DIVINATION, INCANTATION, ETC.  <page 438> 
  

 

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

  EFFECTS OF THE EVIL EYE     Frontispiece. 
     FIGS.  PAGE 
  USHEBTIU--EGYPTIAN RESPONDENTS  1-2-3  <page 50> 
  HEARTS STUCK WITH PINS AND THORNS  4-5  <page 53>-4 
  FATTURA DELLA MORTE  6  <page 58> 
  GEM AMULET--GOAT AND CRICKET  7  <page 121> 
  CRESCENT AND SERPENT (MALTESE)  8  <page 122> 
  WINGED SCARABAeUS  9  <page 125> 
  THE MYSTIC EYE  10-13  <page 126>-8 
  MEDAL AND GEM COMPOUND AMULETS  14-18  <page 130>-1 
  AMULET FOR EVERY DAY IN THE WEEK  19  <page 131> 
  ENGRAVED PHALLIC AMULET  20  <page 133> 
  NECKLACE FROM THE CRIMEA  21  <page 135> 
  TAZZA ORNAMENTED WITH THE EYE  22  <page 136> 
  ETRUSCAN WINGED DEITY  23  <page 136> 
  THE EVIL EYE, WOBURN MARBLE  24  <page 137> 
  WINGED FIGURES  25  <page 141> 
  MYSTIC SCENE WITH LEPIDOTUS AND LOTUS  26  <page 142> 
  GRYLLI, ENGRAVED GEMS  27-30  <page 144> 
  ANIMAL AMULETS  31-38  <page 145>-6 
  MASKS UPON GEMS  39-40  <page 148> 
  THE MANO FICA  41  <page 152> 
  ANCIENT ETRUSCAN AMULETS  42  <page 154> 
  THE PELEKYS  43-44  <page 156> 
  COIN OF THE TOWN LUNA  45-46  <page 156> 
  THE GORGON'S HEAD UPON A GEM  47  <page 158> 
  THE ANUBIS VASE  48  <page 159> 
  THE GNOSTIC GORGON  49  <page 160> 
  THE CORTONA LAMP  50  <page 162> 
  ETRUSCAN MEDUSA  51  <page 163> 
  MEDUSAS, SHOWING THE TRANSITION  52  <page 164> 
  TAHITI GORGON  53  <page 165> 
  PERUVIAN GORGONS  54-55  <page 166> 
  INSIGNIA OF ROMAN LEGIONS  56-66  <page 169>-177 
  HERA IMAGES (Lithograph)  67-68  <page 183> 
  DIANA OF EPHESUS  69  <page 188> 
  ISIS NURSING HORUS  70-71  <page 189> 
  DEVAKI AND CRISHNA  72  <page 190> 
  ISHTAR OF BABYLON  73  <page 191> 
  INDRANEE AND CHILD  74  <page 192> 
  PERUVIAN HORNED MASK  75  <page 197> 
  ROMAN HORNED MEDUSA  76  <page 198> 
  MAH-TO-WO-PA--MANDAN CHIEF  77  <page 200> 
  GREEK HORNED HELMETS  78-79  <page 201> 
  EGYPTIAN CRESCENT AMULET  80  <page 202> 
  NUMEROUS AMULETS, CIMARUTAS, ETC.  81  <page 203> 
  MODERN HARNESS FROM NAPLES  82  <page 205> 
  HORSE AMULETS  83-84  <page 208>-9 
  ROMAN LAMPS  85-86  <page 212>-3 
  DOORWAY OF SEVILLE CATHEDRAL  87, 158  <page 214>, <page 321> 
  ASHANTEE FIELD AMULETS  88  <page 215> 
  ETRUSCAN HORSESHOE AMULET  89  <page 219> 
  ISIS AND HORUS  90-91  <page 228>-9 
  IL DIAVOLO FIORENTINO  92  <page 232> 
  MANUAL NUMERATION  93-95  <page 237>-9 
  ETRUSCAN HAND AMULETS  96-102  <page 241>-2 
  KHUENATEN ADORING THE SUN  103  <page 244> 
  THE OPEN HAND  104  <page 245> 
  ANCIENT STATUETTE FROM SARDINIA  105  <page 245> 
  LA TORRE DE JUSTICIA  106  <page 246> 
  HAND GESTURES FROM RAVENNA  107  <page 248> 
  TUNISIAN HAND, PAINTED ON DRUM  108  <page 250> 
  STORIES TOLD IN GESTURES  109-110  <page 252>-3 
  MANO FICA  111  <page 256> 
  KEYS, HANDS, AND OTHER AMULETS  112  <page 259> 
  THE DEXTERA DEI  113  <page 265> 
  ST. LUKE, AT RAVENNA  114  <page 266> 
  INDIAN GODDESS  115  <page 267> 
  ABRAHAM'S SACRIFICE  116  <page 268> 
  MOSES, FROM RAVENNA MOSAIC  117  <page 269> 
  NEAPOLITAN GESTURE LANGUAGE  118-120  <page 271>-275 
  ANCIENT CROSSES  121-123  <page 278> 
  GRANITE BLOCKS, FROM CUZCO  124-125  <page 280> 
  PERUVIAN HIEROGLYPHICS  126  <page 282> 
  THE ANKH PERSONIFIED  127-128  <page 284> 
  SAXON COIN  129  <page 285> 
  THE ORB AND CROSS  130-131  <page 286> 
  "TWO HEARTS AND A CRISS-CROSS"  132  <page 287> 
  THE TRISKELION  133-134-135  <page 290>-2 
  HAND AMULET FOR THE TABLE  136  <page 293> 
  LA MAIN DE JUSTICE  137-146  <page 294>-8 
  THE MANO PANTEA  147-148, 156-157  <page 299>, <page 318> 
  DIANA TRIFORMIS  149, 163  <page 304>, <page 349> 
  THE FROG  150-154  <page 309>-12 
  SERPENT AMULET FROM ASHANTEE  155  <page 316> 
  MAGIC NAIL  159  <page 328> 
  PERUVIAN GOBBO  160  <page 331> 
  THE CIMARUTA  161-162  <page 344>-5 
  THE FASCINUM  164  <page 351> 
  APOLLO AS A GRILLO  165   <page 353> 
  SIRENS AND SEA-HORSES  166-169  <page 356>-8 
  ISIS A WINGED GODDESS  170-172  <page 359>-60 
  PROSERPINE  173-174, 179  <page 360>-1-7 
  EPHESIAN DIANA  175-178  <page 362>-3 
  HORUS IN THE SACRED BARIS  180  <page 369> 
  TERRA-COTTA MOULDS  18l-183  <page 371>-3 
  THE BARONE LAMP  184  <page 378> 
  MENSA ISIACA  185  <page 383> 
  ETHIOPIC CHARM AND CASE (Lithograph)  186  <page 391> 
  GREEK CHARM  187  <page 397> 
  MAGIC SPELL (GERMAN)  188  <page 398> 
  

 

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

 

THE EVIL EYE

 

CHAPTER I

 

INTRODUCTION

THERE be none of the affections which have been noted to fascinate or to bewitch, but love and envy; they both have vehement wishes, they frame themselves readily into imaginations and suggestions, and they come easily into the eye, especially upon the presence of the objects which are the points that conduce to fascination, if any such there be. We see likewise the Scripture calleth envy an evil eye." [*1]

So wrote one of our greatest philosophers, and on the same subject he says: "Of all other affections, it is the most importunate and continual; . . . therefore it is well said: 'Invidia festos dies non agit,' for it is ever working upon some or other. It is also the vilest affection and the most depraved; for which cause it is the proper attribute of the Devil, who is called 'The envious man that soweth tares amongst the wheat by night.'"

As to the word fascination, even in Bacon's time it had acquired its modern sense, implying the influence or effect we now associate with

[p. 2]

animal magnetism. Notwithstanding this, the word was used by various writers down to the end of the seventeenth century in its original, technical meaning, as an alternative for "evil eye." Nowadays it has practically lost its older sinister sense, and except among scholars has retained only the pleasant one in which Bacon used it.

A fascinating person now, is one who charms delightfully, who excites feelings of pleasure, who is in every way attractive. Similarly in our everyday talk the alternate word bewitch has retained only in polite society its pleasant side. A bewitching woman is one who excites the passion of love alone, and the simple use of either synonym conveys now no implication of malevolence to the conventionally educated.

The quotation from Bacon with which we started well marks the progress always going on in the development of word-meanings. In the Elizabethan age, to fascinate or bewitch had in literature even then arrived at a double position, applicable to either love or hate; whereas in earlier days these words were wholly confined to maleficence in signification. This of course only applies to literary language and polite society; among the peasantry the Latin form, fascination, is unknown, while everything relating to witch or witching still bears an evil sense only.

In proof of all this we have only to compare the modern colloquial significance of the terms fascinating or bewitching, as used in speaking of a person by the educated, with witch, witching, or the west country dialectal "wisht," as used by the peasantry.

[p. 3]

The belief that there is a power of evil working, which is ejaculated (as Bacon says) upon any object it beholds, has existed in all times and in all countries. It was adopted and sanctioned alike by the Fathers of the Church, by mediaeval physicians, and all writers on occult science; while in our own day it still exists among all savage nations, and even here in England in our very midst. Heliodorus [*2] makes Charicles say of his host: "I fancy an envious eye has looked upon this man also; he seems to be affected much in the same manner as Chariclea. Indeed I think so too, I replied; and it is probable enough, for he went directly after her in the procession." [*3]

The origin of the belief is lost in the obscurity of prehistoric ages. The enlightened call it superstition; but it holds its sway over the people of many countries, savage as well as civilised, and must be set down as one of the hereditary and instinctive convictions of mankind.

The stories that might be adduced of the constancy of the belief in a blighting power of influencing other persons, and of controlling events injuriously to others, even. in these days of board-school enlightenment are almost infinite. Here, in Somerset, the pig is taken ill and dies--"he was overlooked." A murrain afflicts a farmer's cattle; he goes off secretly to the "white witch," that is the old witch-finder, to ascertain who has "overlooked his things" and to learn the best

[p. 4]

antidote, "'cause they there farriers can't do no good."

A child is ill and pining away; the mother loses all heart; she is sure the child is overlooked and "is safe to die." Often she gives up not only hope but all effort to save the child; the consequent neglect of course hastens the expected result, and then it is: "Oh! I know'd very well he would'n never get no better. "'Tidn no good vor to strive vor to go agin it." This is no fancy, or isolated case, but here in the last decade of the nineteenth century one of the commonest of everyday facts.

The author of the pious graffito (still in situ):--

	 
		Things seen is Intempural,
		 Things not seen is Inturnel,
		
		 [paragraph continues] referred to in the West Somerset Word-Book, p. ix, is a man far above the average in intelligence. He lodged where the daughter of the family had some obscure malady. She became a patient at the County Hospital, but only grew worse. In this case the mother does not at first seem to have believed in occult influence, but went about and spread a report that "they'd a-starved her maid, into thick there hospital"! At the same time the writer ascertained that the girl had been all the while receiving extra nourishment. She was removed, and of course grew worse. On speaking to the lodger about the starvation theory, he said: "Oh! I knows 'twaddn that." "What do you think it was?" "Oh! I knows." After many times declaring "I knows," he at last said: "Her was overlooked--her was; and I knows very well who don'd it." After much persuasion he mentioned the name of a poor ignorant old woman, who certainly did not bear the

[p. 5]

best of characters. The whole family devoutly believed that the girl's death, which happened very soon, was brought about by this old woman. No doubt a century or two ago she would have been burnt as a witch. [*4]

Several cases of precisely the same kind are well known to the writer and his family--especially relating to children. Visits have been often paid to the sick children of persons whose names might be given, where "'tis very wisht vor to zee the poor chiel a-pinin away like that there." Not much is said to strangers, but those who know are perfectly aware of what the mother means.

	 
		                           Beshrew your eyes,
		 They have o'erlook'd me and divided me;
		 One half of me is yours, the other half yours.
		                    Merchant of Venice, Act iii. Sc. 2.
		
		 The imputation by St. Paul, that the foolish Galatians [*5] had been spellbound, meant that some evil eye had "overlooked" them and worked in them a blighting influence. It was an apt allusion to the then, and still, universally prevalent belief in that power of "dread fascination" which the writer of the Epistle [*6] so well knew they would comprehend, and he therefore used it as a striking metaphor.

[p. 6]

Abundant testimony exists in the oldest monuments in the world that among the ancient Egyptians belief in and dread of the evil eye were ever present; their efforts to avert or to baffle it, both as regarded the living and the dead, who they knew would live again, were perhaps the most constant and elaborate of any, of which we can now decipher the traces.

We see evidence of this in the very beginning of Egyptian mythology. Ptah, the Opener, [*7] is said to be the father of the gods and of men. He brought forth all the other gods from his eye, and men from his mouth--a piece of implied evidence of the ancient belief that of all emanations those from the eye were the most potent.

How strong the feeling was among contemporary Orientals, the many passages in Scripture [*7a] referring to it distinctly prove. Indeed it is found in the literature of every people, in every land since history began to be written. No science, no religion, no laws have been able to root out this fixed belief; and no power has ever been able to eradicate it from the human mind; so that even amongst the cultivated and the enlightened it still exists as an unacknowledged, mysterious half-belief, half-superstition, which nevertheless exercises, though secretly, a powerful influence on the actions of mankind.

We in these latter days of Science, when scoffing at superstition is both a fashion and a passion, nevertheless show by actions and words that in our innermost

[p. 7]

soul there lurks a something, a feeling, a superstition if you will, which all our culture, all our boasted superiority to vulgar beliefs, cannot stifle, and which may well be held to be a kind of hereditary instinct. [*8]

Not only do the pages of Brand's Popular Antiquities, Brewster's Magic, and Hone's Everyday Book, as well as the local press, provide endless stories and examples, which we need not here repeat, but the more modern publications of the Psychical Research Society also record plenty of them; at the same time the latter throw over them a glamour of quasi-scientific investigation.

Among the Greeks, who got their art and many of their customs from Egypt, the belief was so universal that they had a special word to express this mysterious power, baskania, [*9] whence, all authorities say, [*10] comes the Latin word fascinatio.

This latter word Cicero himself discusses, and explains as invidere, to look too closely at: hence invidia, envy, or evil eye, the instigator of most deadly sins--the vice which is even now most frequently named in connection with its sequences, "hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness."

Delrio [*11] and Frommannd trace the Greek word to Chaldean, and discourse upon the etymology as

[p. 8]

well as the meanings of fascinatio at great length, in language and allusions unfit for reproduction, which are, moreover, beside our present purpose. It may, however, be remarked that Frommannd throws much light upon the ancient ideas connected with the evil eye, and with the means taken to baffle it, backed up by an array of authorities such as no other writer on the subject has brought together, but of such a nature that we can only here direct the student to the book itself. [*12] Many objects to be seen in Egypt, Greece, and Italy, especially at Pompeii, are by this extraordinary treatise made to assume an entirely different shape and signification from those given them by the guidebooks or the ciceroni.

It was firmly believed by all ancients, that some malignant influence darted from the eyes of envious or angry persons, and so infected the air as to penetrate and corrupt the bodies of both living creatures and inanimate objects. "When any one looks at what is excellent with an envious eye he fills the surrounding atmosphere with a pernicious quality, and transmits his own envenomed exhalations into whatever is nearest to him." [*13]

It has also been fully believed, both in ancient and modern times, that many persons by the glance of their eye have caused injurious effects, without their consent and even against their will, so that

[p. 9]

in some cases mothers [*14] would not venture to expose their infants to the look of their own fathers.

A story is related of an unhappy Slav, [*15] who with the most loving heart was afflicted with the evil eye, and at last blinded himself in order that he might not be the means of injury to his children.

Frommannd (p. 10) draws attention to the very remarkable passage in Deut. xxviii. 54, in confirmation of the possession of this terrible power acting against the will of the possessor.

Jahn [*16] remarks upon this, that as smell, speech, bodily presence and breath work their influence upon those with whom they come in contact, so in a yet higher degree does the glance from the eye, which, as all know, affects so much in love. [*17]

Domestic animals, such as horses, camels, cows, have always been thought in special danger. In the Scotch Highlands if a stranger looks admiringly on a cow the people still believe she will waste away from the evil eye, and they offer him some of her milk to drink, in the belief that by so doing the spell will be broken and the consequences averted. [*18] The Turk and the Arab think the same of their horses and camels. Above all the Neapolitan cabman of to-day believes in the great danger to his horse from the eye of the jettatore.

[p. 10]

Camden says the Irish believe some men's eyes have the power of bewitching horses. [*19]

Young animals of all kinds were, and are, thought to be peculiarly susceptible. Virgil (Ec. iii. 103) puts into the mouth of a shepherd, what everybody quotes: "Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos." Plutarch [*20] also says that certain men's eyes are destructive to infants and young animals because of the weak and tender constitution of their bodies, but have not so much power over men of strong frames. . . . He says, however, the Thebans had this inimical faculty, so that they could destroy not infants only but strong men.

The Cretans and the people of Cyprus had in ancient times the reputation of being specially endowed with the faculty, and the same belief continues down to this day as recounted by General de Cesnola.

The special dread of fascination for domestic animals is implied by the author of the Book of Judges (viii. 21), for the word translated ornaments in the A.V. is given in the margin as "ornaments like the moon" that were on their camels' necks. [*20a]

Who can doubt that those ornaments were the exact prototypes of the identical half-moons we now put upon our harness? We shall see later that these have ever been among the most potent amulets against the evil eye. The belief still prevails everywhere, that horses are specially subject to its influence: it is found in India, China, Turkey, Egypt, Greece, England, Scotland, Ireland, and in all countries where horses abound, but above all in Italy.

[p. 11]

In Scotland [*21] and in England all kinds of cattle are thought liable to its malignity. To this day any ailment or misfortune to a domestic animal is at once set down to its being "overlooked." [*22] In Ireland in Elizabeth's time they used to execute eye-biting witches for causing diseases among cattle. Cows are particularly subject to fascination in Scotland, and the various preventive remedies are enumerated by Pennant in his Voyage to the Hebrides. [*23] In England, of all animals the pig is oftenest "overlooked." This may be because he has more owners of the peasantry class, or perhaps because of the difficulty of administering physic; and hence his frequent maladies have become mysterious. It is the common saying that "there idn no drenchin' a pig when he's a-tookt bad; there idn no cure vor'n but cold steel." [*24]

Pliny also says that the Thibii in Pontus, and many other persons as well, have a double pupil in one eye, and in the other the figure of a horse, and

[p. 12]

that these people will not sink in water even if weighed down with clothes. [*25]

It is thus easy to see from Pliny, whence the idea came which led people in the Middle Ages, and even later, to put reputed witches to the water ordeal. If they sank they were innocent, but of course then they were drowned, and spite was appeased; while if they floated they were, as in Pliny's time, accounted guilty and then burnt. [*26]

Those who were under the influence of anger or of envy were most dangerous in this terrible faculty, while those who were in the enjoyment of special happiness or good fortune were the most liable to injury, because exciting the greater invidia of the fascinator.

Those who had been highly praised, by others or even by themselves, were liable to be blasted.

Narcissus was thought to have fascinated himself, and hence his untimely fate, for it has always been held that too much praise or admiration of any person or object by whomsoever given, even by himself, would bring upon him the curse of fascination.

How surely this belief still exists even here in England is proved by the following:--A few weeks ago a respectable farmer had a very nice-looking

[p. 13]

horse in his cart, which the writer, his landlord, admired, and said would bring him a long price for a certain purpose. The owner began to expatiate on the good qualities of the animal, but suddenly stopped and said: "But there, I don't want to zell'n, and mustn' zay too much for fear o' bad luck" (Nov. 15, 1893).

Even the most enlightened of us has constantly heard and perhaps said: "I never like to boast of my things; if I do I am sure to lose them." "Only yesterday, I was saying I had not broken anything for years, and now I have let fall this old glass that belonged to my grandmother!"

A story upon this question is told by Plutarch [*28] which he puts into the mouth of his friend Soclarus at a supper in the house of a certain Metrius Florus. There had been a discussion on the evil eye, and some one having asserted that fascination was all nonsense, the host insisted that the power was undoubted, and called on his friends to testify that "we  have known men who could inflict potent injury upon our children by merely looking at them." Plutarch then explains that the voice, the odour, the breath, are emanations which may easily injure those susceptible of them, and particularly is this true of the eyes, which dart out fiery rays, producing a wonderful effect, especially as may be seen in the influence of love through the eyes. Another of the friends agrees: he says that envy exerts an evil influence through the eye; and Plutarch affirms these to produce most direful results, from the envious looks which pierce like poisoned arrows. He goes on to say it is wise to employ charms and antidotes to turn aside these

[p. 14]

evil glances. Soclarus then mentions the fact that fathers and relatives sometimes bewitch their own children unintentionally, and that some even fascinate themselves by their own gaze.

He reminds them of the story of Eutelidas, who like Narcissus fell a victim to the admiration he felt for his own likeness.

	 
		Fair was Eutelidas once, with his beautiful hair,
		 But admiring his face in the stream, on himself he inflicted
		 A dread fascination, and wasted away with disease.
		
		 Theocritus also tells a story of a certain Damaetas who had been boasting of the impression his own beauty had made upon him when he had seen his image reflected in the water. He, however, seemed well aware of what might be the consequence, for he adopted a well-known remedy against fascination, by spitting three times on his breast. This will be referred to later on. [*29]

Further, among the Greeks and Romans, statues of Nemesis were erected, which were adored and invoked to save their worshippers from fascination.

Few of the old classic writers [*30] fail to give an account of the dread power which some individuals exercised over others. Women and children seem to have been accounted by all as the most liable to injury, while also some women were held to be the most powerful fascinators. Not only was the effect supposed to be produced by the eye--ofthalmos baskanos, the fascinating eye of the Greeks--but it was asserted that some could blast trees, kill children, and destroy animals merely by their voice. In Gozola, a town in Africa, a fascinator called Elzarian

[p. 15]

killed by his evil art no less than eighty persons in two years. [*31]

In Rome the faculty of fascination was so well recognised that, according to Pliny, special laws were enacted against injury to crops by incantation, excantation, or fascination. The belief in those days was so universal that when a person was ill without apparent cause the people cried: "Mantis te vidit"--"some fascinator (lit. grillo, grasshopper) has looked on thee"; just as would now be said, "Thou art overlooked." [*32]

It was believed anciently that even the gods also looked enviously upon man's good fortune, and often with malicious joy destroyed it for him. The injurious effect of this envy which seemed to men of old so mysterious (because beyond their comprehension), with the gods was thought to be but the natural outcome of their superhuman power. The belief was also held that the gods were envious of each other, and cast evil glances upon the less powerful of their own fraternity--hence the caduceus always carried by Mercury as a protector.

Although we no longer believe in divine enmity, any close observer can yet discover for himself, that a belief in the same malignant power of envy, though less outspoken, is still prevalent as ever. Here in the west we have a common expression of the peasantry, which keeps alive and tersely expresses this firm belief. Any untoward event which has brought misfortune, is described as "a very wisht thing." The death of a parent

[p. 16]

leaving young children, a child sick without any apparent disease, a fatal accident, or any unexpected calamity is thus spoken of. A person forlorn, sickly, or otherwise pitiable, is always "a wisht poor blid." The phrase extended would be "illwished," i.e. blasted or injured by the envious malignity of some person by whom the sufferer has been "overlooked," by whom the maleficent glance has been cast. The word is so common, and of such regular use, that it would be uttered by many, who would repudiate any such superstitious belief as that of the evil eye. [*34]

In connection with envy, it was customary amongst the Romans when praising any person or thing to add, praefiscini dixerim, [*35] which may be freely

[p. 17]

translated: "Fain evil! I should say." The same custom still holds in certain parts of Italy, where in like circumstances it is said: "Si mal occhio non ci fosse." The object of these conventional sayings was, and still is, to prove that the speaker was sincere and had no evil designs in his praise. We in the West have similar little speeches, though perhaps no set formula. "Mus'n zay too much." "That ever I should zay zo." "I don't wish 'ee no harm, so I on't zay no more," etc. etc., are very common sayings after praise.

It would be easy to multiply ancient quotations all bearing reference to the evil eye, not only from the Scriptures, but from hosts of early writers, which prove not only the prevalence, but the universality, of the belief.

All those who were supposed to possess the evil eye were specially avoided by the ancients. "Eat thou not the bread of him that hath an evil eye" (Prov. xxiii. 6) is just as much a maxim to-day as it was in the time of Solomon. At the appearance of a person having the reputation, a cry, jettatore! is passed, and even in a crowded street of Naples it causes an instantaneous vanishing of everybody, a rush up entries, into shops, or elsewhere; the charms and antidotes, of which we have to speak later on, notwithstanding.

An amusing incident occurred to the writer. I had been searching the book-shops of Italy from

[p. 18]

one end to the other for Cicalata, by Nicolo Valletta. At Venice I entered a large second-hand establishment, and was met by the padrone all smiles and obsequiousness, until he heard the last words of the title of the book wanted, sul Fascino. Instantly there was a regular stampede; the man actually turned and bolted into his inner room, leaving his customer in full possession of his entire stock. Nor did he even venture to look out from his den, so long as I waited to see what would happen. He evidently thought even the dread word a fatal omen, or at least that a foreigner using it must be a jettatore. Generally there is no hesitation among the people, at least the tradespeople, to talk about the jettatura as an abstract fact, but to get at their own personal feelings about it, or to get instances of its effects related, is much more difficult.

The fascinator of infants, jettatore di bambini, as he is called in Italy, is everywhere the most dreaded. A gentleman on three occasions acted as sponsor at Naples, and singularly all three of the children died; upon which he ever after got the reputation of having the malocchio, so that mothers who knew him took all sorts of precautions to keep their children out of his sight; and no one would, for the world, venture to ask him again to be godfather to a child.

The writer's friend, Mr. Neville-Rolfe, tells many similar stories (Naples in 1888. Trubner), and they might be multiplied to any extent. One such ought to be reported respecting a kind of fascination he terms "suspensive," the peculiarity of which is to disarrange whatever is being done. "If you meet him (the fascinator) when going to the train you will

[p. 19]

assuredly miss it. If you are going to see a friend by appointment you will find him out; if a friend is coming to see you he will be disappointed."

"How is your case getting on?" we once said to a Neapolitan friend, who was engaged in a troublesome litigation; "it was heard yesterday, was it not?" "No," replied he, very crestfallen; "on my way to the Court I met Mr. C------, and he has a jettatura sospensiva, so I knew what would happen; my case was adjourned sine die."

It may be mentioned en passant, that in Tuscany the influence is called affascinamento, or mal d'occhio; while in Southern Italy jettatura is the common term. In Corsica, [*36] however, where the belief is universal, it is called Innocchiatura. In other parts of Northern Italy it is known by several names, which seem to include all the varied influences of fascination, as well as those of the evil eye especially. [*37]

Valletta records [*38] that a servant of the Duke of Briganzio caused a falcon to drop down dead, con occhi jettatori. Also that it is registered in the Acts of the Academy of Paris that a dirty old hag (vecchiaccia) in 1739 went near and paused before a highly polished mirror, which, from her glance, absorbed so much greasy matter (grassume), that collected together it was proved to be a very powerful poison. Finally, he says, there was one who by

[p. 20]

looking on a block of marble dashed it in pieces (lo spezzo). Also there was in Rome, Titinnia, who by her evil eye caused the orator Curio to remain speechless when making a peroration against the Senate.

He relates moreover many other misfortunes which befell sundry people known to him, especially how he had himself prepared a memorial to the king, setting forth his labours and claims, and making requests which had always been granted to his predecessors. But, alas! as he was getting into the carriage which was to convey him to Caserta, a friend whom he had long known as a terrible jettatore presented himself, and said: "It is difficult"; consequently there was as much misfortune as could possibly happen on the journey: pouring rain, a drunken coachman, horse taken ill or lame, and at last when approaching the royal presence to present his memorial, he could not find it in his pocket, where he had carefully placed it! The worst of all was that quel maledetto jettatore laughingly reminded him every day of the occurrence and of his blighted hopes.

The professor concludes: [*39] "Every people, every race, believes, and hopes to avoid sinister events and la jettatura, by benedictions, by happy auguries, by those precautions and remedies which experience shows to be most valuable and opportune." He afterwards goes on to philosophise on the invido sguardo, and speaks of the antipathy between the Lion and the Cock. He says (p. 105) the eyes of cocks cause melancholy (mestizia) and fear to the poor lion; that there are seeds in the body of the

[p. 21]

cock inimical to the lion. Curiously too he quotes Bacon's ninth essay, on Envy. Speaking of the various antidotes, he says (p. 144): "For preservation against incantations and evil enchantments (malefici) I have found the following to be recommended: invocation of the Goddess Nemesis; the good prayers of those who do not gaze with admiration on or bepraise others; the blessings of those who wish to inspire courage are valuable to keep off the evil eye (togliere il fascino); the carrying on the person (adosso) certain natural articles, such as rue, certain roots, a wolf's tail, the skin of a hyena's forehead (fronte della iene), the onion, which they say the devil respects because the ancients adored it equally with himself; and that herb with strong-smelling root called Baccharis, Baccari, [*40] vulgarly called Guanto di nostra signora (Our Lady's glove), because it constipates the passages, and restrains the overflow of the spirits which excessive praise produces; whence it closes the door to fascination."

Valletta was evidently himself a profound believer

[p. 22]

in fascination of every kind, whether of eye, bodily presence, or actual touch, and finishes up his essay by offering a reward of from ten to twenty scudi for answers to thirteen questions, according as the notizia may excite in him more or less interest. They are as follows, translated literally:--

1. If a man or woman is the more powerful (jetta piu)? 2. If more, he who has a wig? 3. If more, he who has eye-glasses? 4. If more, the woman enceinte? 5. If monks more (than others), and of what order? 6. If he is able jettare (to fascinate) more, who approaches us after the evil which we have suffered? i.e. Is the second time worse than the first, or do we become increasingly subject to the influence? 7. At what distance does the jettatura extend? 8. If it is able to come from things inanimate? 9. If it operates more on side, front or back (di lato, di prospetto, o di dietro)? 10. What gait (gesto), what voice, what eye, and what character of will have jettatori, and (how) do they make them selves known? 11. What devotions (orazioncine) one ought to recite to preserve oneself from the jettatura of monks (Frati)? 12. What words in general ought one to repeat to escape the evil eye (si debban dire per evitare la jettatura)? 13. What power therefore have the horn, or other things? [*41]

It was anciently believed that women have more power of fascination than men. Varro accounts for their increased evil influence as the result of their unbridled passions, [*42] and he fully describes how to discern between those who have greater or less dangerous

[p. 23]

power. In modern times, however, it has generally come to be believed that the evil eye is possessed more by men than women. [*43]

Ever since the establishment of the religious orders, monks have had the special reputation of possessing the fatal influence.

In 842, Erchempert, a monk of Monte Cassino, the most famous convent in Italy, wrote that Landulf, Bishop of Capua, used to say that whenever he met a monk, something unlucky always happened to him during the day. [*44] To this day there are many persons who, if they meet a monk or priest, on first going out in the morning, will not proceed upon their errand or business until they have returned to their houses and waited a while, so as to be able to make a fresh start.

In Rome are many noted jettatori: [*45] one of them is a most pleasant and handsome man, attached to the Church, and yet, by odd coincidence, wherever he goes he carries ill-luck. If he goes to a party, the ices do not arrive, the music is late, the lamps go out, a storm comes on, the waiter smashes his tray of refreshments, something or other is sure to happen. Some one said the other day: "Yesterday I was looking out of my window, when I saw ------ (a well-known jettatore) coming along. 'Phew!' said I, making the sign of the cross and pointing both fingers, 'what ill-luck will happen now to some poor devil that does not see him?' I watched him all down the street however, and nothing occurred; but this morning I hear that after turning the corner

[p. 24]

he spoke to a poor little boy, who was up in a tree gathering some fruit, and no sooner was he out of sight than, smash! down fell the boy and broke his arm."

A story was told the writer in Naples of an event which had just happened: a certain Marchese, having this evil repute, was invited to a ball, and people who knew he was coming were sure something would happen. He did not arrive till late, but he had no sooner set his foot in the ball-room than down fell the great glass chandelier in the centre of the room. Fortunately no one was immediately beneath it at the moment, but the chandelier was smashed to atoms, and of course he was the cause. Endless stories of this kind are to be heard in Naples, the home par excellence of the jettatura.

 Truth (Nov. 4, 1893), of a party to a cause celebre, says: "In Italy, however, it would be believed that he is a jettatore--that is to say, a person who, from no fault of his own, has the singular attribute of bringing some misfortune on others wherever he goes. The only way for any one brought in contact with such a person to avoid ill consequence is to point two fingers at him. Pope Pio Nono was supposed to be a jettatore, and the most devout Catholics, whilst asking his blessing, used to point two fingers at him. I remember once in Nice there was a gentleman who had this reputation. The Prefet, being a Frenchman, invited him to a ball. He soon, however, discovered that if the jettatore came many others would not, and he had to convey to him delicately the request not to accept the invitation."

Ask a Roman about the late Pope's evil eye

[p. 25]

reputation, and he will answer: "They said so, and it seems really to be true. If he had not the jettatura, it is very odd that everything he blessed made fiasco. We all did very well in the campaign against the Austrians in '48. We were winning battle after battle, and all was gaiety and hope, when suddenly he blessed the cause, and everything went to the bad at once. Nothing succeeds with anybody or anything when he wishes well to them. When he went to S. Agnese to hold a great festival, down went the floor, and the people were all smashed together. Then he visited the column to the Madonna in the Piazza di Spagna, and blessed it and the workmen; of course one fell from the scaffold the same day and killed himself. He arranged to meet the King of Naples at Porto d'Anzio, when up came a violent gale, and a storm that lasted a week; another arrangement was made, and then came the fracas about the ex-queen of Spain.

"Again, Lord C------ came in from Albano, being rather unwell; the Pope sent him his blessing, when, pop! he died right off in a twinkling. There was nothing so fatal as his blessing. I do not wonder the workmen at the column in the Piazza di Spagna refused to work in raising it unless the Pope stayed away!"

Mr. Story tells another tale--of Rachel and a rosary blessed by the Pope, which she wore on her arm as a bracelet. She had been visiting a sister who was ill in the Pyrenees, but one day she was so much better, that Rachel left her to visit another sister. While laughing and chatting merrily, a message arrived that she must return instantly as a fit had

[p. 26]

come on. Rising like a wounded tigress, she seemed to seek some cause for this sudden blow. Her eye fell on the rosary, and in rage and disappointment she tore it from her wrist, and dashed it to the ground, exclaiming: "O fatal gift! 'tis thou hast entailed this curse upon me!" and immediately sprang out of the room. Her sister died the day after.

Another acquaintance of Mr. Story, the Marchese B-----, had the reputation of being a jettatore, and he called on a company of friends who were paying a visit at a villa in the country. All were gay and in good spirits, just on the point of setting off in carriages, on donkeys and mules, for a picnic. At once there was confusion and dismay. Some wished to put off altogether, others thought it would have a very ugly look in his eyes, and that they had better go, after taking all possible precautions to avert the jettatura; and so it was decided. The gaiety, however, was at an end; every one expected ill-luck, and so it happened! They had hardly gone a mile when the horses in one of the carriages bolted, upset the carriage, and so frightened and hurt those who were in it, that they refused to go farther, and the picnic was given up. "Ah, you laugh!" said my friend; "you laugh; but it is no less a fact that wherever the Marchese goes he carries ill-luck. Dio mio! what a jettatore he is! The other day we were going into the country to spend the day when we had the ill-luck to meet him. 'Buon viaggio!' he cried as we passed. 'Si divertino.' We knew at once it was all up with us, and debated whether we should postpone our journey till another day. But that was a disappointment, and then we had made all our preparations, so on we went; but within half

[p. 27]

a mile, off came the front wheel; and, bon gre mal gre, we were obliged to go back."

At a concert at the Sala Dante, in Rome, on December 20, 1876, one of the main gas-pipes burst, but fortunately, though the room was crowded, no one was injured. La Liberta next day concluded an account of the occurrence thus: "A friend coming out of the Sala Dante explained the unfortunate scene which had just taken place, attributing it to the presence in the hall of certain individuals well known as jettatori. Who knows that our friend is not right?"

Dumas in Le Corricolo, which is mostly about Naples, has a short chapter on La Jettatura. He says that it is an incurable malady, [*46] one is born a jettatore and so dies; one is compelled to become such, and when once begun there is no power to throw it off. Generally they are unaware of their fatal influence; hence it is the worst possible compliment to tell a man that he has it. Constantly you see in Naples two men chatting in the street, one of them keeps his hand clasped (pliee) behind his back. Mark carefully the one with whom he is talking; he is a jettatore, or at least one who has the misfortune to pass for one. A stranger arriving in Naples begins by laughing at the evil eye; but little by little he thinks over it, and at the end of three months you will see him covered with horns from head to foot, and his right hand eternally crispee. Nothing guards against it except the means indicated. No rank, no fortune, no social position, can place one above its reach. All men are equal devant elle.

Dumas finishes his chapter with a citation of

[p. 28]

the same questions put by Valletta (see <page 22>), but they are taken from a different edition of the Cicalata from either that used by Mr. Story, or that in possession of the writer.

In a previous chapter (vol. i. p. 177) Dumas speaks of King Ferdinand, that though he had lived seventy-six years and had reigned sixty-five, yet the Neapolitans sought to discover something supernatural in his death at last.

This is what they discovered. The king, who was a firm believer in the power of the evil eye, especially in priests, had been tormented for fifteen years by a certain Canon Ojori, who sought an audience to present some book of which he was the author. Ferdinand had all along persistently refused, but at length, on January 2, 1825, overcome by the persuasions of those about him, he fixed the morrow for this long-sought interview. In the morning the king wanted to set out for Caserta for a day's shooting, an excuse he always deemed sufficient; but he was dissuaded. He remained in Naples, received Dom Ojori, who passed two hours with him, and departed leaving his book behind. The day after, King Ferdinand was dead! The doctors unanimously declared that it was an attack of acute apoplexy, but the people would not believe a word of it. The true cause was that this audience had given an evil chance to Canon Ojori, who was known as one of the most terrible jettatori in Naples.

In Abyssinia potters and ironworkers called Budas [*46a] were believed to have been specially endowed with the maleficent faculty, hence, in that so-

[p. 29]

called Christian land, these people were excluded from the more sacred rites, notwithstanding that as a class they professed to be most religious, and were surpassed by none in strictness of observance. Certain ailments are still set down to their influence, and they are believed to have had the old-world power of the loup garou, or were-wolf--that of changing themselves into hyenas or other ravenous beasts, the counterparts of the wolves of the north.

Nathaniel Pearce, an old African traveller, declares that a friend of his had seen one of these transformations with his own eyes, and that the peculiar earrings worn by the descendants of the Budas had frequently been seen by him (Pearce) in the ears of hyenas that have been trapped. This story is as old as Herodotus, who recounts that the Budas were reputed then to be evil-minded enchanters who for one day in every year changed themselves into wolves; but he himself did not believe it.

The belief in the power of transformation [*47] seems in all countries to have been closely allied with witches and with those possessed of the evil eye. The idea is very common in the stories of ancient mythology, and from the Middle Ages down to the present time it has possessed the popular mind. The hare, the wolf, the cat, and the sow seem nowadays to be the favourite animals whose shape is assumed, though many others are believed in. [*48]

[p. 30]

Giraldus, so often quoted by Higden, says that Ossory men were periodically turned into wolves in his day; and Spenser says "some of the Irish doe use to make the wolf their gossip." These traditions naturally lead to such stories as that of Little Red Riding Hood of our nursery days. In India it is very firmly believed that certain people can change themselves into tigers, and again resume their natural shape at pleasure.

The ancient name versipelles sufficiently expresses the idea of those who could assume strange forms, or turn their skins. We ourselves bear witness to the old belief in the common saying: "Ready to jump out of their skins for joy."

It is easy to see how the belief in their power of transformation by witches has begotten that ever-present dread of ill omens, when one of the animals, supposed to be one of those whose form is usually

[p. 31]

assumed, crosses the path. The writer knows people who would scorn the notion of being uneducated or superstitious, but who are terrified if a hare or a sow cross their path, and fully expect some misfortune presently to happen.

	 
		Nor did we meet, with nimble feet,
		 One little fearful lepus,
		 That certain sign, as some divine,
		 Of fortune bad to keep us.
		
		 Even so serious a writer as Burton [*49] mentions the fear of accident or of prodigies which trouble us "as if a hare cross the way at our going forth." [*50]

In Scotland it is most unlucky to see a hare or a pig cross the path, and the fisher folk turn their backs if they see either. In Somerset, a hare crossing the path in front of the spectator is a sign of death; but since the Ground Game Act this belief is likely to be soon forgotten.

Fishermen everywhere avoid mentioning at sea the name of a hare, pig, salmon, trout, or dog, but go out of their way to find some other word when it is needful to indicate either of these.

The fear of mentioning the name of any sacred or dreaded animal is common in India.

The weasel, or as Trevisa called it, and we still call it, the "veyre," crossing the path, is also a bad omen, doubtless from the same notion, though there does not seem to be any record of witches assuming its shape. "I have known people who have been put into such terrible apprehensions of death by the squeaking of a weasel, as have been very near bringing on them the fate they dreaded." [*51]

[p. 32]

On the other hand a frog was considered a good omen. Many other objects are still considered, when met, to be the forerunners of misfortune, such as a deformed person, [*52] a black cat, a shaggy dog, a barefooted woman; but above all to meet a person who squints, is here in England thought to be as unlucky as in Italy it is to meet a jettatore sospensivo. In fact there are still living people by no means unintelligent to whom omens of bad or good fortune are matters of very considerable importance, and who, without perhaps confessing it, are yet guided in their actions to an unsuspected degree by feelings engendered by such notions as are here hinted at.

The same custom of deprecating over-praise, before referred to, is common among the Turks, among modern Italians, and among ourselves, who each and all have a similar formula. A well-mannered Turk will not pay a compliment without "Mashallah!" an Italian will not receive one without "Grazia a Dio"; an Irishman without "Glory be to God"; or an English peasant without Lord be wi' us." The idea is the same with all peoples: by acknowledging a higher power as the protector, the danger of fascination is averted; this, and not gratitude, must be confessed to be the motive in all cases, and that there is little of what is called Christianity in any.

There were two kinds of fascination among the ancients, the moral and the natural, and this belief is still held. The moral power was that exercised

[p. 33]

by the will. It was against the users of this, that the special laws of the Romans were directed. These included all those who practised incantation and malignant arts. More terrible were, and still are, those in whom the faculty of the evil eye was natural, whose baneful look was unconscious, whose eye threw out radios perniciosos, which by a sort of mesmeric power acted upon the nervous system of the victim. It has always been recognised as a rule of good manners never to praise immoderately lest the speaker should fascinate against his will. Hence the conventional exclamation before referred to, praefiscini dixerim, which put the hearer on his guard to use some antidotal formula for himself.

Heliodorus narrates [*53] that a Greek girl, daughter of Calasaris, fell ill, and that in reply to the question what was the matter, it was said that it was no wonder, seeing that she had been seen by so great a crowd of people--and of course among so many, she had drawn upon her the evil eye of some one; and the speaker goes on to explain that the air, infected by the malign influence, penetrates the eyes, nose, and breath of the victim, and carries with it the bitterness of the envy with which it is surcharged. He argues forcibly that love is of the same origin as disease, which through the sight strikes passion into the soul.

Consider besides, O Charicles, how many have been infected with inflammations of the eyes, and with other contagious distempers, without ever touching, either at bed or board, those who laboured under them, but solely by breathing the same air with

[p. 34]

them. The birth of love affords another proof of what I am explaining, which, by the eyes alone, finds a passage to the soul; and it is not difficult to assign the reason; for as, of all inlets to our senses, the sight is the most lively, and most various in its motions, this animated quality most easily receives the influences which surround it, and attracts to itself the emanations of love.

He ends with saying, if some give the stroke of the evil eye unconsciously to those they love, how much more must the effect be when malignant will is added to the force of nature.

It was currently believed in England at the time of the Black Death, that even a glance from the sick man's distorted eyes was sufficient to give the infection to those on whom it fell. [*54] No doubt it was to this belief that Shakespeare refers in

	 
		Write "Lord have mercy on us" on those three;
		 They are infected; in their hearts it lies;
		 They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes. [*55]
		
		 [paragraph continues] The same speaker, Biron, had just before in the same scene called attention very significantly to

	 
		Their eyes, villain, their eyes!
		
		 The eye was, and is, certainly considered the chief medium of communicating evil, but there were also those of touch, of bodily presence, and of the voice; further again there was the whole class of actions spoken of as enchantments or incantations, practised quite as much with the object of working evil, as of frustrating or counteracting it.

Those students who are curious upon the strange and manifold ramifications of the belief in fascination are once more referred to the exhaustive treatise of Christian Frommannd.

[p. 35]

Another remarkable book is [*56] that of Martin Delrio, a Jesuit of Louvain, who published in 1603 six books folio, in which he also quotes a great number of authorities both ancient and modern. He says he will not argue whether maleficium exists, he takes it for granted, and that the calamities of mortals are the work of evil spirits. He declares that "Fascination is a power derived from a pact with the devil, who, when the so-called fascinator looks

[p. 36]

at another with an evil intent, or praises, by means known to himself, infects with evil the person at whom he looks." He distinctly says that fascination may be received by touch, or by inhalation, but of these, the latter is not only most fatal but most contagious.

As we go on we cannot but see that fascination, in many of its aspects, is nothing more nor less than what we now call Mesmerism or Hypnotism, by which, as we all know, certain people have an extraordinary influence over others. In a recent magazine article was a very remarkable story from a Physician's Note-Book which precisely shows what we mean. A girl, well educated, gentle, refined and perfectly sane, was found to be detained in a lunatic asylum, during the Queen's pleasure, for murder. She had shot a man whom she did not know, and against whom personally she could have had no enmity. The

[p. 37]

story is told with much circumstantial detail, and, extraordinary as it is, seems probable enough. The upshot is that she had become subject to the influence of a physician, who had taken to practise hypnotism, and whose power over her had become unbounded. The man's own confession unfolds the tale: he had some reason of his own to hate the murdered man, and in his heart wished him dead. He himself does not appear to have been specially bad, but he certainly harboured and encouraged in his own mind the evil feeling. One day the girl met the man whom her doctor secretly hated, and at once felt a violent antipathy; this grew and grew, until at last the girl felt herself absolutely impelled, constrained, to murder him. She, a delicate girl who otherwise would have feared even to touch such a weapon, took a pistol of her father's, called upon the victim, and as soon as she got into his presence, shot him dead.

We have heard many instances of a similar kind, where certain people have had mysterious and very extraordinary influence over others. Some years ago a lady hypnotist acquired a marvellous power over some of the undergraduates at Oxford--a power real and overmastering, which science can in no way explain; and however much chicanery there may be mixed with its practice, it is certainly a fact, that the effect produced first by the eye of the mesmerist is greatly strengthened by the actual touch.

In all ages and in all countries the power of touch has been fully recognised.

Many of our Lord's miracles were performed by the aid of touch, usually as an actual means, but on one notable occasion the healing was effected by the

[p. 38]

woman's touching Him. When Naaman went to be cured of his leprosy, he expected that the prophet would touch him "as well as call upon his God." Here in our west country "the doctor" is the well-understood name for a seventh son, though really according to popular faith he should be also the son of a seventh son. The familiar name comes from the firm belief that his touch alone has healing power. The touch of the king for the cure of scrofula, even within the last two centuries, has given to that particular kind the name of the King's Evil. [*57]

Our dialectal word to bless signifies to touch by making the sign of the cross on the part affected. Here in the west, goitre is a rather common ailment, for which the best cure is believed to be the touching of the swelling by the hand of a corpse--the sex being different from that of the person afflicted. I have known many cases of its application, but cannot testify to the effect.

Whatever opinion we ourselves may hold as to the existence of a power or influence such as we are discussing, however much we may be inclined to ridicule the belief so far as concerns human beings, no one can deny that a very powerful influence does exist among animals both as regards the effect of certain species upon others, and as to the power of man upon the eye of savage beasts. Without admitting

[p. 39]

the truth of what Virgil and Pliny refer to as to the fact that he whom the wolf sees before he is himself seen loses his voice, [*58] yet we believe, and it is generally maintained, that no animal can retain his fierceness under, nor endure, the steady gaze of man. Moreover the experience recorded by Dr. Livingstone when being actually torn by a lion, goes to prove that the senses become deadened, that the terror of his position had disappeared, and that the previous nervous dread was the only suffering he experienced: that in fact he felt no pain, nor any acute desire to escape from his terrible assailant.

It is but reasonable, at least, to hope that some such feeling is mercifully provided for animals in general, and that the daily slaughter which is going on everlastingly in nature, may not be attended with all the nervous and physical pain with which, judging by our human feelings, we usually associate it. [*59]

It is certain that some animals can and do exercise a great and mysterious influence over others, fables notwithstanding. [*60] Snakes especially seem to have

[p. 40]

the power of exciting fear and aversion in nearly all other creatures, while with some, especially birds, they have at the same time a power of attraction, which can only be described as fascination.

This feeling is strikingly illustrated by the action of the frog when chased by a snake; for he utters a piteous cry while trying to escape from the creature of which he has an instinctive terror. "When fairly seized, however, it gives itself up to its fate, and seldom attempts to struggle." [*61]

One species, Bucephalus Capensis, is generally found upon trees, to which it resorts for the purpose of catching birds. The presence of one is soon discovered by the birds of the neighbourhood, which collect around it, flying to and fro, uttering the most piercing cries, until some one of them, more terror-struck than the rest, scans its lips, and almost without resistance becomes a meal for its enemy. During the proceeding the snake is generally seen with its head raised ten or twelve inches above the branch round which the body is entwined, with its mouth open and neck inflated, as if anxiously endeavouring to increase the terror it was aware would sooner or later bring within its grasp some one of the feathered group.

Notwithstanding all that may be said in ridicule of fascination, it is nevertheless true that birds, and even quadrupeds, are under certain circumstances unable to retire from the presence of certain of their enemies, and, what is even more extraordinary, unable to resist the propensity to advance from a

[p. 41]

situation of actual safety into one of the most imminent danger. "This I have often seen exemplified in the case of birds and snakes, and I have heard of instances equally curious, in which antelopes and other quadrupeds have been so bewildered by the sudden appearance of crocodiles, and by the grimaces and contortions they practised, as to be unable to fly or even to move from the spot, towards which they were approaching to seize them." [*62]

A remarkable snake story is recorded in Household Words (vol. xvii. p. 139) of a cobra and an old soldier in India, who became quite good friends, and who used to remain in company together two or three hours at a time while the soldier kept singing. One day a hawk chasing its prey came near the cobra, which raised its head and hissed. "The hawk gave a shriek, fluttered, flapped his wings, and tried very hard to get away; but it would not do. Strong as the eye of the hawk was, the eye of the snake was stronger. The hawk, for a time, seemed suspended in the air; but at last he was obliged to come down and sit opposite the snake, who commenced with his forked tongue, keeping his eyes on him all the while, to slime his victim all over. This occupied him for at least forty minutes, and by the time the process was over the hawk was perfectly motionless. I don't think he was dead, but he was very soon, for the snake put him into a coil or two and crackled up every bone in the hawk's body." He then gave him another sliming, made a big mouth, and soon made a meal of him.

In our childhood we used to be told that the fox was in the habit of sitting under a tree whereon a

[p. 42]

bird was perched, that he fastened his eyes and kept them steadily looking up at it, until at last the bird became quite overcome with the fascination and fell from its perch to become an easy victim to sly Reynard.

The ancients again, according to Aelian and Athenaeus, believed that other animals besides serpents had the same power, and moreover that the animals themselves were so far conscious of it, that some birds kept certain stones and plants in their nests in order to protect themselves from it. Doves were said to spit in the mouths of their young for their safe keeping. It was from the belief of the Greeks that the cricket or grillo had this power of the eye, both protective and injurious, over all other animals, that Pisistratus set one up on the Acropolis as an amulet, to protect the citizens against the evil eye.

Again, we all know from experience the powerful attraction, the positive fascination, which a strong light has for some creatures, and the negative or deterrent effect it has upon others.

The experience of our lighthouse-keepers proves to us how migratory birds are attracted to their destruction by their powerful light; while our own senses have told us of the fatal attraction of a light for insects of most kinds, except the common house fly, whose familiarity with the domestic candle has bred a salutary contempt. The raison d'etre of our common country sport, bird-batting, depends upon the fascination of birds by a strong light; on being disturbed at night they fly straight to the light and are caught in the net which is held up in front of it. Toads, too, are said to be so attracted by light that

[p. 43]

they actually rush into the fire, and that the burning so far from checking them seems to stimulate them to crawl towards the hottest parts, even though being roasted to death; just as the poor moth or bee whose wings have been already singed, tries again and again to reach the flame, until at last overpowered and burnt to death. Fish also are lured to their destruction by a light.

On the other hand, light and fire are terrifying and abhorrent to many animals. Among insects, scorpions are driven away by light, and beetles, cockroaches, bugs, with their congeners, scuttle away into hiding as soon as a light appears. Moreover, we all know that a fire is the well-recognised protector against night-prowling wild beasts, which will not come near a strong light. The well-known difficulty of getting a horse out of a stable on fire, where he but too often defies all efforts to save him, and remains to be burnt to death, may possibly be due to either of the influences referred to--either fear to move and face the fire he dreads, or that he is fascinated by it like the moths, and will not escape his fate. Perhaps the latter is the true explanation, for it is said that a horse will press against a knife held against his chest until he is stabbed to the heart. The writer cannot vouch for this as a fact, but he has often heard it asserted.

Footnotes

^1:1 Bacon, Essay IX. "Of Envy."

^3:2 Theagenes and Chariclea (Trans. 1789), vol. i. p. 145. Heliodorus, Bishop of Tricca in Thessaly, about A.D. 380, was a very firm believer in the evil eye, and frequently refers to it in his works, no doubt faithfully reflecting the opinions of his day.

^3:3 See an article on the "Evil Eye" in Chambers's Encyclopaedia. For numerous quotations on the subject see New Eng. Dict. s. v. "Evil Eye."

^5:4 A long account of a prosecution of a white witch, who pretended that a woman was ill of a "bad wish" in a case much like the foregoing, is given in Pulman's Weekly News, June 14, 1892. Similar reports are frequently appearing in the local press. At this moment (October 1894) two persons are dying in Wellington parish (one of phthisis!) who firmly believe, and are believed, to be suffering solely from having been "overlooked."

^5:5 See Lightfoot, Epistle to the Galatians, iii. 1, p. 133.

^5:6 The expression of St. Paul, though translated "bewitched" in our A. V., is in the Vulgate fascinavit, precisely the same as that used by Virgil (post, <page 10>). In the Septuagint also the sense of the passage is identical, referring to the influence, so well understood, of the evil eye, On this see Frommannd, Tract. de Fasc. p. 11.

^6:7 E. Wallis Budge, The Nile-Notes for Travellers in Egypt, p. 77.

^6:7a e.g. Deut. xxviii. 54, 56; Job vii. 8; Psa. xxxv. 21; Prov. vi. 13; Isa. xiii. 18; Lam. ii. 4; Ezek. ix, 5. Especially also Prov. xxiii. 6, xxviii. 22; Matt. vi. 22, 23, xx. 15; Luke xi. 34; Mark vii. 22; Psa. liv. 7, lix. 10, xcii. 11, with many others.

^7:8 "In spite of the schoolmaster we are still as firm believers in witchcraft and the evil eye as were the shepherd swains of Theocritus and Virgil, and many who, if directly questioned on the subject, would indignantly deny the impeachment, are none the less devout believers in such occult powers."--W. F. Rose, Somerset and Dorset Notes and Queries, vol. iv. June 1894, p. 76.

^7:9 In Modern Greek this is kako mati.

^7:10 Tractatus de Fascinatione, Christian Frommannd, Nuremberg, 1674, p. 4; Nicolo Valletta, Cicalata sul Fascino, Napoli, 1787, p. 12; Potter, Archaeologia Graeca, 1824, i. 414; Lightfoot, Ep. to Gal. 1890, p. 133, who all give long lists of authors and quotations in support of this etymology.

^7:11 Disquisitionum Magicarum libri sex, Auctore Martino Delrio, Societatis Jesu presbytero. Moguntiae, apud Johannem Albinum, 1603.

^8:12 Potter's Archaeologia Graeca will be found a mine of information; indeed it would be easy to load our pages with references to authors classical and mediaeval, but sufficient indication is here given for the student to find all that has been written on the subject.

^8:13 Heliodorus, Thea. and Char. i. 140. There can be no doubt that Saul was believed to have the evil eye when we read: "And Saul eyed David from that day and forward" (1 Sam. xviii. 9). In the context we see all the circumstances we have been describing--envy and its consequences.

^9:14 Jahn, "Ueber den Aberglauben des bosen Blicks bei den Alten": Berichte der Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, 1855, p. 35.

^9:15 Woyciki, Polish Folk Lore (Trs. by Lewestein), p. 25.

^9:16 Ut supra, p. 33.

^9:17 In Ireland the belief has always existed, and in old legends we are told of King Miada of the silver hand, who possessed a magic sword, but who nevertheless fell before "Balor of the Evil Eye" (Elton, Origins of Eng. Hist. 2nd ed. p. 279).

^9:18 Notes and Queries, 1st ser. vi. p. 409.

^10:19 Ancient and Modern Manners of the Irish, quoted by Brand, iii. 304.

^10:20 Sympos. lib. v. quaes. 7.

^10:20a The R. V. has "the crescents that were on their camels' necks."

^11:21 See Brand, vol. iii. p. 46 (Bohn).

^11:22 Spectator, "Somerset Superstitions," March 24, 1894. Last week (October 1894) a man much wanted to buy a heifer from an unwilling seller. "Nif he do want'n, I tell ee, you'd better let'n have'n," said a neighbour. There was no question of price, but the reason was obvious.

^11:23 Dodwell, Classical Tour, vol. ii. p. 37. I cannot find what Pennant says, if anything; indeed Dodwell's references are very untrustworthy.

^11:24 Pliny says (Nat. Hist. vii. 2; vol. ii. pp. 126, 127, Bohn) that in Africa there are families of enchanters who can cause cattle to perish, trees to wither, and infants to die. That among the Triballi and Illyrii are some who have the power of fascination with the eyes, and can even kill those on whom they fix their gaze, more especially if their look denotes anger. A still more remarkable circumstance is that these persons have two pupils in each eye. Apollonides says that there are certain females of this description in Scythia who are known as Bythiae. Quoting Cicero he declares "feminas omnes ubique visu nocere, quae duplices pupillas habent." Cf. also Horace, Epist. i. 14. 37:--

	 
		"Non istic obliquo oculo mea commoda quisquam
		 Limat, non odio obscuro morsuque venenat."
		
		 [paragraph continues] See also Bacon, Essay IX. p. 78, and Frommannd, Tractatus, p. 11.

^12:25 Ovid says (Amores i. Eleg. 8. 15):--

	 
		           "Oculis quoque pupula duplex
		 Fulminat et gerninum lumen ab orbe venit."
		
		 [paragraph continues] And again (Metamorph. vii. 364) that the people of Rhodes as well as the Telchinas injured everything by looking at it, See also Frommannd, p. 12.

^12:26 On this swimming of witches, see Brand, vol. iii. p. 21 (Bohn). "Nature has thought fit to produce poisons as well in every part of his body, and in the eyes even of some persons, taking care that there should be no evil in existence, which was not to be found in the human body" (Pliny, Nat. Hist. Vii. 2; Bohn, vol. ii. p. 128). This chapter of Pliny is well worth careful reading; also Dr. Bostock's notes.

^13:28 Sympos. v. prob. 7.

^14:29 Theocritus, Idyll. vi. 39.

^14:30 A long list of these with quotations is given in Dodwell, vol. ii. p. 35. Delrio and Frommannd also give endless references.

^15:31 Story, Castle of S. Angelo, p. 149, quotes Andreas Thuetas.

^15:32 Mantis, locustae genus, quae in stipulis enascitur, si quod inspexerit animal protinus illi quippiam producit mali. Hinc Proverbium: Mantis te vidit."--Frommannd, Tract. p. 19.

^16:34 See West Somerset Word-Book, pp. 365, 548, 835. Blackmore, Perlycross, p. 191, and elsewhere, wrongly writes "weist."

^16:35 The full sentence, of which the foregoing was only the colloquial form, is given by Plautus:--

	 
		"Praefiscini hoc nunc dixerim; nemo me etiam accusavit
		 Merito meo; neque me Athenis est alter hodie quisquam,
		 Cui credi recte aecque putent."--Asinaria, Act ii. Sc. 4. 84.
		
		 This subject is discussed at much length by Frommannd, Tract. de Fasc. pp. 60-63. He gives very numerous instances and quotations from classics and scholiasts; amongst others be says Vossius notes an instance of a girl named Paula being immoderately praised (immodice), when another person interrupting in fear of fascination says:--Paula mea, amabo, pol tu ad laudem addito praefiscini, ne puella fascinetur." (This passage is also quoted by Jahn, Aberglauben, p. 62. Frommannd also gives an account of the Fescennine songs (Fescennini versus) which were most unchaste and lascivious, and were sung at weddings in the belief that they would avert the evil eye. It was usual to interpolate the most disgraceful and obscene expressions, thinking that the more abominable these were, the more certain in effect. Nemesis, Cunina, and Priapus were all invoke(l in these licentious songs.

Besides the authors referred to by Frommannd, both Catullus and Horace speak of these nuptial songs, The latter says:--

	 
		"Fescennina per hunc inventa licentia morem
		 Versibus alternis opprobria rustica fudit."--Epist. i. 2. 145.
		
		 St. Augustine speaks of them as celebrated in his day, cum tanta licentia turpitudinis and exsultante nequitia, for a whole month in honour of the god Liber. He gives details unfit for repetition (De Civitate Dei, vii. 21).

Pliny, Nat. Hist. xv. 24 (Bohn, vol. iii. p. 315), says that the walnut was used along with the fescennine songs at nuptials, because it was a "symbol consecrated to marriage," and a protector of offspring in manifold ways.

Valletta, referring to these songs, says: "Anzi dal fascino molti dicono esser [p. 17] appellati fescennini, quelli, che nelle nozzie alle soverchie lodi si aggiungevano per allontare la jettatura." In a note he says further: "Questi versi contenevano molta licenza nelle parole" (Nicolo Valletta, Cicalata sul Fascino volgarmente detto Jettatura, p. 22. Napoli, 1787).

Story, Castle of S. Angelo, p. 200, speaks of this rare book, and of a portrait in it, as printed in 1819; the writer possesses an earlier edition, dated 1787, but there is no portrait in this latter.

^19:36 Valletta, Cicalata sul Fascino, p. 9.

^19:37 In a note to the preface of an edition in the writer's possession of Capricci sulla Jettatura, de Gian Leonardo Marugi, Napoli, 1815, is the following:--"Se questa Operetta capitasse nelle mani di un Italiano piu settentrionale, piacemi d'avvertirlo che Jettatura suona lo stesso, che stregoneria, sortilegio, fattucchieria," etc. "Questo vocabolo Napoletano e de buonissima lega, e l'etimologia n'e chiara. Viene dalla frase latina jacere sortes, gettar le sorti, incantare, ammaliare, e quindi i maliardi, o Jettatori."

^19:38 Cicalata, c. 12, pp. 55, 59.

^20:39 Cicalata, p. 61.

^21:40 Valletta, Cicalata, p. 145.

	 
		"La Damaccia, ch' a la schiena
		 Corta corta, e piena piena,
		 Se a jettar staravv 'intanto,
		 Voi prendetevi del guanto, [**]
		 Ed in petto lo ponete,
		 O la fronte vi cingete."--Marugi, Capricci, p. 111.
		
		 
		
		 

^21:* "This is a flower called Guanto di nostra signora, known to the ancients under the name of Baccar, which they bound to the foreheads of the sick" (note by Marugi, p. 111). He quotes Loyer as to its being valevolissimo against evil tongues, and Virgil as to its virtues against jettatori.

Gerard (p. 791) says: "About this plant Baccharis there hath been great contention amongst the new writers." He in the end identifies it with Plowman's Spikenard, a name which Britten says was probably invented by Gerard. Britten says the plant is Inula coniza; Dr. Prior (Popular Names of British Plants, p. 187) says it is Conyza Squarrosa.

Gerard says: "Baccharis or Plowman's Spikenard is of a temperature very astringent or binding," and generally he describes its "vertues" much the same as Professor Valletta. There does not appear to be any plant-name known in England at all like "Our Lady's glove."

^22:41 A comparison of these queries with those quoted by Story, Castle of S. Angelo, p. 200, Will show that the later edition of Valletta's book used by him had been considerably altered.

^22:42 "Quia irascendi et concupiscendi animi vim adeo effrenatam habent."

^23:43 "The fear of the evil eye of a woman is very prevalent in Spain, but the panacea is to drink horn shavings."--Murray's Handbook to Spain, by Richard Ford, 3rd ed. 1855, p. 632.

^23:44 Valletta, p. 54.

^23:45 Story, p. 197

^27:46 Vol. i. p. 183.

^28:46a I have read somewhere, quite recently, that there are Budas still in Abyssinia.

^29:47 Story, p. 153, tells a very remarkable story from India by Major General Sleeman in 1849-50, of a boy who always seemed more than half wolf, and never could be tamed.

^29:48 Old Higden tells us by Trevisa, his translator, that in Ireland and in Wales "olde wyfes and wymmen were i-woned, and beey ###525###it (as me pleyney) ofte forto schape hem self in likness of hares . . . and ofte grehoundes renneth after hem and pursewey hem, and weney yat yey be hares. Also some by crafts of nygromancie makey fat swyne . . . and selley hem in cbepinge and in feires; but anon yese swyne passey ony water yey torney a###525###en in to her owne kynde. . . .[p. 30] But yese swyne mowe not be i-kept by no manere craft for to dure in liknesse of swyn over yre dayes" (Higden, Polychron. Rolls Series, i. 360).

There must surely be some allusion to this ancient belief in Jed. xiii. 23, Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil."

For a long disquisition on the whole subject of Lycanthropy, see Frommannd, lib. iii. p. 560, who assigns the entire power to the devil, by whose means magicians not only took the form of a wolf, but his voice or cry, his odour, touch, taste and appetite in devouring flesh (p. 564). He gives, moreover, many wonderful stories and quotations respecting transformations.

See also St. Augustine, De Civ. Dei, xviii. 18. Pliny, Nat. Hist. viii. 34 (Bohn, vol. ii. p. 284), gives the origin of the word versipellis, and although he says he does not believe them, records several wonderful stories.

The following shows that the belief still exists here in our very midst. In 1875 there had been some proceedings regarding the death of a "varth o' paigs," and one of the reputed authors of the mischief had fallen into the fire and been burnt to death, etc. "On the morning of this sad event, the harriers on the adjacent hill lost their hare among some stone walls, where it was next day picked up dead. The man who found it took it to his master's house, but on bringing it into the kitchen, the maids immediately rushed out in terror and 'wouldn't bide' in the house, declaring it was old Mrs. ------ (the old woman burnt to death). It is a common belief that witches have the power of transforming themselves into hares. . . . I suppose there was a vague idea that the witch and her double had passed away at the same moment" (Rev. W. F. Rose, Somerset and Dorset Notes and Queries, June 1894, p. 77).

^31:49 Anatomy of Melancholy, 1621, 4th ed. p. 214.

^31:50 Much on this subject is to be found in Brand, vol. iii. p. 201 et seq.

^31:51 Secret Memoirs of Duncan Campbell, 1732, p. 60. See Brand, iii. 203.

^32:52 In Italy, and generally in Southern Europe, a hunchback is a good omen. At Monte Carlo, gamesters believe that if they can but touch a gobbo when going to play, good luck is certain. We have more to say on the Gobbo later.

^33:53 Theagenes and Chariclea (Trans. 1789), vol. i. p. 141. See also Jahn, Aberglauben, etc., p. 33.

^34:54 W. J. Loftie, London, vol. i. p. 353.

^34:55 Love's Labour's Lost, Act v. Sc. 2.

^35:56 The full title of the author's copy is Disquisitionum Magicarum liberi sex in tres tomos partiti, Auctore Martino Delrio, etc. Moguntiae, apud Johannem Albinum, 1603.

Of these, Book I. treats De Magia in genere, et de naturali et artificiali. In it he discusses at great length the questions whether the power of characters, rings, seals or images is such as the Magi contend; whether in words or incantations there is power to raise the dead or to perform miracles. He sums up one of his discussions with "Respondeo stultorum esse numerum infinitum," p. 32. He also treats at length of alchemy as a magic art. Book II. is De Magia Daemoniaca. He asserts that such is proved to exist, and that by means of power derived from the devil. He inquires by what compact with the devil the fascinator can inflict his deadly influence; and by what other pact can the Magi perform miracles. As to incubi and succubae, he says (p. 141): "Dicimus ergo ex concubitu incubi cum muliere aliquando prolem nasci posse," etc. Again (p. 145) that there are pygmies, and that they are the offspring of demons, etc. Whether demons can restore youth to old age? he believes they can. He declares (p. 193) that the souls of the dead are able sometimes to appear to the living; and (p. 231) discusses apparitions of demons or spectres. There were certain demon wrestlers, who forced men to wrestle with them; for this he quotes (p. 243) Pausanias and Strabo. He discourses also of fauns and satyrs, and gives a long list of Scripture emendata et explicata from both Old and New Testaments. Book III. is De Maleficio et De Vana observatione. p. 26 is a chapter De Fascinatione, in which he repeats many well-worn stories, including that of Eutelidas and self-fascination, with others of Plato, Plutarch, and Heliodorus. Speaking of depraved love, he declares that "not by form only are they who love, captivated; but to each, that which he loves appears to be beautiful; hence, 'Quisquis amat ranam, ranam putat esse Dianam.'"

P. 35 contains the old discussions on the etymology of fascination, and makes reference to the evil eye of the tender and delicate woman mentioned so plainly in Deuteronomy xxviii. 56, 57. In his final chapter (p. 94) he treats at inordinate length of the many means "malis depellendis et morbis sanandis," such as the offering of money obtained in charity, [**] which is thought specially efficacious; crosses made or bought by alms; wax or other matters offered to saints; mixing hair of men and sick animals plunging images in water; certain ligatures against depriving cows of milk; "qui per annulum desponsationis meiunt," and many more, all for the purpose ut liberentur maleficio. [p. 36] In paragraph decimaoctava (p. 103) he directs us to join parallel rods, with the force of certain words, in the centre, and to bind them in the form of a cross; and to suspend from the neck; or to apply a piece of round wood to the throat, with a certain muttering, ut Turcae faciunt. He shows how women were taught to use certain nails called hoefnageln, as love charms, etc.

He recounts endless particulars, and continues: "Recently I have discovered here in Brabant, in order to learn if a sick man is about to die, they commonly place salt in his hand unawares (ignaro) and watch whether or not the salt dissolves." In fact the whole book is a perfect mine of folk lore, though not entirely bearing on our special subject.

Book IV. treats De Dviniatione and discusses the Urim and Thummim. He settles the vexed question thus:----Sic ergo statue, Urim et Thummim fuisse has ipsas gemmas XII. ut volunt Josephus, Lyran., Tostat., Oleaster et Ribera."

In this book he also writes De Chiromantia both physical and astrological, and refers to a people practising it who lived between Hungary and the empire of the Turks, Zigenos appellamus. (Gypsies, German Zigeuner.)

Book V. deals at equal length and in similar detail De officio judicum contra maleficos, and Book VI. De officio confessarii.

Each book is furnished with a complete and separate index, as well as a full summary of contents. On the whole the book is curious and valuable to students of Mediaeval Magic, but upon the subject of fascination it is vastly, inferior to the later work of Frommannd, 1674, which goes into the details of the evil eye as exhaustively, though not quite at such length, as Delrio does into magic.

^35:* In Berkshire it is thought that a ring made from a piece of silver collected at the Communion is a cure for convulsions and fits (Brand, vol. iii. p. 300).

^38:57 See W. Beckett, Impartial Enquiry into the Antiquity and Efficacy of touching for the King's Evil, 1722. T. Badger, Collection of Remarkable Cures of the King's Evil by the Royal Touch, 1748.

It is evident that this practice was common within the time named, as we find recorded by Hone (Everyday Book, 1830, p. 682) a notice respecting Charles II. in 1664 that "his sacred Majesty having declared it to be his royal will and purpose to continue the healing of his people for the evil during the month of May, and then give over till Michaelmas next, I am commanded to give notice thereof, that the people may not come up to the town in the interim and lose their labour."

^39:58

	 
		                 "Vox quoque Moerim
		 Jam fugit ipsa; lupi Moerim videre priores."
		                                     VIRGIL, Eclogue ix.
		
		 Pliny, Nat. Hist. viii. 34 (Bohn, Vol. ii. p. 283), says: "It is supposed that it will instantly take away the voice of a man if it (the wolf) is the first to see him." A note says: "Hence the proverbial expression applied to a person who is suddenly silent upon the entrance of another, 'Lupus est tibi visus.'"

^39:59 Pliny says that near the sources of the Nile is found a wild beast called the catoblepas; "an animal of moderate size . . . sluggish in the movement of its limbs, and its head is remarkably heavy. Were it not for this circumstance, it would prove the destruction of the human race; for all who behold its eyes, fall dead upon the spot."--Nat. Hist. viii. 32 (vol. ii. p. 281, Bohn).

^39:60 "The camel has a natural antipathy to the horse" (Pliny, Nat. Hist. viii. 26; vol. ii. p. 276, Bohn: mentioned by Aristotle, Hist. Anim. vi. 17, also by Aelian). This feeling is on all hands believed to be mutual. George Eliot in one of her novels refers to the well-known fact that a horse trembles with fear when first he sees a camel. This is not fright like that caused by a railway engine, but an actual nervous dread or involuntary excitement, which shows itself by shaking and unwillingness to come near. [p. 40] The elephant is commonly said to have an antipathy to the pig, and especially to its squeal. The following shows how old is this notion: "Elephantes porcina vox terret" (Seneca, De Ira, ii. 12).

^40:61 Museum of Animated Nature, vol. ii. p. 107.

^41:62 Smith, Reptilia, quoted by Story.

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

 

CHAPTER II

 

SYMPATHETIC MAGIC

IN further pursuing this subject, it must be borne in mind that besides the direct influences of fascination, including those of simple bodily presence, breathing, or touching, there is a whole class of operations directly connected with it, comprehended in the terms Magic, Enchantment, Witchcraft.

A great authority, [*63] who has dealt exhaustively with the subject of the Occult Sciences, including Omens, Augury, and Astrology, does not even allude to the belief in the evil eye, which we take to be the basis and origin of the Magical Arts. About these the earliest known writings and the most ancient monuments give abundant evidence. Dr. Tylor calls the belief in magic "one of the most pernicious delusions that ever vexed mankind"; and considering magic merely as the handmaid, or the tool, of envy, this description accords well with that of Bacon, as the vilest and most depraved of all "affections."

The practice of magic as defined by Littre, "Art pretendu de produire des effets contre l'ordre de la nature," began with the lowest known stages of civilisation; and although amongst most

[p. 45]

savage races it is still the chief part of religion, [*64] yet it is not to be taken in all cases as the measure of the civilisation of the people practising it. The reason we assign is, that outward circumstances, such as local natural features, or climate, tend to make the mental condition of certain people specially susceptible of feelings, upon which magical arts can exert an influence altogether out of proportion to the culture of the persons affected. In fact, the more imaginative races, those who have been led to adopt the widest pantheon, have been mostly those upon whom magic has made the most impression; and what was once, and among certain races still is, a savage art, lived on, grew vigorously, and adopted new developments, among people in their day at the head of civilisation. Thus it has stood its ground in spite of all the scoffs of the learned, and the experimental tests of so-called scientific research, until we may with confidence assert that many practices classed as occult, and many beliefs which the educated call superstitious, are still performed and held firmly by many amongst ourselves, whom we must not brand as ignorant or uncultured. No doubt the grosser forms of enchantment and sorcery have passed away; no doubt there is much chicanery in the doings of modern adepts; yet, call it superstition or what we may, there are acts performed every day by Spiritualists, Hypnotists, Dowsers and others, which may well fall within the term Magic; yet the most sceptical is constrained to admit, that in some cases an effect is produced which obliges us to omit the word pretendu from our definition.

[p. 46]

We cannot explain how, but undoubtedly there is in certain individuals a faculty, very occult, by which the divining rod does twist in the grasp of persons whose honour and good faith are beyond suspicion. The writer has seen the hazel twig twist in the hands of his own daughter, when held in such a position that no voluntary action on her part could possibly affect it. Moreover, a professional Dowser makes no mystery or hocus-pocus about it; he plainly declares he does not know how, or why, the twig or watch-spring moves when he passes over water; nor can he even teach his own sons to carry on his business. Of all arts we may say of his, nascitur, non fit.

Again, there are certain phenomena in thought-reading, which are well-established facts, clear to our senses. Above all, there are the strange powers possessed by Hypnotists over their patients, which we can no more explain than we can that minutely recorded act of the Witch of Endor [*65] who "brought up" Samuel, and instantly discovered thereby that Saul himself was with her. Without believing either in magic or the evil eye, the writer fully agrees that "much may be learnt" [*66] from a study of the belief, and of the many practices to which it has given rise. It is needful, however, to approach the subject with an open, judicial mind, and not to reject all, like the "Pharisees of Science," [*67] that our superior understanding is unable to explain. Our senses, our experience, alike tell us that there exist many facts and appearances, which appealed strongly to the despised judgment of our forefathers, rude and

[p. 47]

cultured alike, which never have been either disproved or explained, and some of these facts have been held as firm articles of belief in all ages.

Mr. De Vere [*68] expresses precisely what we mean when he says of the imaginative, rather than the critical mind of our chivalrous ancestors of the Middle Ages, that "they delightedly believed much that many modern men unreasonably disbelieve to show their cleverness." [*69]

It is easy, and the failure of modern science has made it safe, to call everything we cannot understand contemptible superstition. It is however satisfactory and even consolatory, in pursuing our subject, to know that the same word superstition has been applied by "superior persons," indifferently and impartially, to the most sacred doctrines of Christianity, to the belief in our Lord's miracles, to most solemn mysteries, and creeds other than those of our infallible selves, to the magic omens and portents which many believe in, and to the incantations or enchantments of charlatans, wizards, and sorcerers. [*70]

The more, however, we study with unbiassed mind the subjects which are called occult, the more evident will it become, even to the least advanced or enlightened amongst us, that there is a whole world

[p. 48]

of facts, operations, and conditions, with which our human senses and powers of comprehension are quite incapable of dealing. This has certainly been the experience of all people in all ages; we see in his magic but the feeble efforts of feeble man to approach and to step over the boundary his senses can appreciate, into what is intended to be, and must always remain, beyond his ken-essentially the supernatural.

Man, having come to associate in thought those things which he found by experience to be connected in fact, proceeded erroneously to invert this action, and to conclude that association in thought must involve similar connection in reality. [*71]

Here no doubt we have the true reason for that association of ideas with facts which a recent author [*72] calls Sympathetic Magic. He says: "One of the principles of this is that any effect may be produced by imitating it." So concise a definition may well be borne in mind, for we are told that it lies at the very foundation of human reason, and of unreason also. We Christians, however, certainly cannot agree to call this association of ideas with facts a superstition in the conventional sense; for we must see that the principle, perhaps to suit our humanity and our limited reason, has been appointed and adopted for our most sacred rites. Surely in the act of baptism we hope for the spiritual effect we imitate or typify by the actual use of water. So in that highest of our sacraments we spiritually eat and drink, by the actual consumption of the elements.

Leaving sacred things, which are merely mentioned here, with all reverence, by way of illustration, and to show how association of ideas with facts

[p. 49]

is not necessarily superstitious, but a fundamental principle of human ethics, we find that in practice it has nevertheless been more often perverted to the accomplishment, actual or fancied, of the basest designs of malignant spite, than to the higher purposes of religion.

To illustrate his meaning of the term Sympathetic Magic, the author [*73] says: "If it is wished to kill a person, an image of him is made and then destroyed, and it is believed that through a certain physical sympathy between the person and his image, the man feels the injuries done to the image as if they were done to his own body, and that when it is destroyed he must simultaneously perish." The idea herein expressed is as old as the hills, and is practised to-day. [*74] The ancient Egyptians believed that the ushebtiu or little figures of stone, wood, or pottery (Figs. 1, 2, and 3 which they placed, often in such numbers, in the tombs of their dead, would provide the deceased with servants and attendants to work for him in the nether world, and to fight for him against the many enemies he would there have to combat. Their name signifies respondents, [*75] as if to answer to the call for help. The same curious belief is shown in the imitations or re-

[p. 50]

presentations of food, such as terra-cotta bread, [*76] and other articles placed with the dead for his use and sustenance.

Maspero in his lectures on the "Egyptian Hell" (see a long notice in the Times of August 22, 1887)

Click to enlarge
Figures 1, 2 and 3

  [*76a]

dwells upon the reasons which induced the ancients to provide their dead with arms, food, amulets, and slaves, for it was thought the dead would be liable to the corvee as well as the living. Besides all these things the dead were furnished with a funereal

[p. 51]

papyrus, now known as the "Book of the Dead," which Maspero, describes as a "Complete Handbook to Hell," giving not only an itinerary of the route but all the spells, incantations, and prayers for each stage of the journey.

The very curious part of these provisions is that idealism seems to have run riot, as though the dead himself, in whose actual existence there was devout belief, would be satisfied with a mere make-believe, or even the picture of the article he needed. They seem to have thought that in the future state the person deceased would be so readily deceived, as to consider himself provided for by the most innocently transparent counterfeits. [*77]

This remarkable belief in the easy gullibility of the departed was by no means confined to the ancient Egyptians, for among the Chinese is found a custom at present, which, seeing that in China habits change not, we may conclude to be of ancient date.

Archdeacon MacCullagh, long resident in China, says that Chinamen still believe that paper money passes current in the next world as it used to do with them in 'this. They also believe that as the person is dead, so must his money be with which he is to be furnished in the place to which he has gone. They therefore kill the money for him by burning it, in order that he may have dead or killed money.

[p. 52]

[paragraph continues] Paper currency has been for many centuries abolished in China, but the people will not believe it to be so in the world of spirits. They therefore prepare spurious paper money in imitation of the old extinct currency, which they burn at the funeral, and also annually at the grave of their departed relative. The Egyptians did almost the same thing: they broke the arms placed with the dead. This killed them, and set their ghosts free to follow their dead master. [*78]

Such deception, which they think suitable for the spiritual world, evidently will not do for the present: at the death of a Chinaman, his friends present coins, of small value indeed, but real, to all corners, in order to make friends for the departed who may possibly meet him in the place where he is gone. The terra-cotta cakes at the Ashmolean Museum, so like modern Neapolitan loaves, must be such as would be placed with the dead man, by way of satisfying his appetite on his journey to the happy hunting grounds.

Nor can we say that this notion of being able to deceive the dwellers in the unseen world is confined to ancient or specially superstitious people, when we see altars in churches, dedicated to departed saints, bedecked in their honour with flowers of painted tin or coloured calico, stuck in sham vases of tinselled wood.

Again, nearer home, when we see the wreaths of beads strung on wires, of tin leaves and tinted flowers placed under glass shades upon the graves in our cemeteries, we wonder if the "Ka," or the

[p. 53]

shade of the departed, when it visits the cast-off mortal coil, will be deceived by these cheap counterfeits. We fear we must conclude that such things can only be classed, even in this nineteenth century, as mere examples of the performances of sympathetic magic, to be summed up in the famous words of Erasmus to Sir Thomas More: "Crede ut habes et habes."

In our Somerset County Museum at Taunton is to be seen more than one heart, said to be those of pigs, stuck full of pins 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 4
 and thorns, which have been found not long ago in old houses near the writer's home. The illustrations are careful drawings from the originals and represent actual size. [*79] These hearts are also said to be malignant in design as well as protective: that the persons who stuck those pins into the hearts, had special ill-will, and desired to work injury against the person in whose house they were found. They entertained the old,

[p. 54]

old belief that the heart is the seat of life, and therefore a fit representative or symbol of a living person. They believed that the heart of the hated person would suffer from the pricking inflicted upon the pig's heart, and that as the latter dried up and withered, so would the heart and the life of the victim against whom the act was designed.

The Bakongo people "believe the spirit is situated 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 5
in the middle of the heart, and it is regarded as the mainspring of action, so that to bewitch the spirit in a man's heart is to cause him to waste away and die." [*80] The charm doctor is the great spiritual power: his business is to find out the witch who has eaten the heart of a newly deceased person.

A few years ago, also in this same neighbourhood,

[p. 55]

an onion was found hidden in a chimney, with a paper stuck round it by numberless pins; on this was written the name of a well-known and highly-respected gentleman, a large employer of labour.

The other day I [*81] was at the Court House, East Quantoxhead, and was shown in the chimney of a now disused kitchen--suspended--a sheep's heart stuck full of pins. I think Captain L------ told me that this was done by persons who thought themselves "overlooked" or "ill-wished;" also to prevent the descent of witches down the chimney. . . . The heart is in good preservation.

In 1875 the village of Worle, near Weston-super-Mare, was in a commotion about the death of a "varth o' paigs," and the owner sent for a "wise man" from Taan'tn, who laid it to the charge of four

[p. 56]

village wives, all of whom he declared he would bring to the house of the aggrieved party to beg for mercy and forgiveness.

The heart of one of the defunct pigs was stuck full of pins and then thrown on the fire--the owner and his wife sitting by and "waiting for poor old Mrs. ------ to come and ask why they were hurting her." The remarkable coincidence followed these proceedings, that the old woman, who bore a bad reputation for "overlooking," should have met her death by falling into the fire on her own hearth. We are not told how soon this event followed the burning of the heart. [*82]

Another recent instance in Somerset. An old woman living in the Mendip district had her pig "took bad," and of course at once concluded that it was "overlooked." As usual in such cases, a white witch was applied to. [*83] The following is what took place in obedience to his orders.

A sheep's heart was stuck full of pins and roasted before the fire. While this was being done, the assembled people chanted the following incantation:--

	 
		It is not this heart I mean to burn,
		 But the person's heart I wish to turn,
		 Wishing them neither rest nor peace
		 Till they are dead and gone.
		
		 At intervals, in response to a request of "Put a little more salt on the fire, George," the son of the old woman bewitched, sprinkled the fire, thus adding a ghastly yellow light to the general effect. After this had gone on far into the night, the inevitable "black cat" jumped out from somewhere, and was pronounced to be the fiend which had been exorcised." [*84]

[p. 57]

Closely allied to these practices is that of the maidens in Shropshire, who drop needles and pins into the wells at Wenlock, to arrest and fix the affections of their lovers. [*85] Nor is this particular form of sympathetic enchantment, which here in Somerset is a very common one, by any means confined to this country.

A year or two ago a friend showed me in Naples an almost identical object, within a few days of its discovery: the following is his own account of it:--

In 1892 Mr. William Smith, English grocer at Naples, in course of cleaning his house, took down his curtains, and on the top of the valence-board found the object. Mrs. Smith presented it to Mr. Neville Rolfe, knowing that he took an interest in such things. He showed it to his cook, an old man, who was as ignorant and superstitious as ever a Neapolitan could be; and he was so horror-stricken (thinking it had been sent to the house by some evil-disposed person) that he declined to remain in the house unless the object were at once sent out of it! Mr. Rolfe, accordingly, lent it to the Museum at Oxford. It consists of an ordinary Neapolitan green lemon, into which twenty-four clout-headed nails and half a dozen wire nails are stuck, the nails being secured by a string twisted round their heads. The cook asserted that after the thing was made by the witches, they put it above a brazier, and danced round it naked, thus making it of deadly power. Many stories are current in Naples of the efficacy of the incantations practised by the witches, and especially of one who resided in Mergellina, a part of Naples still mainly inhabited by fishermen.

It appears that in Southern Italy the article is so common as to have a regular name, Fattura della 

[p. 58]

 morte (deathmaker), and that it is constantly employed in the same manner, and for the same purpose, as the pig's heart or onion is with us. Fig. 6 is from a drawing of this remarkable object now in the Pitt Rivers Museum. [*86] The string or yarn twisted

Click to enlarge
FIG. 6

about the nails, though now blackened by dirt and age, seems to have been originally coloured.

Who can deny that along with the onion as an eatable tuber, which almost certainly came to us from Italy, we may also have received the practice of the fattura della morte?

The winding of the thread or yarn amongst the nails has doubtless its especial meaning, and is certainly a relic of ancient days, for Petronius, writing of certain incantations performed for the purpose of freeing a certain Encolplus from a spell, says: "She then took from her bosom a web of twisted threads of various colours, and bound it on my neck." [*87]

[p. 59]

[paragraph continues] The same custom of tying threads of many colours on the necks of infants as part of a charm against fascination is mentioned by Persius. [*88]

The foregoing examples are intended to show sympathetic magic in its destructive or evil-working side, but we may easily find instances of its use for beneficent or at least harmless purposes. The idea prevails in various parts of South Wales, where at certain holy wells, each having a separate reputation of its own for specific diseases, the faithful hang a piece of rag, after having rubbed it over the part diseased, upon some special tree or bush near the well, in the belief that the rag absorbs the ailment, and that the sufferer will be cured. One or more of these trees are covered with pieces of rag placed on it by the believers. There is, in some instances, an accompaniment of dropping pins into the well, but it does not appear whether this act has any particular connection with the rag; though it is suggested that the pin or button dropped into the well is a make-believe votive offering to the presiding spirit. There are besides many famous wishing wells, where by the practice of certain acts, such as dropping pins, maidens learn who is to be their lover; also on the other hand ill-wishing is practised; for corks stuck with pins are set afloat in them, and the hearts of enemies are wounded thereby. [*89]

One of our commonest cures for warts is: "Take a dew-snail and rub it on the wart, then stick the

[p. 60]

snail upon a white thorn, and as the snail dries up and 'goes away' so will the wart." [*90] Another is: "Steal a piece of fresh raw beef and rub that upon the wart, then bury it where nobody sees, and as the meat perishes, so will the wart." In both these cases secrecy is of the essence of the act--if any one is told or knows what is done, except the person performing, the result will be nothing. Sympathetic medicine is no less an active force than the evil-working magic of which examples have been given. The following recipe, called "The Cure of Wounds by the Powder of Sympathy," is a serious one, and throws light upon the art and science of surgery just two hundred years ago.

Take good English Vitriol which you may buy for 2d. a pound, dissolve it in warm water, using no more than will dissolve it, leaving some of the impurest part at the bottom undissolved, then pour it off and filtre it, which you may do by a coffin of pure gray paper put into a Funnel, or by laying a sheet of gray paper in a sieve, and pouring your water or Dissolution of Vitriol into it by degrees, setting the sieve upon a large Pan to receive the filtred Liquor: when all your Liquor is filtred boyl it in an Earthen vessel glazed, till you see a thin scum upon it; then set in a cellar to cool covering it loosly, so that nothing may fall in: after two or three days standing, pour off the Liquor, and you will find at the bottom and on the sides large and fair green Chrystals like Emerauds: drain off all the water clean from them, and dry them, then spread them abroad in a large flat earthen dish, and expose them to the hot sun on the Dog-days, taking them in at Night and setting them out in the Morning, securing them from the rain; and when the Sun hath calcin'd them to whiteness, beat them to powder and set this powder again in the Sun, stirring it sometimes, and when you see it perfectly white, powder it, and sift it finely, and set it again in the Sun for a day, and you will have a pure white powder, which is the Powder of Sympathy, which put in a glass and stop it close. The next year when the Dog-days come if you have any of this powder left

[p. 61]

you may expose it in the Sun, spreading it abroad to renew its vertue by the Influence of the Sunbeams.

The way of curing wounds with it, is to take some of the blood upon a Rag, and put some of the Powder upon the blood, then keep only the wound clean, with a clean Linnen about it, and in a moderate temper betwixt hot and cold, and wrap the Rag with the blood, and keep it either in your Pocket, or in a Box, and the Wound will be healed without any Oyntment or Plaister, and without any pain. But if the wound be somewhat Old and Hot and Inflamed, you must put some of this Powder into a Porringer or Bason full of cold water, and then put anything into it that hath been upon the wound, and hath some of the blood or matter upon it, and it will presently take away all Pain and Inflamation as you see in Sir Kenelm's Relation of Mr. Howard.

To staunch the Blood either of a Wound or bleeding at the Nose, take only some of the Blood upon a Rag, and put some Powder upon it; or take a Bason with fresh water and put some Powder into it; and bath the Nostrils with it. [*91]

"A few years ago in India, during a cholera scare," a witness tells the writer, "a woman dressed in fantastic style was led by two men up to an infected house, with the usual following of tom-toms and musicians. A fire with much smoke was made outside, and the woman, who represented the cholera spirit, was completely fumigated amidst much ceremony, prayers, and great din. Nothing whatever was done to house or patient; in two days, however, the cholera had ceased."

We also include here all the many harvest customs, the Maypoles, the jacks in the Green, with all their dancing and merrymaking, as being more or less dramatic representations of the ends all these acts and ceremonies were originally intended to produce. Surely the Lord and Lady of the May, the King and Queen of the May, the actual marriage of trees, are something more than mere types or emblems of

[p. 62]

animal and vegetable fertility, which, primarily, all these things were believed and intended to procure or to stimulate.

There is abundant evidence that those now practised are survivals of very ancient rituals: that the marriage of Dionysus and Ariadne, said to have been acted every year in Crete, is the forerunner of the little drama acted by the French peasants of the Alps, where a king and queen are chosen on the first of May and are set on a throne for all to see.

Persons dressed up in leaves represent the spirit of vegetation; our Jack in the Green is his personification. In several parts of France and Germany the children dress up a little leaf man, and go about with him in spring, singing and dancing from house to house.

Throughout Europe, the Maypole is supposed to impart a fertilising influence over both women and cattle as well as vegetation.

Sometimes these May trees, and probably our west country [*92] Neck, like the ancient Greek Eiresione, were burnt at the end of the year, or when supposed to be dead; and surely it is no unfair inference to assume that such burning was a piece of ritualistic worship of the life-giving Sun, whose bright rays are so needful to the progress of vegetation. Again all the little by-play with the water which occurs in our business of "Crying the Neck," and the throwing water over the priest of the sacred grove in Bengal, with many other examples in several parts of Europe of the sousing with water over the tree, the effigy, or the real person representing the rain spirit, are

[p. 63]

but acted imitations of the end desired. The object of preserving the Harvest May, Neck or Eiresione, from one year to another, is that the life-giving presence of the spirit dwelling in it may promote the growth of the crops throughout the season, and when at the end of the year its virtue is supposed to be exhausted, it is replaced by a new one. How widely spread these ideas are found, and among what essentially different races, can be proved by the fact that precisely analogous customs are found in Sweden and Borneo, in India, Africa, North America, and Peru. [*93]

Referring to sun-worship, mentioned above, there are still remaining amongst us many vestiges, besides those relating to the Beltan fires, [*94] in Scotland, Ireland, and Northern England.

An Irish peasant crawls three times round the healing spring, in a circuit that imitates the course of the sun. [*95] It is everywhere thought most unlucky to progress in a direction opposite to the course of the sun; indeed so well is this understood that we

[p. 64]

have a special word, widdershins, to express the contrary direction. It is a well-known rule of Freemasons not to go against the sun in moving within the Lodge, and there are other plain survivals of sun-worship in other points of masonic ritual. In the Hebrides the people used to march three times from east to west round their crops and their cattle. If a boat put out to sea, it first made three turns in this direction, before starting on its course; if a welcome stranger visited the islands, the people passed three times round their guest. [*96] A flaming torch was carried three times round a child daily until it was christened. [*97]

The old Welsh names for the cardinal points of the sky, the north being the left hand and the south the right, are signs of an ancient practice of turning to the rising sun. [*98]

In the Highlands of Scotland [*99] and in Ireland it was usual to drive cattle through the needfire as a preservative against disease. [*100] In these last examples we see customs almost analogous to making the children pass through the fire to Moloch.

We know that our British forefathers were Sun-worshippers,

[p. 65]

though the Sun does not appear to have been the chief of their divinities. Lug was the personification of the sun; he was the son of Dagda [*101] "the good god," who was "grayer than the gray mist," and he had another son named "Ogma the sun-faced," the patron of writing and prophecy.

It may well be maintained that all our modern notions included in the general term Orientation are but survivals of the once universal sun-worship.

A great authority [*102] says that the ceremony of Orientation "unknown in primitive Christianity . . . was developed within its first four centuries."

This statement (and here he differs from his usual practice) is unsupported by any authority; with all deference we would submit that there is much evidence to the contrary. Sun-worship was undoubtedly an abomination to the Jews, but the very facts recorded in connection with Ezekiel's horror (ch. viii. 16) at the idolatry of the twenty-five men who worshipped the sun in the temple of the Lord, show first a careful Orientation of the temple itself, in accordance with the plan the Israelites had learnt in Egypt; and next that general importance attached to the directions of east and west. Thus, although actual sun-worship was considered as idolatry, the Sun was both actually and typically regarded as the almighty life-giving power of nature--giving his own name to the great emanation, the only begotten Son of the Father, the Light of the World, the Sun of Righteousness. Surely these very names speak eloquently of the idea, if not of the practice implied in the term Orientation. Primitive Christianity

[p. 66]

will doubtless be admitted to have been developed from the older Judaism, and even if no distinct intimation of any actual ceremony which might be called Orientation can be found among Jewish rites, yet the fact that Daniel (ch. vi. 10) prayed with his windows opened "towards Jerusalem" shows that he attached importance to position, even though Jerusalem, where he believed his God to reside, was situated to the west of Babylon.

It was an ancient custom among the heathen to worship with their faces towards the east. [*103] This is confirmed by Clement of Alexandria, who says that the altars and statues of pagan temples were placed at the east end, so that those who came to worship might have their faces towards them. [*104] This account scarcely accords with the construction of Egyptian temples, yet we read immediately: "Nevertheless the way of building temples towards the east, so that the doors being opened should receive the rays of the rising sun, was very ancient, and in later ages almost universal." Moreover we know that Orientation in building was an important factor in pagan worship long antecedent to Christianity; while the traditional burial of Christ Himself, looking eastwards, shows that the ceremony of Orientation was at least practised in the earliest days of the Church, though it can be no more called an act of idolatrous sun-worship, than is our still-observed custom of burying our dead with their feet eastwards, so that the body may rise to face the Lord at His second coming in

[p. 67]

the east. Here again we see Christianity and heathendom hand in hand, for among the aboriginal Australians, who are still cannibals, the graves have a direction from east to west, and the foot of the grave is toward the rising sun. "If the deceased was a prominent man, a hut is sometimes built over his grave. The entrance, which faces east, has an opening through which a grown person may creep. Near Rockhampton I saw several graves not more than a foot deep, in which the feet were directed towards the rising sun." [*105]

The care observed by the ancient Egyptians in building their temples properly east and west is remarkable, and while perhaps involving something more, still plainly points to the idea that the sun was the almighty power. Nowhere is this seen more distinctly than in the two rock-hewn temples at Abou Simbel. These are carefully constructed to meet the rising sun upon two anniversaries. The great temple was hewn out to commemorate the victory of Rameses the Great over the Cheta, and was specially dedicated to Ra, the God of Light. [*106] The writer was fortunate enough to see the rays at sunrise penetrate to the extreme end, and light up the statues at the innermost part of the sanctuary, on the very anniversary of the famous battle--February 24. [*107] The smaller temple also commemorates a victory of Rameses, but evidently at a later

[p. 68]

period of the year, as its axis points north of that of its greater companion. All the Egyptian temples are carefully orientated with the sanctuary at the west, so that the sun's rays enter at the east end and light up the sacred statues only on certain dedication days. The same system was adopted by the Greeks, and later by the Romans in their temples. The Roman basilicas were also constructed in like manner, and have thus left their mark on the churches now called Basilicas, where the main entrance--as at St. John Lateran, St. Peter's, S. Paolo fuori le mura, Sta. Maria Maggiore, and others--is at the east, and the sanctuary at the west. These facts all tend to show a general adaptation of what had been good, or unobjectionable, in pagan customs to the requirements of the Christian faith; just as the pagan and Jewish lustrations, ancient and almost universal, were perpetuated in the Christian rite of baptism, both by the example and precept of the Church's divine Master; proving that practical customs, harmless in themselves, were not forbidden, but were consecrated by adoption as sacred ceremonies into the then reformed Jewish worship which we call Christianity. We find, too, that baptism itself was in the early Church closely allied to Orientation, in the position in which the catechumen was placed. [*108]

It is not generally known that in pagan temples there was a vessel of stone or brass, called perirranterion, filled with holy water, with which all those admitted to the sacrifices were sprinkled, and

[p. 69]

beyond this it was not lawful for the profane to pass, [*109] until purified by water. By some accounts this vessel was placed at the door of the temple; thus the holy-water stoups, outside the doors of so many of our old churches, are not of Christian origin at all, but merely an adaptation of the lustration used in rites we now call heathen.

Although it was usually considered that a small sprinkling was sufficient, yet sometimes, before participation in the sacred rites, the feet were washed as well as the hands. [*110] So also the water was required to be clear and free from all impurities. The Jews used the same rite as the pagans, and were careful to have clean water for their washing of purification, hence St. Paul's expression (Heb. x. 22), "Our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water." In Ezekiel (xxxvi. 25) we read: "I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean."

Whether or not Orientation be in idea and in practice a quasi sun-worship, we, who would repel the suggestion of idolatry, have customs, keeping their place amongst us, notwithstanding all our enlightenment and culture, to which no such exception can be applied, for they surely partake of both sun-worship and sympathetic magic.

The very common custom, still maintained, of passing a child afflicted with congenital hernia through a split ash-tree is precisely such a case. The rite has to be performed on a Sunday morning at, or just before, sunrise--the opening must be made in the direction of east and west, for the child

[p. 70]

must be passed through it towards the rising sun. [*111]

Another custom almost similar is reported from Gweek, in the parish of Wendron, Cornwall, [*112] where the Tolvan or holed stone was in repute as a means of curing weak or rickety infants, who were brought, often from a distance, to be passed through the hole.

In ancient Greece, such as had been thought to be dead, and on whom funeral rites had been celebrated, but who afterwards recovered, such also as had been long absent in foreign countries, where it was believed they had died, if they should return home, were not permitted to enter into the temple of the Eumenides until after purification. This was done at Athens, by their "being let through the lap of a woman's gown, that so they might seem to be new born."

So in Rome, such as had been thought dead in battle, and afterwards returned home unexpectedly, were not allowed to enter at the door of their own houses, but were received at a passage opened in the roof, [*113] and thus, as it were, in full view of the sun.

These rites can be considered as nothing short of dramatic representations of that which it is desired to accomplish, i.e. remedy of congenital or ceremonial imperfection by a new birth.

The homoeopathic notion that like produces or

[p. 71]

cures like, is by no means new. One of the oldest remedies for a bite, here in England, was a hair of the dog that bit you; or the best way to staunch blood from a wound was to place in it the knife or sword which caused it. A friend of the writer, the Rev. R. P. Murray of Shapwick Vicarage, Dorset, relates that in May 1890, while at Arucas, in Grand Canary, he saw a dog fiercely attack a native boy, and that although he rushed to the boy's assistance, the latter was badly bitten in the hand, and his clothes much torn. The howling of the lad and the shouts of Mr. Murray caused a hue and cry, so that the dog was quickly caught amid much gesticulation and brandishing of knives, which my informant thought were to polish off the beast in no time. Instead of this, however, a handful of his shaggy hair was cut off, and the boy, well knowing what was to be done, held out his bleeding hand: the hair was placed on the wound, a lighted match was applied, and a little fizzled-up heap of animal charcoal remained upon it. No doubt the cautery was a good remedy, but all the virtue was believed by the natives to be in the hair of the dog that caused the wound.

Another curious form of the association of ideas with facts, or rather perhaps of persons with their belongings, is shown in the care which many people take to prevent anything they have owned or used getting into the possession of an enemy.

A South Sea Island chief persisted that he was extremely ill, because his enemies the Happahs had stolen a lock of his hair, and buried it in a plantain leaf for the purpose of killing him. He had offered the Happahs the greater part of his property if they

[p. 72]

would but bring back his hair and the leaf, for that otherwise he would be sure to die. [*114]

It is for this reason that nothing whatever is to be seen but ashes on the spot where gypsies have encamped, unless it be the little peeled stick, left sometimes standing upright in the ground, most likely as a secret signal to friends who may be passing that way. One of these was noted very recently by the writer (Dec. 1893). Everything else is carefully burnt or otherwise made away with.

The aboriginal Australians believe that an enemy getting possession of anything that has belonged to them, can employ it as a charm to produce illness or other injury to the person to whom the article belonged. They are therefore careful to burn up all useless rubbish before leaving a camping ground. Should anything belonging to an unfriendly tribe be found, it is given to the chief, who preserves it as a means of injuring the enemy. This Wuulon, as it is called, is lent to any one who desires to vent his spite against a member of the unfriendly tribe. When thus used as a charm, the Wuulon is rubbed over with emu fat mixed with red clay and tied to the point of a spear-thrower, which is stuck upright in the ground before the camp fire.

The company sit round watching it, but at such a distance that their shadows cannot fall on it. They keep chanting imprecations on the enemy till the spear-thrower, as they say, turns round, and falls in the direction of the tribe the Wuulon belongs to. Hot ashes are then thrown in the same direction with

[p. 73]

hissing and curses, and wishes that disease and misfortune may overtake their enemy. [*115]

One cannot but wonder if the little stick stuck up by our gypsies is in any way connected with this custom. These latter are said to have come from India, and their habit of burning up all refuse after them, like the far-away Australians, seems to point to a common origin. [*116]

A recent traveller in Australia says that "in order to be able to practise his arts against any black man, the wizard must be in possession of some article that has belonged to him--say, some of his hair or of the food left in his camp, or some similar thing. [*117] On Herbert River the natives need only know the name of the person in question, and for this reason they rarely use their proper names in addressing or speaking of each other, but simply their clan names."

Another apt illustration comes from the West Indies. In Demerara it is to-day firmly and widely believed by the negroes and others, that injuries inflicted even upon the defecations of persons will be felt by the individual by whom they were left; and consequently it is often sought thus to punish the author of a nuisance. In 1864 the town of Georgetown was nearly destroyed by fire, and upon close investigation into its origin, it was proved to have been in consequence of some boys who, having

[p. 74]

found the excrement of another in a newly-constructed house, said: "Ki! let us burn it; now we make him belly ache"; and accordingly they got some shavings and made a fire over what they had found-the consequence was a vast destruction of property. The foregoing fact can be distinctly substantiated by the writer's informant, who was then a medical officer on the spot. Moreover, the like belief is still held even here in Somerset. About the year 1880 the child of a well-to-do farmer's wife was ill, and in the course of her explanations to the doctor, the mother expressed great displeasure with the nurse, especially at having discovered that she had thrown the child's excrement on the fire, and continuing, said: "You know this is very bad for the baby and ought not to be done, as it causes injury." She could not be drawn out to say what injury or malady was to be expected, but she said enough to show that the belief was commonly and strongly held. This woman is still living, and she and all her family are well known to the writer.

Further inquiry in other quarters completely clears up the question as to the injury to be expected from this proceeding, and very remarkably confirms the story from Demerara. An old midwife, questioned (May 14, 1894) upon this piece of nurse lore, at once said: "'Tis a very bad thing to throw a child's stooling on the fire, 'cause it do give the child such constipation and do hurt it so in his inside." She said she had proved it; she knew it was a bad thing, and had always heard, ever since she was a girl, that it was bad for the child. On the same day Mrs. S------, aged 85, said that when she was a girl at Taunton, she well remembers. people saying that

[p. 75]

it was a bad thing, as it gives the children constipation and hurts them; but she did not believe in it. She had not heard anything about it for years now. The day following, Mary W-----, 80, and Anne P-----, 70, two old women in the Workhouse, one a native of Devon, on being asked about it, said: "Lor! did'n you never hear o' that?" Both believed it, and had always heard that it was hurtful to a child. Several other old women--indeed all there were--knew all about it. These inquiries led to the further discovery that the piece of the funis umbilicus should be taken off at the proper time and burnt; that if this is not done, and if it is allowed to drop off naturally, especially if it should fall on the floor, the child will grow into a ------ which, politely expressed, means afflicted with nocturnal enuresis, an uncleanly habit. Squabbles among the women "in the House" are not uncommon, from this cause. Much more might be said as to other reasons given for the careful attention to this operation, especially as to the different treatment of a boy from a girl, but they are wide of our subject, and scarcely desirable for discussion here.

Very strange belief in sympathy, even in the present day, appears in the following:--

A friend of mine, not long ago, told me that the wife of his coachman had been confined some time before the event was expected. He thereupon went to his own cook to tell her to send food to the woman and to render what help she could.

The cook said: "I knew how it would be, sir; it's all along of them lionesses." She repeated the expression, and my friend, not understanding what she meant, inquired what the lionesses had to do with the matter.

[p. 76]

"Why, don't you know, sir, that when the lionesses have their cubs very early, women have always a tendency to be brought to bed prematurely?"

She appeared surprised that he had never heard of this "fact"; and on inquiry of a medical friend--or friends--he told me that the superstition seems to be a very prevalent one among the old "Mother Gamps."

One would have supposed this belief must be peculiar to London, the locale of this story, where alone the presence of lionesses can be effective; still the facts are of much interest as a proof of a continued survival. On close inquiry, however, even here in Somerset, there are traces of the like notion. The old women in the Wellington Workhouse say: "If a lioness dies in whelping, the year in which that happens is a bad one for women to be confined in." This belief is quite common; Mrs. M------ the matron has often heard it. All this suggests the idea that the British Lion may be not merely a fanciful object of heraldic blazonry, of which the people know nothing, but that he must be the Totem of our Celtic forefathers.

It is strange that the notion should be so stoutly maintained as to the injury done to a person by burning one thing, while on the other hand it is equally held that a child's milk-teeth, his nails, and hair should be burnt, lest injury come to him through neglect of that precaution. Stranger still is it to find how very widely these old and deep-seated beliefs are entertained by people of races so different as Somerset peasantry and West Indian negroes.

Such facts as we have given above cannot fail to

[p. 77]

suggest that the burning of the effigy of a hated person means, at the bottom, a good deal more than a mere demonstration, and at least in times past was thought to injure by actual bodily suffering the person represented.

The student of man tells us that the reason for the reluctance to disclose one's name, was of the same nature as that which makes savages, and nations far above the savage state, feel anxious that an enemy should not get possession of anything identified with one's person as a whole, especially if such enemy is suspected of possessing any skill in handling the terrors of magic. In other words, the anthropologist would say that the name was regarded as part of the person, and having said this, he is usually satisfied that he has definitely disposed of the matter. . . . The whole Aryan family believed at one time, not only that his name was a part of a man, but that it was the part of him which is termed the soul, the breath of life, or whatever you may choose to define it as being. [*118]

May we not add to this, that what relates to persons may by the same reasoning be applied to things? Hence, of course, comes the belief of the modern Neapolitan, that in the absence of the amulet or charm the mere utterance of its name is equally effective as a protection, and that force is added thereto by the repetition of the name. [*119]

Professor Rhys says that the Irish "probably treated the name as a substance, but without placing it on one's person, or regarding it as being of one's person, so much as of something put on the person at the will of the name-giving Druid, some time before the person to be named had grown to man's estate." Something of the same kind is found among Australian aborigines. They "have this peculiarity in common with the savages of other countries, that

[p. 78]

they never utter the names of the dead, lest their spirits should hear the voices of the living and thus discover their whereabouts." [*120] Did not the Witch of Endor "call up" Samuel, that is by uttering his name?

The connection of a man's shadow with his body, as evidenced in the proceedings of Australian savages, is also a very widespread belief at the present time throughout the East amongst the races from which the Australians originally sprang. An injury to a man's shadow, such as stabbing, treading on or striking it, is thought to injure his person in the same degree; and if it is detached from him entirely, as it is believed it may be, he will die.

In the Island of Wetar in the Eastern Archipelago, near Celebes, the magicians profess to make a man ill by stabbing his shadow with a spear, or hacking it with a sword. Sankara, to prove his supernatural powers to the Grand Lama, soared into the air, but as he mounted up, the Grand Lama, perceiving his shadow swaying and wavering on the ground, struck his knife into it, upon which down fell Sankara and broke his neck. [*121] The ancient Greeks, too, believed in the intimate association of a man or beast with his shadow. It was thought in Arabia that if a hyena trod on a person's shadow it deprived him of the power of speech; also that if a dog were standing on a roof, and if his shadow falling upon the ground were trodden upon by a hyena, the dog would fall down as if dragged by a rope. Again it was thought, on the other hand, that a dog treading upon the shadow of a hyena rendered the latter dumb. [*122]

[p. 79]

[paragraph continues] Whoever entered the sanctuary of Zeus on Mount Lycaeus was believed to lose his shadow and to die within the year. Here in the west country there is an old belief that many have sold their souls to the devil, and that those who do so, lose their shadow--from this it would seem to be thought, that the shadow contains the soul, i.e. the "Ka" of ancient Egypt.

In olden times it was believed in many widely separated countries [*123] that a human victim was a necessity for the stability of any important building; indeed the idea was by no means confined to paganism, for we are told that St. Columba [*124] found it necessary to bury St. Oran alive beneath the foundation of his monastery, in order to propitiate the spirits of the soil, who demolished at night what had been built during the day.

Here in England, throughout the Middle Ages, the common saying, "There's a skeleton in every house," or, "Every man has a skeleton in his closet," was hardly a figure of speech. The stories of finding the skeletons of faithless monks and nuns walled up alive, [*124a] seem to have sprung from a much earlier notion; and it is now well established that these are by no means myths, but very facts. At Holsworthy, in North Devon, the parish church was restored in

[p. 80]

[paragraph continues] 1845. On taking down the south-west angle wall a skeleton was found imbedded in the stone and mortar. There was every appearance of the body having been buried alive, and hurriedly. A mass of mortar was over the mouth, and the stones were heaped and huddled about the corpse; the rest of the wall had been built properly.

Many similar accounts are given of finds of a like nature in various parts of Germany, and the superstition that walls would not stand without a human victim, existed among Celts, Slavs, Teutons and Northmen. Even so late as 1813 when a Government official went to repair a broken dam on the Elbe, an old peasant sneered at his efforts, and said: "You will never get the dyke to hold unless you first sink an innocent child under its foundations." Several stories are told of parents who sold their children for this purpose, and of others where the victim, often a woman, was kidnapped and built into the foundations.

At the building of the castle of Henneberg a mason had sold his child to be built into the wall. The child had been given a cake, and the father stood on a ladder superintending the work. When the last stone had been put in, the child screamed in the wall, and the man, overwhelmed with self-reproach, fell from the ladder and broke his neck.

At the castle of Liebenstein, a mother sold her child for this purpose. As the wall rose about the little one it cried out: "Mother, I still see you!" then later, "Mother, I can hardly see you!" and lastly, "Mother, I see you no more!" [*124b] Several other castles have similarly ghastly stories connected

[p. 81]

with them. The latest authentic instance of the actual immuring of a human victim alive, occurred at Algiers, when Geronimo of Oran was walled up in the gate Bab-el-Oved in 1569.

Most so-called Devil's Bridges have some story associated with them, keeping alive the old idea of sacrifice, though sometimes substituting an animal for a human victim. The most usual account is that the devil had promised his aid on condition of having the first life that passed over the bridge, and then follow the dodges by which he was cheated, showing that his wits were not estimated much higher than those of the Giant in Jack the Giant-Killer.

In all ages it has been customary in sacrifice to substitute a victim of less value for one of more importance. The same idea, as that involved in the substitution of the sham for the real in the offerings made to the dead, is found running through sacrifice. This latter is defined as "primarily a meal offered to the deity," [*125] and the offering up of a human victim has been in all ages considered the highest and most important.

The Romans substituted puppets for the human sacrifices to the goddess Mania. They threw rush dolls into the Tiber at the yearly atoning sacrifice on the Sublician Bridge. How curiously this corresponds with a find here in Devon! A few years ago the north wall of Chumleigh Church was pulled down, and there, in it, was found a carved crucifix, of a date much earlier than the Perpendicular wall of the fifteenth century, when this figure was built into it as a substitute. Not far off, at Holsworthy, at about the same time, as we have just

[p. 82]

noted, the church wall was built upon a veritably living victim. Was Chumleigh more advanced in civilisation in the fifteenth century, or less devout in its belief in the efficacy of real sacrifice? or were the Holsworthy people less chary of human life, and, equally believing in the value of the rite, determined to fulfil it to the ideal, so as to ensure a good result?

Substitution in sacrifice, however, was of much earlier date than either Chumleigh or Roman offerings. The Egyptians who put off their dead with counterfeits, offered an animal to their gods instead of a man, but they symbolised their intended act by marking the creature to be slain with a seal bearing the image of a man bound and kneeling, with a sword at his throat. [*125a]

When once the notion of substitution has got in, whether in offerings to gods or men, the decadence becomes rapid, and in these latter days takes the form of buttons and base counters in our offertory bags.

In modern Greece at the present day it is still customary to consecrate the foundation of a new building with the sacrifice of some bird or animal; but sometimes, perhaps on a great occasion, upon which in old times a human victim would have been offered, the builder who cannot do this, typifies it by building on a man's shadow. He entices a man on to the site, secretly measures his body or his shadow, and buries the measure under the foundation stone. It is believed, too, in this case that the man whose shadow is thus buried will die within the year. [*126]

The Roumanians have a similar custom, and they,

[p. 83]

too, believe that he of the buried shadow will die within the year; it is therefore common to cry out to persons passing a newly begun building: "Beware lest they take thy shadow!" Not long since all this was thought necessary for securing stability to the walls, and there were actually people whose trade it was to supply architects with shadows.

Our own very commonly uttered sentiment, "May your shadow never grow less!" is at least a coincidence.

From the shadow the step is but very short to the reflection, consequently we find many savage people who regard their likeness in a mirror as their soul. The Andaman and Fiji Islanders, with others, hold this belief, and of course its corollary, that injury to the reflection is equivalent to injury to the shadow, and so to the person reflected.

Far away from these islanders, it was believed that the reflection may be stabbed as much as the shadow. One method among the Aztecs of keeping away sorcerers was to leave a bowl of water with a knife in it behind the door. A sorcerer entering would be so alarmed at seeing his likeness transfixed by a knife, that he would instantly turn and flee.

Surely here we have in this very ancient and widespread belief, the basis of that very common one amongst our own enlightened selves, of the terrible calamity which awaits the person who destroys his own image by breaking a looking-glass. Some hold that "he will shortly lose his best friend," which may of course mean that he will die himself, others that it portends speedy mortality in the family, usually the master. [*127]

[p. 84]

In Germany, England, [*128] Scotland, and other places even as far off as India and Madagascar, it is still believed that, if after death a person see his image reflected in a mirror in the same room as the dead, he will shortly die himself; hence in many places it is customary to cover up looking-glasses in a death-chamber. Bombay Sunis not only cover the looking-glasses in the room of a dying person, but do so habitually in their bedrooms before retiring to rest. [*129]

The Zulus and Basutos of South Africa have almost precisely similar notions. We have no need however to go so far afield for instances of a belief of a similar kind.

The following story is given by a correspondent of the Spectator, of February 17, 1894, as told to him "last month" by an old woman, in a Somerset village about ten miles from Bristol.

"Old John, that do live out to Knowle Hill, have a-told I, his vaether George had a sister, an' when her wer' young, a man what lived next door come a-courten of she. But she wouldn't have none on him. But she were took bad, an' had a ravennen appetite, an' did use to eat a whole loaf at once. Zoo her brother thought she wer' overlooked; an' he went down to Somerton, where a man did bide who wer' a real witch, and zo zoon as George got to un, he did zay: 'I do knaw what thee bist a-cwome var; thy zister be overlooked by the neighbour as do live next door. I'll tell 'ee what to do, an' 'twont cost thee no mwore than a penny.' Zoo her told un to goo whoam an' goo to the blacksmith an' get a new nail, an' not to let thick nail out of her hand till her'd a-zeed un make a track, then her were to take an' nail down the track. Zoo George did as her wer' twold, an' when her zeed the man make a track, her took the nail in one hand an' the hammer in t'other, an' a-nailed down the track. And the man did goo limping vrom

[p. 85]

that time, and George's sister she got well. Zome time arter that, the man wer' took very bad, an' George's wife did work vor a leady, an' she twold her missus he wer' ill. Zoo her missus gied her a rhabbut to teake to the man, but when she got to his house some men outzide the door twold her he wer' dead. Then she did offer to goo an' help lay un out, and wash un, because she wanted to look wether or no there wer' anything wi' his voot. Zo she went and helped lay un out, an' zhure enough there wer' a place right under his voot, as if so be a nail had been hammered into un. An' this, John her son twold I as it were certain true." [*129a]

The strange notion, that the soul goes out of the body with the shadow or the reflection, is carried still further by many savage people, and obstinately remains with some civilised ones, who think it unlucky to be photographed or to have their portraits painted. They have a fancy that it will shorten their days, just as many have about insuring their lives. This idea is the secret of the savage's unwillingness to be photographed, or to have his likeness sketched, which may be said to be almost universal.

A recent traveller [*130] gives a graphic account of his experience among the Ainus after having apparently in another place (Volcano Bay) been permitted to paint the people unmolested, except by inquisitiveness. He says that a young lad came over to see what he was doing, and that being told the author was painting a group of his people, "the news seemed to give him a shock. . . . He rejoined the others, excitedly muttered some words, and apparently told them that I had painted the whole group, fish and all. Had any one among them been struck by lightning, they certainly could not have

[p. 86]

looked more dismayed. . . . The fish was thrown aside, but not the knives, armed with which they all rushed at my back." He describes how his paint-box and apparatus were smashed, the painting destroyed, and he himself knocked down and "a big knife was kept well over my head."

The dread of being pictured is found all over the world. The writer has often heard Somerset people object to having their likenesses taken on the ground that it is unlucky, and that so and so was "a-tookt," but soon afterwards she was "took bad and died." Of course these persons would indignantly repudiate any suggestion of superstition; indeed they would do the same about any other belief, such as the death-watch, or an owl's hooting, nevertheless they confess to the feeling and are strongly influenced by it. Quite recently the wife of a gardener near the writer's home objected to have her photograph taken upon the ground that she had "a-yeard 'twas terrible onlucky"; and that "volks never didn live long arter they be a-tookt off," i.e. photographed.

Whence then do these notions come, if they are not the heritage of untold ages?

Footnotes

^44:63 Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. i. p. 101.

^45:64 R. Stuart Poole in Smith's Dict. of Bible, s.v. "Magic."

^46:65 1 Samuel xxviii. 7 et seq.

^46:66 Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. i. p. 101.

^46:67 Spectator, July 14, 1894, p. 45.

^47:68 "Mediaeval Records," Spectator, January 6, 1894, p. 14.

^47:69 These remarks are suggested by a "scientific gentleman," who was a witness with the writer of the twisting of the rod above mentioned, and who had the taste to assert that the young lady was in league with the Dowser.

^47:70 Since this was written we have been favoured with Mr. Huxley's ex cathedra deliverance in the Times of July 9, 1894, on Mr. Lang's book, Cock Lane and Common Sense, which may be shortly summed up: "I do not understand these things, therefore they are not."

No doubt superior people would nowadays accept the consequence, which John Wesley put so plainly when he said "to give up belief in witchcraft was to give up the Bible" (Farrar. Smith's Dict. of Bible, s.v. "Divination," 101. i. p. 445). We, however, venture to believe that there is a middle course, that of determining what we mean by witchcraft. As vulgarly understood and practised we are of course uncompromising unbelievers.

^48:71 Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. i. p. 104.

^48:72 Frazer, Golden Bough, vol. i. p. 9.

^49:73 Frazer, Golden Bough, vol. i. p. 9.

^49:74 In the Pitt Rivers Museum at Oxford, is the original clay figure actually made to represent a man, whose death it was intended thereby to compass. This happened no longer ago than 1889 in Glen Urquhart, where the image was placed before the house of an inhabitant. That this is not an uncommon act is proved by their having in Gaelic a distinct name for the clay figure--Corp Creidh, the clay body, well understood to mean the object and purpose above described. The great antiquity of this mode of working evil is shown by the discovery at Thebes of a small clay figure of a man tied to a papyrus scroll, evidently to compass the destruction of the person represented and denounced in the scrip. This figure and papyrus are now in the Ashmolean Museum. We refer again to this subject in Chapter XI.

^49:75 Wilkinson, Anc. Egypt, vol. iii. p. 492.

^50:76 Maspero, Archaeol. Egyp. p. 245. Of the ancient Greeks, we are told that in some "places they placed their infants in a thing bearing some resemblance to whatever sort of life they designed them for. Nothing was more common than to put them in vans, or conveniences to winnow corn, which were designed as omens of their future riches and affluence" (Potter, Archaeol. Graec. vol. ii. p. 321). We are further told these "things" were not real but imitations.

^50:76a Fig. 1 is from Wilkinson, Anc. Egyp. Figs. 2 and 3 from author's collection.

^51:77 "C'etaient des simulacres de pains, d'offrandes destines a nourrir le mort eternellement. Beaucoup de vases qu'on deposait dans le tombe sont peints en imitation d'albatre, de granit, de basalte, de bronze ou meme d'or, et sont le contrfacon a bon marche des vases en matieres precieuses, que les riches donnaient aux momies."--Maspero, Archaeol Egyp. p. 245. Upon this subject see also Maspero, Histoire Ancienne des peuples de l'Orient, p. 53 sq.; Ib. Trans. Bibl. Archaeol. Soc. vol. vii. p. 6 sq.; Mariette, Sur les Tombes de l'Ancien Empire, p. 17 sq.; Brugsh, Die Aegyptische Graberwelt, p. 16. sq.

^52:78 Maspero, Etudes Egyptiennes, vol. i. p. 192. See also Mariette, Sur les Tombes, p. 8. Closely allied to this is the breaking of votive offerings to SS. Cosmo and Damian, referred to later.

^53:79 Fig. 4 was found October 1882 in a recess of a chimney in an old house occupied by Mrs. Cottrell in the village of Ashbrittle. It was wrapped in a flannel bag, black and rotten, which crumbled to pieces. Some of the old people declared it to have been a custom when a pig died from the "overlooking" of a witch to have its heart stuck full of pins and white thorns, and to put it up the chimney, in the belief that as the heart dried and withered so would that of the malignant person who bad "ill wisht" the pig. As long as that lasted no witch could have power over the pigs belonging to that house. Fig. 5 was found nailed up inside the "clavel" in the chimney of an old house at Staplegrove in 1890. One side of this heart is stuck thickly with pins, the other side, here shown, has only the letters M. D. which are considered to be the initials of the supposed witch.

^54:80 Herbert Ward, Five Years with the Congo Cannibals, 1890.

Only ten years ago an old woman died here in the Workhouse, who was always a noted witch. She was the terror of her native village (in the Wellington Union), as it was fully believed she could "work harm" to her neighbours. Her daughter also, and others of her family, enjoyed the like reputation. Virago-like she knew and practised on the fears of the other inmates of "the House." On one occasion she muttered a threat to the matron, that she would "put a pin in for her." The other women heard it, and cautioned the matron not to cross her, as she had vowed to put in a pin for her, and she would do it. When the woman died there was found fastened to her stays a heart-shaped pad stuck with pins; and also fastened to her stays were four little bags in which were dried toads' feet. All these things rested on her chest over her heart, when the stays were worn.

A farm boy left his employment in a neighbouring parish against his [p. 55] master's wish, "to better himself," and took service near. Soon after, he was seized with a "terrible" pain in his foot, so that he could neither stand nor drive home the cows. An acquaintance coming by took him home in his cart, and advised him to consult "Conjurer ------." The latter told him at once, "Somebody's workin' harm 'pon thee." In the end the boy was advised to go back to his old place, and to keep a sharp watch if Mr. or Mrs. ------ took anything down out of the "chimbly." "'Nif they do, and tear'n abroad, they can't never hurt thee no more." After many questions he was taken back into the house again, and in a short time he saw Mrs. ------ take an image down from the chimney. "'was a mommet thing, and he knowd 'twas a-made vor he." He saw that the feet of the little figure were stuck full of pins and thorns! As soon as he found out that the thing was destroyed, he went off again to farmer ------'s, because his feet got well directly, and he knew they could not work harm a second time.

Fifteen years ago, at a town in Devonshire, lived for many years an unmarried woman, the mother of several children. The woman left, and a neighbour searching about the house found, in the chimney as usual, onions stuck thickly with pins, and also a figure made unmistakably to represent das mannliche Glied, into which also were stuck a large number of pins. The people who crowded to see these things had no doubt whatever as to their being intended for a certain man who kept a little shop near, and had been known as a visitor of this woman, who thus vented her spite upon him.

The names of the parties to all these stories are known to me, and the "Conjurer" up to his death a few years ago occupied a cottage belonging to my father.

The pins in an onion are believed to cause internal pains, and those in the feet or other members are to injure the parts represented, while pins in the heart are intended to work fatally; thus a distinct gradation of enmity can be gratified.

^55:81 Letter from Mr. J. L. W. Page (Author of Explorations of Dartmoor, Exmoor, etc.), October 20, 1890.

^56:82 W. F. Rose, Somerset and Dorset Notes and Queries, vol. iv. part xxvi. p. 77 (1894).

^56:83 Those whose profession is to counter-charm and to discover witchcraft are white witches or "wise men," or more commonly "conjurers." They are usually, but not always, men.

^56:84 H. S. in the Spectator, Feb. 17, 1894, p. 232.

[p. 57]

In all the foregoing instances, it will be noted that the hearts or onions were to be scorched either by being actually thrown on the fire or by being placed in the chimney, where they would be exposed to much heat. The inside of the clavel beam would be a particularly hot place. A specimen of the same kind of heart as Fig. 5, at Oxford (Pitt Rivers Museum), has also a large nail through it, to fasten it to the wooden clavel.

^57:85 Mrs. Gaskell in Nineteenth Century, Feb. 1894, p. 264.

This, however, is somewhat wide of our subject, and belongs rather to the widely-extended belief in holy wells and sacred springs. (For full information on this subject, see Mackinlay, Folk Lore of Scottish Lochs and Springs, 1894.)

^58:86 In the same case are to be seen one or two other hearts of the same character as Figs. 4 and 5, though less perfect as specimens.

^58:87 Petronius, Sat. 131. Story, Castle of S. Angelo, p. 211. Jahn, etc., p. 42, says: "Bunte Faden spielten bei allen Zauberwesen eine grosse Rolle," and gives numerous references to classics and scholiasts.

^59:88 Persius, Sat. ii. 31. There is also a very common practice both in England and elsewhere of tying a bunch of many-coloured ribbons to horses' heads. "During the panic caused in Tunis by the cholera some extraordinary remedies were eagerly run after by the populace." Among others one woman "sold bits of coloured ribbon to be pinned on the clothes of those who were anxious to escape the epidemic" (Hygiene, Nov. 17, 1893, p. 938).

^59:89 On this subject see Sacred Wells in Wales, by Professor Rhys, read before the Cwmrodorian Society, January 11, 1893.

^60:90 Compare this with the many examples of sending away various diseases by hanging articles on trees, giver, by Dr. Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. ii. p. 137.

^61:91 The True Preserver and Restorer of Health, by G. Hartman, Chymist, 1695, servant of Sir Kenelm Digby.

^62:92 See "Crying the Neck," Transactions Devon Association, 1891.

^63:93 At the Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford, are many specimens of this Harvest figure from several parts of the world. Particularly several "Kirn babies" from Scotland, made from the last of the corn cut, and thus supposed to contain the corn spirit. Though not precisely alike in form, they are exactly analogous in motive to the "Neck" of Devon and West Somerset. Upon "Kirn babies," Brand fell into the error that Kirn meant corn, from similarity of sound. The word really means churn, and is precisely analogous to kirk and church. At harvest time in Scotland there has always been a great churning of butter for the festival, and hence the Kirn has developed into the name for the festival itself. Baby is but the old English name for a doll or "image," as Brand recognised. Therefore the Kirn baby has nothing to do with the word corn, but means a "Harvest-festival doll." Theories built up upon its meaning corn-maiden, are without any foundation except that of connection with the end of harvest. No doubt these figures are made from the last of the corn, and do represent the spirit of vegetation, but their signification is by no means implied in their Scotch name. Mr. Frazer (Golden Bough, vol. i. p. 344) has therefore been misled by Brand. See N. E. Dict. s.v. "Corn-Baby."

^63:94 See Brand, vol. i. p. 226 et seq.

^63:95 Elton, Origins of English History, 2nd ed. p. 282.

^64:96 Martin, Description of Western Islands, quoted by Elton, Orig. p. 282.

^64:97 In ancient Greece, "on the fifth day after the birth, the midwives, having first purified themselves by washing their hands, ran round the fire hearth with the infant in their arms, thereby, as it were, entering it into the family" (Potter, Archaeol. Graec. vol. ii. p. 322).

^64:98 Rhys, Welsh Philology, p. 10.

^64:99 Kemble, Saxons in England, vol. i. p. 360, has a long note on this act in Perthshire during the present century, and also in Devonshire.

^64:100 We refer to these fires later on, but they were undoubtedly relics of sun-worship.

"In Munster and Connaught a bone (probably the representative of the former sacrifice) must be burnt in them (Baal fires). In many places sterile beasts and human beings are passed through the fire. As a boy I with others jumped through the fire 'for luck,' none of us knowing the original reason. "--Kinahan, Folk-Lore Record, vol. iv. 1881, quoted Notes and Queries, 8th ser. v. 433.

^65:101 Elton, Origins of English History, p. 276.

^65:102 Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. ii. p. 387.

^66:103 Selden says: "'Tis in the main allowed that the heathens did in general look towards the east when they prayed, even from the earliest ages of the world."

^66:104 Potter, vol. i. pp. 223, 224. Upon the subject of "Bowing towards the Altar" much is said in Brand, vol. ii. pp. 317-324 (Bohn, 1882).

^67:105 Lumboltz, Among Cannibals, 1889, p. 276.

^67:106 Brugsch, Egypt under the Pharaohs, vol. ii. p. 412, 2nd ed. 1881,

^67:107 The facts given here are those observed, and those related on the spot traditionally. It is however clear that although this temple may have been truly orientated by Rameses for the day of his great battle, yet that date could not then have corresponded with the present season of February 24, owing to the precession of the equinox. Upon this subject see Norman Lockyer in The Dawn of Astronomy, reviewed in the Times, February 2, 1894.

^68:108 As we proceed we shall see other striking examples of this eclecticism of modern Christianity, and a lesson of tolerance may well be learnt from the spectacle.

^69:109 Potter, vol. i. pp. 224, 261.

^69:110 Ibid. vol. i. pp. 262, 263.

^70:111 Mead, Proceed. Som. Arch. and Nat. Hist. Soc. vol. xxxviii. p. 362, 1892. Also F. T. Elworthy in Spectator, February 5, 1887. The tree itself about which this notice in the Spectator was written is now in the Somerset Archaeological Society's Museum at Taunton.

^70:112 First Report of Committee on Ethnographical Survey of the United Kingdom (Sec. H, British Association), 1893, p. 15.

^70:113 Potter, vol. i. p. 265.

^72:114 D. Porter, Journal of a Cruise in the Pacific, vol. ii. p. 188. Dawson, Australian Aborigines, tells other stories of this nature.

Frazer, Golden Bough, vol. i. p. 198, gives many references to authors who have recounted instances of this common belief.

^73:115 Dawson, Australian Aborigines, p. 54.

^73:116 Here we have another link in that remarkable chain of beliefs so ably demonstrated by Dr. Tylor, at the British Association meeting, 1894, in his lecture on the "Distribution of Mythical Beliefs as evidence in the History of Culture," which seems also to prove the common parentage of widely-separated races. The ultimate relationship of the Nagas of Assam, with the Australian aborigines, through migration by way of Formosa, Sumatra, and the Indian Archipelago, is traced by Mr. Peal in "Fading Histories," Journ. Asiatic Soc. of Bengal, lxiii. part iii. No. 1, 1894.

^73:117 Lumholtz, Among Cannibals, 1889, p. 280.

^77:118 Prof. Rhys, "Welsh Fairies," art. in Nineteenth Century, Oct. 1891, p. 566. Cf. also remark on Herbert River natives, p. 73.

^77:119 Jorio, Mimica degli Antichi, p. 92.

^78:120 Lumholtz, Among Cannibals, p. 279.

^78:121 Bastian, Die Volker des ostlichen Asien, v. 455.

^78:122 Torreblanca, De Magia, ii. 49.

^79:123 Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. i. p. 94 et seq. gives a number of very remarkable instances of foundation sacrifices from all parts of the world as for instance, quite in modern times even in our own possessions in the Punjaub--the only son of a widow was thus sacrificed. But perhaps the strangest account of all is that of several willing victims, making the story of Quintus Curtius seem quite commonplace.

^79:124 Baring-Gould, art. "On Foundations," in Murray's Magazine, March 1887, pp. 365, 367. Tylor tells the same story, op. cit. i. 94.

^79:124a These stories are sifted and disproved in The Immuring of Nuns, by the Rev. H. Thurston, S.J., Catholic Truth Society, 1st ser. p. 125; but he by no means controverts facts relating to long antecedent beliefs.

^80:124b For authorities see Note [*124], p. 79.

^81:125 Robertson Smith, art. "Sacrifice," in Ency. Brit.

^82:125a Robertson Smith, art. "Sacrifice," in Ency. Brit.

^82:126 Schmidt, Das Volksleben der Neugriechen, p. 196 et seq. Frazer, Golden Bough, vol. i. p. 145, also quotes as above, and gives many other authorities, See also Baring-Gould, Murray's Magazine, March 1887, p. 373.

^83:127 Dyer, English Folk Lore, p. 277.

^84:128 Dyer, English Folk Lore, p. 109. Folk-Lore Journal, vol. iii. p. 281.

^84:129 Punjaub Notes and Queries, vol. ii. p. 906, quoted by Frazer.

^85:129a The recorder of this story doubtless gives the facts correctly; but his rendering of the dialect is quite literary.

^85:130 A. H. S. Landor, Alone with the Hairy Ainu, p. 13

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 87]

 

CHAPTER III

 

TOTEMS, PORTENTS, TREE-WORSHIP

A BELIEF so strong, so universal, so founded on fear, as that connected with fascination, would naturally in the earliest days of humanity have led to the study and search for means to baffle or to counteract its dreaded effects. The causes of most kinds of evil, indeed of all that could not be easily accounted for by the senses, were set down to the supernatural action of invisible but malignant spirits which in one form or other were worshipped as divinities. Without going far into the field of primitive religion or of pagan mythology, it becomes abundantly evident that more thought was bestowed upon propitiating the angry or the destructive deities, than in the worship of those whose attributes were beneficent; we find that fear and dread have in all human history been more potent factors in man's conduct than hope and gratitude or love. Even the earliest records of worship in our ancient Scriptures point in the same direction. The sacrifices of Abel and of Cain were, we imagine, more propitiatory of an offended power, than as thank-offerings in grateful remembrance of blessings received. It is true we hear later of acts of devotion by way of acknowledgment and in gratitude for mercies bestowed, but they were the

[p. 88]

result of an express command, recognising man's innate weakness of fear, rather than the outcome of spontaneous thanksgiving. Our very words, to atone for sins, atoning sacrifice, imply acts to appease, to submit, to propitiate anger, to avoid the punishment due to offences.

As men degenerated from the monotheistic sun-worship, every power and attribute of nature became personified; even Time became Chronos the destroyer, the avenger, the Saturn of the Romans with his scythe, who ate up his own children; and in our day is the personification of Death the terrible. Zeus or Jupiter, the king of heaven, the giver of all his blessings and miseries to man, was generally represented as the holder of the thunderbolts, whose wrath had to be appeased. The stories of the various metamorphoses of Jove into a swan, a bull, a satyr or goat, do but carry back the later, even the present superstitions, as to the power of uncanny persons to assume animal shapes. Juno, too, the Queen of the Gods, though often a protectress and benefactress, was on the whole more dreaded than beloved, and was the very type of jealousy and spite. A sow and a ewe lamb were the offerings she most accepted, and these animals were consequently sacred to her, as representing or symbolising her attributes. Surely we may conclude that in the witch lore of today the misfortune of a sow crossing the path implies the envious anger likely to be felt and displayed by somebody towards the person to whom Juno exhibits herself in this guise. Certain objects and certain animals seem by primaeval habit to have been sacrificed as propitiatory offerings to the various deities who were supposed to watch over, for good or for

[p. 89]

evil, the doings of mankind. Moreover certain other objects or animals were supposed to partake of their special natures, and hence were held to be especially under their protection, and to be their particular favourites. Consequently these became sacred, and like the modern totems [*131] of many savages, or the sacred animals of India, must on no account be killed or molested. [*132]

In early days no doubt the swan was the totem of some tribe, and being also the most famous metamorphosis of Jupiter, it would naturally follow that this bird should be held specially sacred. The Irish saga shows the strength of the belief:--

	 
		Then was it Erin's sons, listening that cry,
		 Decreed: "The man who slays a swan shall die." [*133]
		
		 [paragraph continues] "Lir" was an ocean-god of both Ireland and Britain. According to Irish romance, the children of Lir were turned into swans by enchantment; and the men of Erin were so grieved at their departure, that they made a law and proclaimed it throughout the land, that no one should kill a swan in Erin from

[p. 90]

that time forth. In Welsh histories he appears as "Lear." [*134]

Totemism cannot after all be so very savage a cult, for we are told by Mr. G. L. Gomme [*135] that various animals are still held sacred in Britain. Among these he places the seal, wolf, fowl, cat, hare, magpie, butterfly, Sparrow, swan, raven, and otter. To these we should add many others which sentimentally are held to be sacred by various individuals, such as the wren, robin, swallow, lady-bird, bat, cuckoo, dog, fox, horse, swine, salmon, goose, cow, toad, deer. [*135a] "The robin (in Irish, the spiddoge) is, as is well known, a blessed bird, and no one, no matter how wild or cruel, would kill or hurt one, partly from love, partly from fear. They believe if they killed a robin a large lump would grow on the palm of their right hand, preventing them from working and from hurling. It is fear alone, however, that saves a swallow from injury, for it is equally well known that every swallow has in him three drops of the devil's blood." [*136] In Somerset much the same notion still exists. [*137]

[p. 91]

The root idea of totemism seems to be that whatever connection there may be, either in character or temper, between a person and his totem, is of benefit to both sides. Hence the totem becomes the man's protector, and the man will not kill or injure his totem. The totem is not a fetish to be worshipped like an idol: it includes a whole class of objects like the whole family of wolves or bears; it is not often inanimate, and very rarely artificial. It may belong to an entire class, or to one sex in the tribe, but not to the other: again it may belong to an individual without passing to his descendants. Members of the same totem may not intermarry.

How strong all these so-called savage beliefs still are may be seen almost on the surface of things. Who can doubt that the prohibition of certain marriages between persons having no blood kinship, however canonical, is after all the outcome of this belief in some indescribable, impalpable relationship described politely as affinity, but among the uncivilised as totemism; such, for instance, as that between god-parents, or between a man and his wife's kin? Surely it is pure totemism which in Shropshire makes it unlucky to kill a bat, and elsewhere, as here in Somerset, to kill a swallow, wren, or robin.

The belief in the owl's hooting being a death portent

[p. 92]

is very widely extended, and it is said to be unlucky to shoot an owl. [*137a] Even among the Australian natives the kokok or great owl is a bird of ill omen: "It smells death in the camp, and visits the neighbourhood of a dying person, calling Kokok! Kokok!" [*138] The "bad spirit" also is said to employ owls to watch for him; hence owls are birds of ill omen, and hated accordingly. When one is heard hooting, the children immediately crawl under their grass mats. [*139]

In Tonquin every village chooses its guardian spirit (or totem), often in the form of an animal, as a dog, tiger, cat, or serpent. Sometimes a living person is selected as the patron divinity. Thus a beggar persuaded the people of a village that he was their guardian spirit, so they loaded him with honours and entertained him with their best. [*140] The names of many Irish kings are said to be taken from their totems, and instances are given of the wearing of dresses to imitate curious animals on particular festival days. [*141]

Almost all savage beliefs are nowadays traced back by the savants to totemism. Why then should not the origin of similar ones held by refined and educated people be stretched back a little, so as to cover the time of their evolution from outward or undisguised savagery?

[p. 93]

Where is the family in which some member does not believe in luck, or fatalism, in the dire calamity to follow the spilling of salt, in "thirteen at dinner" foreboding death? Whose heart has not beat at the sound of the death-watch? Where is the house which is not considered lucky to have a swallow's nest under the eaves, but especially against a window? Does not every household contain some one who dreads to hear an owl hoot, or a raven croak? Since this was written we have read in the papers of the heroic doings of the "Thirteen Club," who bravely defy the terrors which their very buffoonery shows they acknowledge. Their splendid temerity is well matched by their singular ignorance, to which the Spectator and other journals did sufficient justice at the time. Did we not note the names of more than one acknowledged savant, among the famous "thirteen" group?

In all lands there is something more than mere dread of deadly animals. They are looked upon by human beings with that same sort of physical shrinking, that negative attraction, with which all wild creatures, familiar with his appearance, regard a man--they fly from him. The stoutest of us, even here in England, will admit an involuntary shock, at least a momentary flutter, when he suddenly perceives he was about to step on a viper. The same instinct unrestrained, is that which causes some silly women to shriek at the sight of a mouse in the room, as though a lion were in the path. We superior people flout the idea of superstition, or of anything akin to the belief that there is anything uncanny in venomous beasts, yet very often the writer has remarked that a sportsman will call the keeper to kill an

[p. 94]

adder, when a stroke from himself would have done it. Neither is it entire tenderness of heart which causes "my lady" to ring for Perks or the butler to kill the mouse. Mankind is the same everywhere at bottom, whether in Belgravia or in Uganda.

Hindoos especially hold the tiger in superstitious awe: many would not kill him if they could, nor are they always willing to show where he may be found, even when he has been killing their comrades or their cattle, from the fear that he may haunt them, or do them mischief, after he is dead. . . . In certain districts they will not pronounce his name. [*142]

They do the same as regards the wolf; but as a general rule they are glad that others should destroy both wolf and tiger, and make great rejoicing when either is killed. "All sorts of powers are ascribed to portions of the tiger after death: the fangs, the claws, the whiskers are potent charms, medicines, love philtres, or protectors against the evil eye, magic, disease or death. . . . It is difficult to preserve the skin of a tiger with claws and whiskers intact; the natives steal them if possible." Not only does this apply to tigers, but to lions, leopards, hyenas, cheetahs, wolves, jackals, wild dogs, and bears. "It is believed that these bears (Ursus labiatus) sometimes carry off women, hence perhaps one of their names, Adam-Zad." [*143]

Everywhere it is thought that the raven [*144] is a bird of ill omen, and in Scotland this is well expressed in

[p. 95]

the gilly's proverb: "Nae gude ever cam' o' killin' black craws."

The belief that bees have an affinity with the family of their owners is strongly held even now in Somerset. If a death occurs in the house to which the bees belong, they must be formally told of it before the corpse is carried away, or they will all die before the year is out. [*145] It is considered a death portent in the family if the bees in swarming should settle on a dead tree.

In Northampton [*146] if at a funeral the hearse has to be turned after the coffin is placed in it, it is a sure sign of another death in the family quickly to follow. Besides these portents, are the firm beliefs that certain objects used in a special way are not merely bad omens, but actual producers of death. For instance, here in Somerset it is steadfastly believed far and wide that "May"--the flower of the hawthorn--if brought into the house will cause death in it shortly. To put that common household implement the bellows on the table is equally fatal. The writer has known this to produce fright little short of convulsions in the "gudewife."

In some places the crowing of a hen, or rather the attempt, for it is at best only a poor and laughable imitation of her lord and master, is looked upon as foreboding ill-luck to the owner, and death is quickly dealt out to her in consequence; the idea being that taking her life will avert the impending trouble. On entering a farm-house in Somersetshire recently, I saw on the table a beautiful plump fowl, all picked and trussed ready for cooking, the farmer's wife explaining to me that her husband, seeing the hen in the yard in the act of crowing that morning, caught her at once, and then and there despatched her without

[p. 96]

delay, his prompt action in the matter proving how strong and firmly rooted was his belief in the superstition. [*147]

Mr. Gomme says that certain trees are English totems, that they are particularly identified with the life of certain animals; that in many places in Ireland, and also in Scotland, misfortunes which have happened to families are said to have been occasioned by the cutting down of trees.

The curious antipathy of many people, particularly the Scotch, to the cutting down of trees, not on account of their beauty, but from the feeling that it is unlucky, or that it will lead to misfortune to do so, may surely be traced to the ancient worship of trees. We find in Scripture abundant evidence of this. The very earliest mention of them lends a sort of inspiration to the tree of knowledge and the tree of life, planted in the garden of our first parents. Then before they became objects of idolatry we read how Abraham planted a tree (grove, in the A.V.) in Beersheba, which was evidently of special sanctity, for there he called on the name of the Lord (Gen. xxi. 33). Later on when the Israelites had come under Egyptian influence, trees became objects of direct idolatry; the planting of a grove of trees near the altar of the Lord was strictly forbidden, "Neither shalt thou set thee up any image, which the Lord thy God hateth" (Deut. xvi. 22). [*148]

[p. 97]

Among the ancient Egyptians [*149] many trees and plants were held to be specially sacred. The peach was sacred to Athor, and to Harpocrates; while the sycamore was sacred to Nut. The tamarisk, so common in Egypt, was a holy tree, from having been chosen to overshadow the sepulchre of Osiris; the chest containing his body was found by Isis lodged in its branches, when driven ashore by the waves. The legend is quite in accord with our own experience, for the tamarisk is almost the only tree which will grow by the sea, where salt spray can reach.

Garlic and onions were treated as gods by the Egyptians when taking an oath, says Pliny, [*150] while Juvenal satirises [*151] them for their veneration of these garden-born deities. The palm branch represented a year in ideographic writing. The ivy was called Chenosiris, or the plant of Osiris. [*152] Evergreens seem to have been special favourites in ancient times; among the Romans, the myrtle was sacred to Venus, [*153] and it was on this account that the myrtle had always to be excluded from the components of a maiden's wreath. The laurel and bay were sacred to Apollo, and the olive to Minerva. The pine has been held in reverence by many races. In ancient Greece it was sacred to Poseidon, Dionysos, and Zeus. It was especially the tree beloved of virgins. The Pinea Corona was the emblem of virginity which Daphne took from Chloe and placed upon her own head. Among the Romans the chaste Diana was crowned with a chaplet of pine. [*154]

[p. 98]

Clement of Alexandria mentions thirty-six plants dedicated to the genii who presided over the signs of the zodiac.

In classic days tree and plant worship was prevalent both in Greece and Italy. Pliny tells us that in the Forum at Rome there was a sacred fig-tree named ruminalis, which was worshipped from the time of Romulus down to his day, [*155] and dire consternation would have arisen if any evil had befallen it. Tacitus also speaks of this tree, while the writer can testify that it is still to be seen on the Forum, sculptured on one of the two remarkable monuments, said to have been erected by Trajan, each of which has the Sustaurovilia or Suovetaurilia on one of its sides. The tree appears in the bas-relief which commemorates the foundation of an orphanage. Another sacred tree in Rome grew on the Palatine, and whenever in a dry season this tree seemed to be drooping, Plutarch says a shout was raised, and people ran from all sides with pails of water as if to put out a fire. The story of Daphne being changed into a laurel-tree is all in keeping with this ancient faith. [*156]

[p. 99]

Uncivilised man all the world over, from the extreme east in Kamtschatka to the extreme west in the Rocky Mountains, has always believed that trees held not only living spirits, but that they were animate themselves.

Trees are regarded by some people as the body itself of a living being, and by others as the abode of a spirit, but in either case as capable of feeling, and hence they must not be cut down or injured. In Livonia there is a sacred grove, where it is believed that if any man cuts down a tree, or even breaks a branch, he will die within the year. The tree spirit had always to be appeased before the wood could be cut. In ancient Rome, before thinning out trees, a pig had to be sacrificed to the deity of the grove.

One remarkable and widespread belief regarding trees was that certain kinds had the power of granting easy delivery to women. In Sweden there was a sacred tree near every farm, which no one was allowed to touch, not even to pluck a single leaf. The women used to clasp this tree

[p. 100]

with their arms during pregnancy to ensure easy delivery. [*157]

The same thing is done in Congo, and the women also make themselves garments from the bark of their sacred tree, because they believe that it will deliver them from the peril of childbirth.

How old this belief is, may be seen from the Greek story of Leto, that when about to give birth to Apollo and Artemis, she clasped a palm and an olive, or, according to some, two laurels, that she might obtain painless delivery.

It is still believed that certain trees have the power of producing fertility; moreover the exact converse has been believed in all ages regarding other plants. Among the ancient Greeks and Romans it was firmly held that certain plants had the property of rendering women pregnant. In Turkestan, the Kirjiz women, if barren, roll themselves on the ground under a solitary apple-tree in order to obtain offspring. This ancient faith in the fertilising power of the tree spirit is shown still in the common custom in many parts of Europe of placing a green branch on May Day before the house of a sweetheart. A similar custom is placed to the account of the Irish: "they fancy a green bough of a tree fastened on May Day against the house will produce plenty of milk." In Germany also peasants set up May-trees, one for each horse or cow, before the stable doors, in order that the cows may give more milk.

Moreover, May Day customs have always been accompanied by much dancing, which has been held to have a mystic meaning in connection with fertility,

[p. 101]

but somewhat outside our subject, as treated for the general reader.

Most of our May Day festivities if traced to their ultimate origin will be found to be branches of tree-worship, and to lead to the old faith, typified by the death of the spirit of vegetation, and its resuscitation in the spring. The harvest wail in our "Crying the Neck" to-day, the Manerus or Linos of the ancient Greeks, the "Dirge of Isis" of the still dimmer antiquity, alike point to the central belief of humanity that the deity should be slain and die that he might rise again to give life to man. The joyous shout following the wail in all these cases typifies the gladness of the world at the revival of the dead god, just as the May Day rejoicings all over the temperate part of the northern hemisphere commemorate the spring, or the uprising of dead vegetation.

This must be the true meaning of all those curious customs of which Brand, Hone, and others' give so many particulars. If such were doubtful, it is proved by the fact that in more northern latitudes, where vegetation is much later in the season, all these rites are postponed. In Sweden they setup their Maj Stanger on St. John's Eve (June 23), with elaborate decorations of leaves and flowers, round which they dance. They have also large bonfires like the Beltan fires, to be danced around and jumped over. In some parts of Bohemia also the pole is set up on Midsummer Eve, and like bonfire customs are observed there, together with much climbing of the pole by the men, after the garlands and ribbons fixed to it by the maidens. All these things are said to have typical relation to subjects nearly akin to the revival of vegetation,

[p. 102]

and to many grosser rites, that can be no more than hinted at in these pages. [*158]

The Congo natives place calabashes of water under certain trees, that the tree spirit may drink when thirsty. In parts of India a marriage ceremony is performed between trees, as between human beings; while in the Moluccas, [*159] clove-trees in blossom are treated like pregnant women. No loud noise must be made nor anything done to frighten the tree, lest she should drop her fruit like the untimely deliverance of a woman. This same idea of pregnancy is held with regard to rice in bloom, by the Javanese, and in Orissa. Red Indians of North America and old Austrian peasants are equally averse to cutting down green trees, from the belief that they are animate, and feel wounds as acutely as a man himself The Mundaris [*160] in Assam have a sacred grove near every village, and the grove deities are held responsible for the crops; at all great agricultural festivals they are especially honoured.

Philippine Islanders believe the souls of their fathers to dwell in certain trees, and cut them only on compulsion.

Among the Bechuanas the blackthorn is held sacred, and it is a very serious offence to cut a bough from it and carry it into the village during the rainy season; but when the corn is ripe they go and cut a branch, which each man brings back. [*161] The juniper is much venerated, according to De Gubernatis, in Italy and in Northern Germany,

[p. 103]

as a protector against evil spirits. "Frau Wachholder," the juniper spirit, is invoked to discover thieves by bending down certain of the branches. There are many Italian stories and legends about the juniper in connection with Our Lady, who was hidden by one in her flight, and who blessed it in consequence. In Italy branches of juniper are hung up at Christmas just as the holly is in England, France, and Switzerland. "In the sacred cemetery at Meccah, the aloe, here as in Egypt, is hung like the dried crocodile over houses as a talisman against evil spirits." [*162]

Of all trees, the oak seems to be the sacred one par excellence of the Aryan people in those latitudes where it grows. It certainly ranked first among the holy trees of the Germans, and was indeed their chief god; distinct traces of its worship have survived almost to the present day. To the ancient inhabitants of Italy the oak was sacred above all other trees. The image of Jupiter Capitolinus at Rome was nothing but a natural oak-tree, according to Livy. The Greeks worshipped Zeus as residing in the sacred oak at Dodona, and the rustling of its leaves was his voice. The civic crown of the Romans was of oak; and a chaplet of oak was the reward of eminent services rendered to the State. Acorns having been the staple food of man till Demeter introduced corn, boughs of oak were carried in her mysteries at Eleusis. The Druids all consenting pitched on the most beautiful oak-tree, cut off its side branches, and then joined two of them to the highest part of the trunk, so that they extended

[p. 104]

themselves on either side like the arms of a man this was the Thau or God. [*163]

Frazer [*164] says the presumption is that in the primitive fire festivals, the essential feature was the burning of a man who represented the tree spirit, and that the tree so represented was the oak. These sacred fires were of oak kindled by the "needfire," which was always produced by the friction of two pieces of wood, and these pieces, among Celts, Germans, and Slavs, were always of oak. [*165] In Scotland until quite modern times the Beltein, [*166] or Baal's fire as it is (wrongly) called, was kept up in Ayr on St. Peter's Day, and in Perth on May Day; in Northumberland and Cumberland at Midsummer, and in Ireland, known as La Beal-tine, on May Day. The first of May is called in Irish La Beal-tine, "that is, the day of Beal's fire." Beal and Phoenician Baal are said to be one and the same deity--the sun. [*167] Another writer [*168] says: "On St. John's Eve, the 23rd of June, still may be seen a few bonfires on the mountains; in the old days they blazed on every hill and in every farm. No field was fruitful into which a burning brand had not been thrown, no horse or cow which had not been touched by fire on that night." The date

[p. 105]

here does not accord with other accounts, though the custom is abundantly recorded.

Here in Britain we all believe in the sacred groves of our Druid forefathers, whose worship is said to have always been under an oak. The Saxons held their meetings under an oak, and there are endless stories connected with that tree, all of which may be said to be kept alive by our still commemorating the 29th of May as "Oak Apple Day," with boughs of oak--a notable example of popular inaccuracy. The date of the Restoration being perpetuated by the memory of King Charles's escape on quite a different occasion. We are too apt to forget that besides King Charles's oak, all this tree-worship is in our very midst, and is kept up to this day. What is the old Christmas custom of wassailing the apple-trees, which the writer himself has often heard going on, but a worship, a pouring out of a libation to the tree spirit? [*169]

In the typical representation of "plenty" known to all Freemasons, we have in the "ear of corn near a fall of water," not only a reminder of the ancient worship of the spirit of vegetation, symbolised by the corn, but also another example of association of ideas with facts--the dramatic representation of the desired result. The corn irrigated by the water from this point of view is a singularly appropriate symbol of abundance.

Our Scandinavian forefathers were less acquainted

[p. 106]

with the oak. With them the ash, Igdrasil, the tree of life, was especially sacred. We find the survival of this amongst ourselves in the passing of a child afflicted with congenital hernia through a growing ash, [*170] always an ash, with certain formulae connected with sunrise and Sunday, by which a new-born life is typified. [*171] Several instances of this cure are recorded in the Gentleman's Magazine for 1804, p. 909. The writer of these says the rupture returns whenever the tree is cut down. Other beliefs are still entertained respecting the ash in various parts of England. The following evidently relates to Warwickshire: "Tom was in a state of as blank unimaginativeness concerning the cause and tendency of his sufferings, as if he had been an innocent shrew-mouse imprisoned in the split trunk of an ash-tree in order to cure lameness in cattle." [*172]

The old west country custom of burning an ashen faggot on Christmas Eve points to the sacredness of the ash. From it, an old Norse tradition says that man was first formed. It is believed that idols were made from it: "He planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it. . . And the residue thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image" (Isaiah xliv. 14-17). Hence probably was developed our Christmas custom, which is no less

[p. 107]

than the burning of Igdrasil, the tree of life, emblematical of the death of vegetation at the winter solstice. It is supposed that misfortune will certainly fall on the house where the burning is not kept up, while, on the other hand, its due performance is believed to lead to many benefits. The faggot must be bound with three or more "binds" or withes, and one or other of these is chosen by the young people. The bind which first bursts in the fire shows that whoever chose it will be first to be married. Hence at the breaking of each bind the cider cup goes round to pledge the healths first of the lucky ones and afterwards of "our noble selves," etc. [*173]

The old idea of a spirit residing in trees is expanded into one embracing all vegetation. Hence the corn spirit, which the Romans worshipped as the goddess Ceres, was a cult which still exists unconsciously at our very doors. The little plaited ears of corn hung up in a farmhouse kitchen, which the writer has seen within the past few days (December 1893), speak of the slaying of a divinity, such as the Egyptian Osiris, and of the subsequent resurrection of the life-giving corn. [*174]

The remarkable similarity in customs all over Europe points to the conclusion that tree-worship was once an important element in the early religion of mankind, especially of the Aryan stock, and that the singular uniformity of the rites and ceremonies which can easily be shown to exist in widely separated countries, fully warrants us in believing that they have not much changed from very remote

[p. 108]

ages, and that the practices continued down to a very recent period by peasantry, some even among ourselves, were substantially identical with the same rites and ceremonies observed by Egyptians, Etruscans, Greeks and Romans. [*175]

In further reference to trees and plants it should be noted, that there is a strange and very remarkable antipathy as well as sympathy amongst certain of them, just as there is between certain animals. The laurel is said to be fatal to rosemary and the vine: the cabbage will not grow under either vine or olive. We all know that the fir will not grow with the elm; that hardly anything will grow under the beech. On the other hand, the vine and the poplar have a special affinity; so has the mushroom for the chestnut, and rue for the fig. Between the oak and the olive there exists a hatred so inveterate, that transplanted, either of them, to a site previously occupied by the other, they will die. [*176]

The same attraction or repulsion is very evident between certain animals and reptiles, and still more is this the case as between some men and some animals. Man and beast alike have an inborn repugnance to snakes; "dog-and-cat life" is a common description of habitual domestic squabbling. Some persons cannot endure cats, and the very presence of a cat, even if not seen, throws them into convulsions. Bats, too, have the like effect upon certain people. An Italian physician, Antonio

[p. 109]

[paragraph continues] Vallisneri, relates a curious instance of this kind. He shut up a bat in a box which he placed in the room of his patient, who on entering, though utterly ignorant of the presence of the bat, was immediately seized with convulsions, which continued until the bat was removed. Those of us who have visited tombs and ruins where many bats live, can more readily accept this story, from the peculiar and pungent odour they emit.

Antipathy and sympathy among men and women have existed from the beginning, and create a feeling we cannot call mere prejudice, viewed from either side of the attraction we now call fascination.

	 
		Non amo te, Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare;
		   Hoc tantum possum dicere--non amo te! [*177]
		
		 is but the old-world form of our modern

	 
		I do not love you, Dr. Fell!
		 The reason why, I cannot tell
		 But this alone I know full well,
		 I do not love you, Dr. Fell.
		
		 Many authors from Plato and Aristotle down to Descartes and William Hazlitt have written upon this subject, which may be said to fall within the scope of fascination, although here we have only space to hint at it.

On reflecting upon all the strange cults and practices in connection with the annual death and resurrection of the spirit of vegetation we are struck by the apparent repetition of the same old idea of the slaying and the resurrection of a god, figured in the ancient Egyptian myth of Osiris preserved on the wall at Philae; in the very remarkable cult of Diana Nemorensis, wherein her priest was slain

[p. 110]

by his successor after he had plucked the golden bough; and in our own familiar custom of "crying the neck," already referred to.

Mr. Frazer has worked out at considerable length and with striking force, the belief which seems to lie deep down in the heart of man, inherited from his very earliest ancestors, that not only was a human victim a fitting, but a necessary object for sacrifice, whether to atone for past offences or to propitiate for future favours. The faith of Abraham was tested in a way evidently familiar, and not apparently shocking or unreasonable according to the customs of his day. The killing of a substitute for a god, [*178] may be observed in many of the human sacrificial rites performed by savage or semi-savage people. The view that the victim is also an embodiment of the spirit of the deity to be slain, is shown by the great pains taken "to secure a physical correspondence between him and the natural object," whose spirit or embodiment he is made to represent. Thus the Mexicans killed young victims for the young corn, and old ones for the ripe. The full identification of the victim with the corn spirit or deity is shown by the African custom of putting him to death with spades and hoes, and by the Mexican, of grinding him like corn between two stones.

Stranger still, the same author shows plainly and at great length the custom of sacramental eating the representative body of the slain god to be prevalent as the survival of a cult long anterior to Christianity.

Not only did the Pawnee chief devour the heart of the Sioux girl, slain as a sacrificial offering, but

[p. 111]

other savages ate the victim's flesh not as cannibals, but as a sacred rite. Even in pious Sweden the flour from the grain of the last sheaf, supposed to contain the corn spirit, is baked into a loaf in the shape of a girl, which is divided amongst the whole household and eaten by them. In Scotland, too, the last sheaf is made up into a female form and is called "the Maiden," but we are told nothing as to its being eaten in any special way--it is rather kept; but everywhere the eating of a loaf made from the last sheaf is certainly thought to be eating the god of the corn. At La Palisse, in France, moreover, the dough man, made of the last of the corn, cut at the end of harvest, is actually broken in pieces by the mayor and given to the people to eat.

The custom of eating bread sacramentally as the body of a god was practised by the Aztecs before the discovery and conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards. A long account of the ceremonies used is given by Acosta (Hakluyt Society); and another writer (Bancroft) gives further details of this rite, especially how a priest took a flint-tipped dart, and hurled it into the breast of the dough image, piercing it through and through. This was called "killing the god Huitzilopochtli, so that his body might be eaten." The image was divided into minute pieces, one of which every male, even down to the babe in the cradle, received to eat, but no woman might taste a morsel. The ceremony was called torqualo, that is "God is eaten." Mr. Frazer also produces evidence of sacramental eating of bread as practised by ancient Romans at Aricia, near Albano, and traces the custom of eating animals and men by various races,

[p. 112]

in the belief that the eater acquires the physical, moral, and intellectual qualities of the animal or man so eaten.

There can be no doubt of the totem origin of the ritual of sacrificial offerings, especially that of eating the slain god. "The victim is not only slain, but the worshippers partake of the body and blood of the victim, so that his life passes into their life, and knits them to the deity in living communion." [*179]

The same belief comes to us from Australia, where the cannibal aborigines consider that "the most delicate morsel of all is the fat about the kidneys. By eating this they believe that they acquire part of the slain person's strength, and so far as I could understand, this was even more true of the kidneys themselves. For according to a widespread Australian belief, the kidneys are the centre of life." [*180] The natives on Herbert River are particularly fond of the fat of a dead foe, which is not only eaten as a delicacy and as strengthening food, but is also carried as an amulet.

In the north-east of Burmah are mountain tribes who eat the congealed blood of their enemies. "The blood is poured into bamboo reeds, corked up, and in course of time hardens. When the chief wants to treat his friends to this kind of food, the reed is broken and the contents devoured with the greatest relish." The natives believe that they "will thereby acquire the courage and strength of their enemies." [*181]

In further support of this idea, an authentic story comes from India, [*181a] where it is very firmly believed

[p. 113]

that the flesh eaten imparts to the eater the fierceness or other qualities of the animal so consumed.

Mr. Evans, a Wesleyan missionary, who has been living in the Kassia hills, but who has evidently no knowledge of native religions, relates that the people there are primitive and old-world in their beliefs, although it appears that he has a considerable flock who have adopted Christianity. Not long since, a certain Captain Crawley, who was on a visit, heard that a goat had been killed by a tiger close to the village. After the usual preparations he shot the tiger, whereupon the natives asked to have the flesh given to them; this was agreed to on condition that he should have the skin and head. The people (we presume the men) then took the carcase and made a hearty meal off it. On the following day, being Sunday, they attended Mr. Evans's chapel, and he was at once aware of the overpowering odour from the people's breath--so much so that he was obliged to adjourn to the open air, but even there he had to conduct his service with much discomfort.

Among Mr. Evans's congregation was a milkman, to whom of course the cows were quite accustomed. On that Sunday morning however, on going to milk his cows, they became instantly frantic, and the usually docile creatures burst from their fastenings and rushed away, They would not permit their own attendant to come near them, and had to be milked by another man who did not smell of tiger. It does not appear that these people liked tiger meat, but it seems to have been eaten under the impression that it would make them strong and fierce, by the absorption into their bodies of the tiger qualities through

[p. 114]

eating his flesh; and looking at the fact that Hindoos hold the tiger in awe as the embodiment of a deity, they were performing a sort of sacramental rite, which their adoption of Christianity by no means tended to modify or to influence.

There is nothing uncommon in the notion that the flesh of oxen gives strength and courage, while that of sheep does not. This is said to be the reason why our soldiers and sailors are fed on beef and seldom taste mutton.

We are thus brought to see that some of the most sacred and mysterious rites of our religious faith have had their beginning in the beliefs and customs of those we now call pagans, and that these crude though firm ideas, planted in the heart of primaeval man, have but been purified, purged from their gross accretions, and adapted to our still imperfect intelligence, as suitable to the limited vision of our humanity. So far from investigations of this nature tending to injure or to lower our convictions of the truth, or the reality of Revelation, the veil seems to be somewhat lifted, to enable us to see how consistent and prearranged is the divine plan to meet the usages and forms of thought implanted in the human breast. The various types, allegories, and parables, whereby we are instructed in Holy Scripture, are but adaptations of that innate association of ideas with facts, which seems to have been one of the very earliest creations of man's reasoning faculties.

Footnotes

^89:131 The word "totem" is North-American Indian, almost unchanged. Among the Algonquins dodaim is their name for their tribe-animal or totem, and hence the term has been adopted by ethnologists everywhere to express the idea (Tylor, Prim. Cult. ii. 213). Ogilvie spells it Totam.

^89:132 "The term totem signifies the device of a gens or tribal division; it may be an animal or a vegetable, or any natural object or phenomenon, or even a mere quality. The nature of totemism as a system is shown by the fact that among the Australians the totem is the symbol of a group of kinsmen. It is thus equivalent to a family name, and it is properly defined as a 'badge of fraternity,' answering to the 'device of a gens.' . . . The gens is founded on two chief conceptions, the bond of kin and non-intermarriage of persons belonging to the same gens. This obligation applies not only to human beings, but also to the totem group of objects which are regarded as sacred by the members of the gens, although they may be killed and eaten by persons not belonging to it. . . . The fundamental basis of totemism is to be found in the phase of human thought which supposes spirits to inhabit trees and groves, and to move in the winds and stars, and which personifies almost every phase of nature."--C. Stanisland Wake, "Definition of Totemism," British Association Report, 1887, p. 906.

^89:133 Foray of Queen Meave, p. 96, quoted in N. and Q. 8th ser. iv. p. 431.

^90:134 Elton, Origins of English History, 2nd edition, p. 279.

^90:135 "Lecture on Totemism," Standard, April 17, 1889.

^90:135a "There is a small black spider that often gets on clothes or hats; this is called a 'money spider,' and if you kill it you will be sure to suffer from the lack of the needful."--Choice Notes from N. and Q. ("Folk Lore") p. 164.

^90:136 Le Farm, Seventy Years of Irish Life, 1894, p. 41.

^90:137 "Hold a robin in veneration: to kill one is most unlucky. This bird is said to tap three times at the window before the death of any member of the family. Always take off your hat to a magpie, or at any rate bow respectfully to him, or evil will surely follow."--"Somerset Superstitions," in Somerset County Herald, Nov. 8, 1892. The magpie seems to be held everywhere as a portentous bird.

	 
		Augurs and understood relations have
		 By magot-pies and choughs and rooks brought forth
		 The secret'st man of blood.--Macbeth, Act iii. Sc. 4.
		
		 Nearly every district has its own special version of the omens to be interpreted by the numbers seen at any one time. Our Somerset one is--[p. 91]

	 
		One, sign o' anger; two, sign o' muth;
		 Dree, sign o' wedding-day; vower, sign o' death
		 Vive, sign o' zorrow; zix, sign o' joy;
		 Zebm, sign o' maid; an' eight, sign o' boy.
		
		 The belief that the magpie is the devil's own bird is no doubt the reason of the well-known custom alluded to above. Our vernacular "Always take off your hat to the devil," conveys the same notion, which may be considered as a free paraphrase of "A soft answer turneth away wrath," that is, disarms malignity, and so neutralises the baneful glance of an enemy's eye.

In Ireland (Le Fanu, op. cit. p. 104) it is lucky to see two pies, but unlucky to see one. This seems the universal belief.

^92:137a I have shot many owls, and have often "had bad luck." I scarcely attribute the bad luck to the owls.

^92:138 Dawson, Australian Aborigines, 1881, p. 52.

^92:139 Ibid. p. 50,

^92:140 Frazer, Golden Bough, vol. i. p. 40. Bastian, Die Volker des ostlichen Asien, vol. iv. p. 383.

^92:141 For a full and comprehensive review of totemism, see Frazer, Golden Bough, vol. ii. p. 337 et seq. For particulars of various gentes, with their customs, stories, legends, but especially for lists of birds, animals, and objects adopted as totems with their native names, see "Anthropological Report," British Association Report. 1889, p. 819 et seq.

^94:142 Sir Joseph Fayrer, "Deadly Wild Beasts of India," in Nineteenth Century, August 1889, p. 223.

^94:143 Ibid. p. 236.

^94:144

	 
		The owl shriek'd at thy birth,--an evil sign
		 The night-crow cried, aboding luckless time
		 Dogs howl'd, and hideous tempest shook down trees
		 The raven rook'd her on the chimney's top,
		 And chattering pies in dismal discords sung.
		                                  3 Henry VI. Act v. Sc. 6.
		
		 

^95:145 West Somerset Word-Book, p. 55; also Brand, vol. ii. p. 300; also "Superstitions," in Somerset County Herald, Nov. 8, 1892.

^95:146 Notes and Queries, Oct. 21, 1893, p. 328 (8th ser. iv.).

^96:147 Wellington Weekly News, June 13, 1889.

^96:148 It should be borne in mind that the word "grove" in the A.V. must not be always, nor indeed generally, taken in its present sense. Authorities agree that Jezebel's groves were idols of a special kind called Asherah in Hebrew. They were symbolic trees, of which several representations are preserved in Babylonish sculptures. The worship was particularly licentious and obscene. Full information may be found in Smith's Dict. of the Bible, s.v. "Asherah-Grove," and in Daremberg et Saglio, Dict. des Antiquites. Those who require more detailed particulars must consult books like Forlong's Rivers of Life, Inman's Ancient Faiths, Higgins's Anacalypsis, etc. The latter is a learned and very interesting book.

^97:149 Wilkinson, Ancient Egyptians, iii, 349; see also Ib. pp. 110, 131, 132.

^97:150 Nat. Hist. xix. 32. The inhabitants of Pelusium were devoted to the worship of the onion and garlic.

^97:151 Juvenal, Sat. xv.

^97:152 Plutarch, De Iside, s. 37.

^97:153 Pliny, Nat. Hist. xv. 35 (Bohn, vol. iii. p. 328).

^97:154 In Silesia (Cultus Arborum, privately printed 1890, p. 76). "Frau [p. 97] Fichte," the pine, is credited with great healing powers, and is believed to preserve animals from harm. Boughs of it are hung up on stable doors to keep off the evil spirits. In Bohemia, too, the pine kernel from the topmost cone is thought to make the eater invulnerable against shot. In other parts of Germany to tie a knot in the highest shoot of a pine-tree is a sovereign remedy for gout! (Doubtless!).

^98:155 Pliny, Nat. Hist. xv. 20 (Bohn, vol. iii. p. 3 10).

^98:156 Among the sacred trees and plants we cannot omit the large number which in a way are, even amongst ourselves, dedicated to or named after Our Lady. First are those into which the name enters, as in Marigold, Marsh Marigold, Rose Mary, Mary Buds (Calendula officinalis).

	 
		     Winking Mary-buds begin
		 To ope their golden eyes.--Cymbeline, Act ii. Sc. 3.
		
		 [paragraph continues] St. Mary's Seed (Sonchus Oleraceus, Sow thistle), Mary's Tears, or Sage of Bethlehem (Pulmonaria officinalis).

Then we have Lady Glove (Digitalis purpurea). This is very different from the Italian Guanto di nostra Signora.

[p. 99]

Our Lady's Cowslip, Our Lady's Cushion, Lady's Keys (Primula veris), called also in German Frauenschlussel.

Our Lady's Mantle (Alchemilla vulgaris).

Lady's Meat, Lady's Milk, Lady's Milkwort, Our Lady's Seal (Tamus communis), "Sigillum Sanctae Mariae."

Our Lady's Thistle (Carduus Marianus).

Virgin Mary's Candle (Verbascum Thapsus).

Virgin Mary's Cowslip and Virgin Mary's Milk-drops (Pulmonaria officinalis).

Virgin Mary's Pinch (Polygonum Persicaria).

Virgin's Bower (Clematis vitalba). With very many more. We do not of course include amongst these any plants which are not manifestly intended by their names to indicate the B.V.M. There are very many of these--such as Lady's Slipper, Lady's Garters, My Lady's Looking-glass--to be found in the old herbals, but more readily in Britten's Eng. Plant-Names (E. Dial. Soc.), or in Prior's Popular Names of British Plants.

^100:157 Mannhardt, Der Baumkultur der Germanen und ihrer Nachbarstamme, p. 51. For much information on this subject see Frazer, G. B. i. 74.

^102:158 Upon this subject see Forlong, Rivers of Life; Hargrave Jennings, Phallicism; Phallic Series; Payne Knight's Worship of Priapus, etc. etc.

^102:159 Frazer, Golden Bough, vol. i. p. 60 et seq. Much information is given and very many authorities are quoted.

^102:160 Dalton, Ethnology of Bengal, p. 188.

^102:161 J. Mackenzie, Ten Years North of the Orange River, p. 385.

^103:162 Sir R. F. Burton, Pilgrimage to Meccah and Medinah, ed. 1893, ii. 248.

^104:163 Borlase, Hist. of Cornwall, p.. 108.

^104:164  Golden Bough, Vol. ii. p. 291 et seq.

^104:165 In the Pitt Rivers Museum is a complete collection of apparatus such as was used for the "needfire," and is still employed by some savage races.

^104:166 Brand, Pop. Ant. Vol. i. pp. 226, 228, 318, 337. Elton, Orig. Eng. Hist. p. 261. See also Kemble, Saxons in England, Vol. i. p. 361.

^104:167 See New Eng. Dict. s.v. "Beltane." "The rubbish about Baal, Bel, Belus, imported into the word from the O.T. and classical antiquity, is outside the scope of scientific etymology." The word is pure Celtic; in Gaelic bealltainn is the name of the 1st of May. The word has nothing to do with Baal, and is but one more instance of popular etymology. The very fact that the name was applied to fires lighted at different seasons completely destroys the Baal theory.

^104:168 Le Fanu, Seventy Years of Irish Life, 1894, p. 101.

^105:169 See W. Somerset Word-Bk. p. 820. Brand, Pop. Ant. vol. i. pp. 9-29. An account of the recent performance of this curious ceremony appeared in the Devon and Somerset Weekly News, Feb. 20, 1890, although Brand says the custom is discontinued. Raymond in Sam and Sabina (Pseudonym Library) gives a good account of wassailing apple-trees, and also of burning the ashen faggot.

^106:170 This tree was evidently highly prized by the ancients who had the oak as well; for Pliny (Nat. Hist. xvi. 24; Bohn, iii. 365) says that the leaves of the ash yield an extract which is a specific for the bites of serpents; that no serpent will ever lie in the shadow of an ash, either morning or evening, and that they keep the greatest possible distance from it. He states positively that if a serpent and a lighted fire are placed within a circle formed of the leaves, it will rather throw itself into the fire than encounter the ash leaves.

^106:171 Referred to ante, <page 69>. Newspapers and magazines in plenty testify to the prevalence of this well-known custom. See Gentleman's Mag. June 1804; also Cultus Arborum, Phallic Series, privately printed 1890, p. 67.

^106:172 George Eliot, Mill on the Floss, p. 126. See also Brand, iii. 290.

^107:173 Many curious beliefs as to the power of the ash-tree will be found in Brand, vol. iii. p. 290 sq.

^107:174 "Crying the Neck," by F. T. Elworthy, Trans. Devon Assoc. 1891.

^108:175 "Tree-worship may be traced from the interior of Africa not only into Egypt and Arabia, but also onward uninterruptedly into Palestine and Syria, Assyria, Persia, India, Thibet, Siam, the Philippine Islands, China, Japan and Siberia, also westward into Asia Minor, Greece, Italy, and other countries."--Gen. of Earth and Man, p. 139, in Smith's Dict. of the Bible.

^108:176 Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxiv. i. (Bohn). The whole chapter is upon the antipathies and sympathies which exist among trees and plants.

^109:177 Martial, Epigr. i. 33.

^110:178 Frazer, Golden Bough, vol. i. p. 391; vol. ii. p. 67 et seq.

^112:179 Prof. W. Robertson Smith, Ency. Brit. s.v. "Sacrifice," p. 138.

^112:180 Carl Lumholtz, Among Cannibals, 1889, p. 272.

^112:181 Ibid. p. 274.

^112:181a Letter from Mr. Samuel Peal, resident in Assam.

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 115]

 

CHAPTER IV

 

SYMBOLS AND AMULETS

IF so many strange beliefs still exist in these days of science and enlightenment, it is easy to see how in olden times a fanciful people, full of imagination, who personified not only every aspect of nature, but every virtue and every vice, got to look upon the trees or animals they thought sacred, as symbols of the deity to whom they were sacred. Perhaps of all nations we English are the most materialistic and matter of fact, yet in what endless ways do we even now make use of symbols, to denote not only objects, but events and abstract ideas! Every letter that we write or print is said to be the survival of some primitive picture, and thus to be the symbol of a separate idea. In Christian art symbolism occupies as large a place, as in the pagan mythology of old. A figure holding a key with sometimes a cock in the background is at once known as St. Peter; a man in a boat typifies Noah; a figure with a loaf and a basket signifies the feeding of the multitude; the fish is a symbol of our Lord, said to be a Greek acrostic as well as a sign; the dove represents the Holy Spirit; the cross is a symbol not only of a great event, but of a great doctrinal fact; while the hand, or Dextera Dei, of which we have much to

[p. 116]

say, represents power, and thereby the person of the Almighty Father.

Even latter-day Puritans, "who are eager to banish the cross and the crucifix, with everything that has to them even a faint association with the terrible word idolatry, [*182] accept that most symbolic of romances, The Pilgrim's Progress, as a true exemplar of their special views," and thus provide the best possible evidence that no religious feeling worthy of the name will consent to live without some imaginative expression for those urgent and intimately varied spiritual yearnings, for which there is no definite and rigidly accurate language.

This love of symbol and the eagerness for its artistic use are said to be rapidly reviving [*183]--a fact which does but prove how history repeats itself, and that the primitive notions of mankind are constantly reasserting themselves; that we are but now readopting the methods which have prevailed intermittently throughout all human time.

In this way we get a clue to the primitive use of emblems and symbols by way of protection, against evils that people believed might be averted, through the intervention of the powers or divinities to whom they specially appealed; hence the reverence for, the half-worship of, the symbols representing those powers to their own minds. Moreover the uncultured mind does not readily discriminate between the symbol itself and the person, object, or fact which it is intended to represent.

In view of the looseness with which words of

[p. 117]

different significance are often used to represent the same ideas, and, on the other hand, the same word used to imply different meanings, it is well here to define what we mean by emblem and symbol. Curiously both words were originally derived from concrete objects, very far removed from the ideas they ultimately came to signify. Symbol properly means the separate contribution of each person towards the cost of a Greek drinking party. To ensure due payment it was customary for each person to pledge his signet ring to the caterer, to be redeemed on his paying his share of the bill. This custom was also adopted by the Romans, and by the time of Plautus the ring itself had got to be called symbolum. The signet ring having thus become the most easily available, as well as trustworthy of credentials, symbolum developed quickly into signifying the credential itself. From this, by a further development, in ecclesiastical language, as in the Symbolum Apostolicum, it expressed a definite creed, and at last has become a term for the conveyance of any idea, but more particularly of such as appertains to religious belief. We may now define a symbol as a means of conveying ideas and facts to the mind, through representations more or less pictorial. By constant repetition these pictures become in a way so conventionalised and stereotyped, that the mere portrayal, or even the mere mention, of a certain object conveys a distinct and well-defined train of thought to the mind.

An emblem was an inlaid or raised ornament on a vessel, but inasmuch as the subjects of the designs were always figures of persons, generally mythological, so the word emblem came to imply representation,

[p. 118]

more or less allegorical, of some person or attribute personified; and in the end, by the same process of repetition, the emblem became conventionalised like the symbol, so that certain representations always conveyed to the beholder the idea of a certain fact or event, or of some being, or personification; with this difference, that the emblem expressed more fully and distinctly, while the symbol only hinted at the idea conveyed. [*184] To make what we mean more clear, the crucifix is an emblem, a dramatic representation of a great event, carrying with it all its history and consequences, while the simple cross is a symbol no less expressive, but yet conveying by a mere hint all the history, all the doctrine, all the significance, of the more elaborate representation.

Justice, again, as an emblem is represented as a blindfolded female figure, holding the sword of punishment in one hand, with the balance of judgment in the other. As a symbol of justice, either the sword, or the balance alone, conveys the idea, though in a more abstract form. Victory, too, has for her emblem a winged female figure holding a wreath or a palm branch, while the symbol of victory is the wreath or the palm alone.

It will be readily understood how a symbol may be easily developed from an actual pictorial emblem, into a mere description, either spoken or by gesture acted, so as to convey the same idea. Thus when the hand is raised in the act of benediction, the three

[p. 119]

extended fingers are the well-known symbol of the Holy Trinity; so when we speak of bearing the cross, wearing the wreath or the palm, we symbolise and convey our meaning just as clearly as though those symbols were actually painted or carved.

Precisely as a miniature in a locket brings back to the wearer the individuality of the person portrayed, so does the symbolic representation of the deity, whose aid is sought, bring back to the mind of the beholder the whole conception of the attributes and power of the being so represented. An ancient Roman believed that Juno would protect him against certain dangers; forthwith he paints or carves a peacock, her own bird, and is thus reminded of her. In theory he prays to her as often as he looks upon her symbol, while he honours or worships her by wearing it. [*185]

The practice, if not the belief, still survives amongst us.

Some eight or ten years ago a gentleman well known to me went to call on an intimate friend of his. Unfortunately for him, he had the eye of a peacock's feather in his hat. When the lady of the house saw it, she snatched it from him and threw it out of the hall-door, rating him as if he had been guilty of some great moral offence.

Some years ago, in North Yorkshire, an old servant came to the house where I was, and found some peacocks' feathers above the mantelpiece in one of the bedrooms. She expressed her horror to the young ladies of the house, and said that they need never expect to be married if they kept such things for ornaments. [*186]

[p. 120]

In Shropshire also it is believed to be very unlucky to bring peacocks' feathers into the house. [*187]

No doubt the belief that to keep peacocks' feathers is unlucky, comes from the ancient cult of Juno--her anger being in some way excited by the plucking of the feathers of her favourite bird; while the idea that so long as they are kept in the house no suitors will come for the daughters, points to the old attribute of spite and jealousy in love or matrimonial matters, with which that goddess was always accredited. [*188]

From keeping and using such objects or signs, as reminders of the worship due to the beings symbolised, the history of the word symbol shows that it is but a very short step to the belief in the efficacy of the symbol itself, and hence we are led to the universal use of what have been of old called amulets.

These are described [*189] as "anything worn about the person as a charm or preventive against evil, mischief, disease, witchcraft," etc. In Smith's Dictionary of Antiquities we find it said that the word signified something suspended, and that it was used for objects such as a stone, plant, artificial production, or piece of writing, which was suspended from the neck, or tied to any part of the body--seemingly ignoring the many other uses of amulets both ancient and modern. Even in Pliny's time amulets were not merely worn, but were used as ornaments or objects having special purposes, fixed or otherwise, as they are to this day, about the houses, carriages, and fields of widely diverse races. The word amulet is nowadays very

[p. 121]

commonly used as synonymous with talisman, whereas in meaning it is entirely distinct. The latter means a "sigil engraved in stone or metal," [*190] and it served a double purpose, namely, "to procure love, and to avert mischief from its possessor," while an amuletum, derived from amolior to do away with, or to baffle, [*190a] had for its sole end the protection of the owner. Pliny, writing on the cyclamen (tuberterrae) [*191] says, it "ought to be grown in every house, if it be true that wherever it grows noxious spells can have no effect. This plant is also what is called an amulet." Boccaccio speaks of "the skull of an ass set up on a pole in a cornfield as a potent amulet against blight." As a modern parallel to this we are told that at Mourzak, in Central Africa, the people set up the head of an ass in their gardens to avert the evil eye from their crops. [*192]

Pisistratus too is 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 7.--King's Handbook of Gems.
 recorded by Hesychius to have set up, in the Acropolis at Athens, the figure of a grasshopper (cricket) or grillo, as a charm or amulet to avert the evil eye from the citizens. [*193] This insect is constantly found engraved on gems (Fig. 7) with a

[p. 122]

similar intention. [*194] The grillo or locust is said [*195] to have been adopted as an amulet from its likeness to a skeleton, which is still the emblem of Chronos or Saturn, and a powerful charm against the evil eye.

The Maltese, who are full of beliefs about the 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 8.
 evil eye, have set an amulet upon the base of a statue in front of the Church of Crendi near Valetta, which the writer sketched on the spot (Fig. 8)--a crescent with a serpent coiled about it. When we come to speak of the Cimaruta and the specific charms used in Italy, we shall see clearly that this relief can only be intended as an amulet. Abundant evidence will be produced later on to show that amulets were used also as household ornaments, much as we now use vases and other nicknacks upon our chimney-pieces and tables. It is very probable that the teraphim, translated images in our Authorised Version, [*196] which Rachel stole from Laban, were really amulets of the kind not to be worn, but used as protecting objects; these, like the Lares and Penates of subsequent times, were looked upon almost as objects of worship, though not as actual gods. Indeed we can have no reason to believe Laban idolatrous, or that Rachel carried them off with the intention of worshipping them. Still it is evident they were highly prized. [*197]

[p. 123]

We are told [*198] that "the ear-rings" mentioned in Gen. xxxv. 4 and Hosea ii. 13 were really amulets, and were connected with idolatrous worship. Amulets, however, were mostly worn round the neck, or rather suspended from a necklace and forming its centrepiece. We find this custom coming down to us here in England, through the classic and Middle Ages to our own times, though just now out of fashion, in the various lockets containing hair, etc., with other articles of a like kind forming the central ornament of necklaces. In some

[p. 124]

countries these things are still worn, not as mere ornaments, but avowedly as protective amulets against dread fascination. By no means were all hung round the neck, for the phylacteries which were worn as the "frontlets between thine eyes" (Exodus xiii. 16) were true amulets. One kind of phylactery was bound upon the bend of the left arm, and the other on the forehead. They were little leather boxes containing strips of parchment on which were written the four following passages of Scripture, called the Tetragrammaton, namely, Exod. xiii. 2-10 and 11-16; Deut. vi. 4-9 and xi. 13-21. They were certainly worn by all Jews over thirteen years of age in the time of our Lord. [*199]

Slips from the Koran, the Scriptures, or other writings, are now worn on the person, or upon horses and camels, by Arabs, Turks, Abyssinians, [*200] Greeks, Italians, and even English. They are all avowedly worn for the purpose of averting the evil eye; and seeing that the dread of it was perhaps even greater in old days than now, it seems but reasonable to assume that the direct object of the biblical phylactery was then, as it is to-day, to baffle the malignant glance.

It is curious that Turks, and, indeed, all Mahomedans, once used animals and figures of men, representing various deities, as amulets against fascination, but since their conversion from heathenism they have discarded most of these, and now wear sentences from the Koran, avowedly to guard them against the evil eye. Little silver cases to contain them, such as are shown on Fig. 112, <page 259>,

[p. 125]

are regular articles of sale in all Eastern bazaars. At Constantinople they may be bought by the dozen.

It was said by Plutarch [*201] that when Isis brought into the world Harpocrates, the posthumous son of Osiris, she wore an amulet round her neck, in the shape of a vase, the "emblem of Ma," the goddess of truth. The vase was also a symbol of Osiris. [*201a] This vase represented water; hence the vivifying power of nature, i.e. Osiris the personification of the Nile [*202] which was thus typified by a vase.

Among the ancient Egyptians not only were protecting amulets worn by the living, but in that land where the belief in a future life seemed to absorb so much of the care and interest of the present, they placed them in profusion on their dead, in order that they might be protected from evil spirits and the blighting eye, during the dark passage from this world to the next.

Maspero [*203] says these amulets (speaking of scarabs)

Click to enlarge
FIG. 9--From Author's Collection.

were "symboles de duree presente ou future," placed, ailes deployees, upon the breast of the dead along with a written prayer (Fig. 9), that the heart (of the

[p. 126]

person) whose form the beetle was made to represent, would never bear witness against the dead in the day of judgment. The commonest of all Egyptian amulets, except the scarab, was that known to English people as the Eye of Osiris: "L'oeil mystique (Fig. 10), l'ouza lie au poignet ou 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 10.
 au bras par une cordelette, protegeait contre le mauvais oeil, contre les paroles d'envie ou de colore, contre la morsure des serpents." These scarabs and mystic eyes were worn equally by the living and the dead "as amulets against evil magic." [*204] Moreover the mystic eye appears everywhere painted on walls. One such, of especial size and prominence, is to be found over the door of one of the upper chambers in the temple of Denderah, and it is seen constantly as one of the hieroglyphics translated ut'a. [*205]

We find the eye also used for two other signs in Egyptian writing. It was said to be that of Shu or Horus as the god of stability, and was carried in funeral processions along with the sacred boat. [*206] Wilkinson says it "was placed over the incision in the side of the body when embalmed, was the emblem of Egypt, and was frequently used as a sort of amulet and deposited in the tombs." [*207]

[p. 127]

It was natural from the association of idea with fact, or "sympathetic magic," that representations of the eye itself should among all people have been considered potent amulets against its malign influence. The Phoenicians certainly used it as an amulet. In the Museum at Carthage, among the objects found in the ancient tombs, there are 
Click to enlarge
FIG 11.
 numerous examples of the head of an animal in blue pottery, having a very large eye at the side of the head (Fig. 11). These were all provided with eyelets for suspension. Precisely the same thing was, in 1889, to be seen in the Ashmolean Museum, from Beirut, showing it to have been a common object among the Phoenicians. Similar amulets are to be seen in the museums of the Louvre and at Athens. The Etruscans also had an amulet of this kind. The head itself is said [*208] to be that of a panther, and from the number of specimens of this identical amulet which the writer has seen in various museums, brought from widely separated countries, yet all in the track of the Phoenicians, we may take it as established, that 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 12.
 this form of the eye amulet was most in use among that ancient people.

In the Louvre among the gems is a medal-shaped amulet (Fig. 12), with an eye alone in the centre; and Jahn gives several other examples of the single eye used as an amulet, especially in two necklaces drawn on Taf. V. of his article. In one, the eye is

[p. 128]

the pendant to a necklace formed of conchae veneris; this latter (Fig. 13) a potent charm in itself against 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 13.
 fascination among the Greeks of old, and among the Turks, Arabs, and Nubians of to-day. Jahn considers the head of which this eye is the most obvious feature to be that of a fowl (or cock). [*209]

As we proceed with the consideration of the various charms and amulets used by ancients and moderns alike, we shall find that not only were single objects, such as the eye, the hand, and many others to which we shall refer later, used as such, but that there was a combination, a sort of piling up of emblems and symbols, so that we constantly find objects of a highly composite character differing very essentially in their several component parts, but yet on the whole presenting a sort of similarity; while it is perfectly obvious that the design or purpose of these compound amulets was in all cases the same.

We shall endeavour to discover as we go on what was the special import of each item of these many compounds, and as far as possible to decide what deity was typified by the several representations made use of--for at the outset we postulate that every one of the symbols used, does definitely represent some deity or other personification, who was believed by the possessor of the amulet to be a protector against maleficent influence. The combination

[p. 129]

of symbols we find to be as various both in number and description, whether we take ancient or modern dates, as is now the cult of the various saints in the calendar; so that when we find an amulet of unusually complex character, bearing a great number of symbolic figures, we may take it to be the prototype and the equivalent of the latter-day summing up of "All Saints" or "all the company of heaven." A singular comment upon this accumulation of protectors is seen' in an inscription of the first year of our Christian era, A.U.C. 754, found quite recently in the Tiber near the Church of Sta. Lucia della Tinta.

Under the consulship of Caius Caesar and Lucius Paulus, a freedman named Lucius Lucretius Zethus was warned in a vision by Jupiter, to raise an altar in honour of Augustus, under the invocation of "Mercurius Deus Aeternus." Following these directions, Lucretius Zethus had the altar made, and unwilling apparently to hurt the feelings of the gods in general, dedicated it not only to Mercury Augustus, but at the same time to Jupiter, Juno, Minerva, the sun, the moon, Apollo, Diana, Fortune, Ops, Isis, Piety and the Fates. From an epigraphic point of view, this monument ranks among the very best discovered in the works of the Tiber. [*210]

A great number of ancient compound amulets in the shape of marble reliefs, medals and engraved gems, have been found, in which an eye is the central object, while grouped around it are various animals or other emblems of protecting divinities.

Jahn in his well-known paper gives no less than six different medals and gems, which have for each the eye as a centre, surrounded by a greater or less numerous grouping of symbolic figures, and all are undoubted amulets of ancient date against the evil eye.

No. 2 in Jahn is taken from Caylus rec. vi, 38,

[p. 130]

[paragraph continues] 3 (Fig. 14), and is a struck medal having in the centre the eye, surrounded by a crocodile, swan, serpent, cock, dog, lion, winged phallus, scorpion, and thunderbolt.

No. 3 (Fig. 15) is from Arneth, Gold- und Silbermon, S. iv. 96 G.--a medal with eyelet for

Click to enlarge
FIG. 14, 15, 16.

suspension. It has the eye in centre, with crocodile or lizard, thunderbolt, elephant, scorpion, phallus (as seen at Pompeii), lion, dog, swan, around it.

No. 4 is from Caylus rec. v. 57, 1, 2 (Fig. 16), also a medal with eye in centre, surrounded by thunderbolt, lizard, phallus, scorpion, star, elephant, 
Click to enlarge
FIG 17.
 swan, fish, serpent. The medals are all of silver.

No. 5 (Fig. 17) is an engraved gem, from the Florence Museum. It has the central eye, with lizard, scorpion, frog, bee, serpent, crab, bee again, and tortoise, surrounding.

No. 6 (Fig. 17) also a gem from Antike Paste in Berlin, described by Winkelmann, p. 554. It has the eye in the centre with tortoise, lizard, scorpion, frog, bee, serpent, crab, and another bee, surrounding. [*211]

[p. 131]

No. 7 (Fig. 18 is an engraved onyx [*212] from Gerhard's collection, with central eye, but with Jupiter's or Serapis's head, eagle, 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 18.
 thunderbolt, and dolphin, surrounding. On this last, Jahn remarks that it is evidently a symbol of the highest protecting divinity. [*213]

Still more remarkable than any of the foregoing amulets given by Jahn is that of an engraved sard from the Praun gems, of which an illustration is given by King, Gnostics, p. 115, and also Handbook 

Click to enlarge
FIG. 19.--From King's Gnostics.

 of Engraved Gems, p. 81, where the central eye is surrounded by an owl, serpent, stag, scorpion, dog, lion and thunderbolt (Fig. 19).

[p. 132]

On this blood-red gem King remarks (Gnostics, p. 238) that it shows "the evil eye surrounded by antidotes against its influence for every day in the week, in the attribute of the deity presiding over each, namely, the lion for dies Solis, the stag for dies Lunae (Diana venatrix), the scorpion for dies Martis, the dog for dies Mercurii, etc." To these we must add the thunderbolt for dies Jovis. The owl, however, was sacred to Athene or Minerva, and must have been substituted as the symbol of dies Veneris, for Venus does not seem to have been regarded as a protectress against fascination, unless we look upon her as identical with Isis, Ishtar, and Diana; whereas Minerva, the bearer of the Gorgon's head, was always one of the most potent protecting deities. The serpent, too, was the symbol of Hecate, [*214] one of the attributes, as we shall see later, of Diana Triformis, and was considered one of the most powerful of all the antidotes. Scarcely any compound amulet occurs without the serpent, and hence we must suppose in the case we are considering that it was adopted as the symbol applicable to dies Saturni.  [*214a]

In considering this gem, we must not forget its Gnostic character, and that its origin was Graeco-Egyptian, though the work of a European hand.

[p. 133]

[paragraph continues] Hence every symbol must be interpreted as Egyptian from a Greek point of view. Now as we know, and as Pliny [*215] long ago related that there are no stags in Africa, it is clear that the designer of this amulet must have denoted by the stag a deity of the Graeco-Roman mythology; and we must therefore look for one whose prototype is to be found in Egypt, and whose attributes were the same as the Ephesian Diana whom undoubtedly the stag represented in his idea. This could be no other than Hathor, whom we must look upon like Diana, as distinctly a moon goddess. [*216] So the thunderbolt, in like manner, would represent Serapis, the great Sun-god.

Thus considered, every one of the symbols on this week-day amulet ultimately resolves itself into one or other of the great Gnostic gods, the Sun and Moon.

The use of the eye as the central object in amulets involving sympathetic magic, may be taken to be universal. "Arab amulets at the present day bear the figure of the thing against which they exert their virtue, and all oriental practices in this line come down from immemorial antiquity." [*217]

The Maltese, partly Arab and partly Italian, holding the beliefs and customs of both parent stocks,

[p. 134]

are specially in dread of the evil eye, and being a maritime people too, we should look for marks of this in connection with their principal calling, for perils by the sea are everywhere believed to be constant sources of danger subject to maleficent influence. Consequently we find the native boats, as a regular part of their decoration, have a large eye painted on each side of the bows, giving them a very weird and uncanny appearance, much enhanced by the high prolongation of the stem. The same kind of stem is seen in the Neapolitan boats, though without the eyes.

The writer has seen boats having eyes on either side of the prow in some other places, at Smyrna, or one of the Greek ports, but having missed his note cannot recall at which port it was. This custom is evidently of great antiquity. The eye was placed on boats by the ancient Egyptians, [*218] and also by the Etruscans. [*219] Dennis remarks: [*220] "The presence of eyes on the bows of ancient vessels, perhaps originating in the fancied analogy with fish, or to intimate the vigilance necessary to the pilot, is well known--'they were charms against the evil eye.'" [*221]

Besides the conventional ouza or oeil mystique already referred to, the Egyptians wore eyes as amulets of a more realistic character. They were in pairs, looking fully to the front, and were pierced

[p. 135]

 

Click to enlarge
FIG. 21

 

[p. 136]

with the usual hole for the string. A number of examples of this kind may be seen in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford.

In the remarkable necklace or string of amulets found in a tomb at Kertch, taken by Jahn from the Russian work of Achik, [*222] a great many of the separate objects have markings on them which can only be intended for eyes (Fig. 21).

Jahn, page 41, says that necklaces with separate pendants as amulets are extremely common in Etruscan art-work. Among other people, girdles of various kinds, arm-bands with amulets thereon, are common, and specially in Italian art-work.

Among the Etruscans 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 22
 a prominent eye was often placed on objects which can hardly be called amulets, but on which the eye may well be considered to take the place it does at present on

Click to enlarge
FIG. 23.

Maltese boats. It was in itself a powerful amulet,

[p. 137]

and was therefore used as a conspicuous object of decoration.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 24--From Woburn Marbles.

Fig. 22 is from Vulci. [*223] Fig. 23 is an Etruscan winged deity. [*224]

[p. 138]

Perhaps the most noteworthy of all the amulets in which the eye forms the central object in combination with several other emblems, is the very remarkable relief illustrated in Millingen's paper in vol. xix. of Archaeologia, p. 74, and referred to by Jahn. [*225] It is one of the Woburn marbles (Fig. 24) in the collection of the Duke of Bedford, and measures 1'6" x 1'5", but this last dimension is not perfect, being broken on the left side. There was a framing, and it is usually thought to have been built into a wall, as a house-decoration, but still more as a protection. The centre is a large human eye, and, as Jahn says, "the left, which may be considered a special feature of its sinister intention, and moreover the pupil is strongly marked." [*226] Over it is a very prominent eyelid and an arched brow. Above this is seated a beardless man in a Phrygian cap, with his back towards the spectator, and his head turned backwards. He is squatted down with both hands on his knees, has his shirt pulled up, and strikingly exemplifies the description of Pomponius:--

	 
		"Hoc sciunt omnes quantum est qui cossim cacant." [*227]
		
		 [paragraph continues] Moreover it is evident that he is in that position which even now conveys in its full reality (in England no less than in Germany) the common

[p. 139]

typical expression of the utmost contempt. [*228] In fact, the figure is sitting on the eye in a most indecorous position, and as we explain later, any object or gesture which gave rise to an indecent or obscene idea was looked upon as specially effective in the way of a protection against fascination. One cannot help once more remarking here, how strikingly this mockery of the evil eye, this challenging of its malignity in the old Roman days of Septimius Severus, to which period this marble is ascribed, are reproduced in this enlightened nineteenth century by the heroic performances of the "Thirteen Club." Surely the dinner with its brave defiance of the Fates is a very eloquent and convincing piece of evidence that so-called civilisation, enlightenment, culture and all the rest of it, have not even yet eradicated the feeling, which has existed in man's breast from the remotest antiquity-that there is a power, an influence, a something passing from certain persons to others, which though unseen, unfelt, unmeasured and incapable of explanation, at least is dreaded by many, and perhaps most by some of those who scoff loudest, and outwardly defy it most ostentatiously.

It is well known that at the present day Neapolitan and other Italian sailors use this same identical attitude, turning themselves thus towards a contrary wind, in the belief that by such contemptuous defiance of the adverse spirit of the wind, its direction may be changed. [*229]

[p. 140]

On the right of the spectator in our illustration is another figure with his face turned towards the Phrygian, the former appears to be a gladiator wearing the distinctive girdle called the subligaculum. In his right hand is the trident, with which he seems to stab the eye, and in his left a short sword [*230] (fuscina). The yoke-like object on his left shoulder, and the armlet he wears, recognised as the galerus, [*231] prove that he was a Retiarius, one of those who fought with a net, which he tried to throw over his opponent the Mirmillo, so as to entangle him and his shield; and then he attacked him with the trident. The Retiarius, moreover, used to fight bare-headed like the figure here. There was most likely (Jahn says, ohne Zweifel) a figure on the opposite side of the bas-relief, which is now broken off, and it is here suggested that the latter may have represented the opposing Mirmillo, though Jahn says nothing upon that subject.

On the lower part of the marble are five animals seemingly attacking the eye with great fury. These are a lion, a serpent, a scorpion, a crane, and a raven or crow--each one a distinct amulet in itself.

Millingen remarks that no doubt can be entertained but that the evil eye or fascinum is here represented, and in this opinion he is fully supported

[p. 141]

by Jahn; while to any candid observer the relief itself is by far the best evidence. [*232]

It was usual to ornament the coffins or mummy cases of the ancient Egyptians with two large open eyes, with two monumental doors on the left, while on the right they placed three doors. These eyes could only have been intended to answer the same purpose on the outside as the oeil mystique within.

The remarkable scene here given (Fig. 25) from an amphora found at Vulci, now in the British

Click to enlarge
FIG. 25.

[paragraph continues] Museum, is but a sample of the eyes found on painted vases like this, not only of Etruscan, but also of undoubted Greek origin, which are fully recognised, says Dennis, as charms against the evil eye. [*233]

The curious representation of the great eyes (evidently the feature of the whole) upon the conventionalised wings of two Sirens, and upon those of a Fury in the collection of Sig. Bargagli at Sarleano, described by Dennis, [*234] forms another connecting link in the chain which we hope to forge, by which we shall connect the sirens of modern Naples with

[p. 142]

the ancient mythology of Egypt, Greece, and Rome. The Etruscans ornamented their vases and furniture with eyes very conspicuously depicted, as may be seen in the Museo Gregoriano in Rome and elsewhere. On these Dennis [*235] remarks, that they "have evidently an analogy to those so often painted on the Hellenic vases, and have probably the same symbolic meaning."

The ancient Egyptians, too, were accustomed to 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 26.
 adorn their pottery with the eye as a special feature of the design. The strange combination of three fishes with three lotus flowers here given (Fig. 26) is from Maspero, Arch. Egypt. p. 255. [*236]

Except upon Maltese and some other boats, or in masonic symbolism, the eye seems to have passed out of modern use, and as an amulet almost exclusively to be a thing of the past; even among the ancients it was by no means the commonest emblem used against its own influence. Eyes, however, made of wax or silver are extremely common to-day as ex votos--hung up in churches, before Notre Dame de bon secours, and some other favourite saints, such as SS. Cosmo e Damiano. We must ever bear in mind that it was, and continues to be, believed that the first glance of the evil eye was the

[p. 143]

most fatal, and therefore it was of the utmost importance that any object intended to protect against its influence should be such as should attract the first or fatal stroke; for it was just as firmly held, that whatever diverted it for the moment from the person or animal liable to injury, absorbed and so destroyed its effect. Anything, therefore, calculated to excite the curiosity, the mirth, or in any way to attract the attention of the beholder was considered to be the most effectual. There were three methods generally accepted for averting fascination, whether it were of look, voice, touch, or bodily presence of the fascinator. [*237] These were, by exciting laughter or curiosity; by demonstration of good fortune so as to excite envy in the beholder and so to draw his evil glance upon the object displayed; and by doing something painfully disagreeable to cause him an unpleasant feeling of dread lest he, the fascinator, should be compelled to do likewise. [*238]

Plutarch in a remarkable passage [*239] declares that the objects that are fixed up to ward off witchcraft or fascination, derive their efficacy from the fact that they act through the strangeness and ridiculousness of their forms, which fix the mischief-working eye upon themselves. [*240]

It was this firm belief which led to the design of those extremely grotesque figures amongst the Romans of which they were so fond, and of

[p. 144]

which we have such numberless examples in every museum of ancient gems. These amulets, all intended for the same purpose, are now called

Click to enlarge
FIG. 27., 28., 29.

[paragraph continues] Grylli, from modern Italian grillo, signifying both a cricket or grasshopper, and also a caprice or fancy. [*241] 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 30
 Though some are compounded of the grillo itself with other objects, yet they are mostly formed out of portions of various animals of the most diverse kinds combined into one nondescript, impossible monster, such as the examples here given (Figs. 27-30).

These grotesques formed of the creatures, sometimes called Chimerae, have been by some considered as Gnostic remains; but it is urged on the other side, [*242] that besides never exhibiting the symbols which are characteristic of Gnosticism, the style of work proclaims them to the least experienced eye to belong to a much earlier date--that of the best period of

[p. 145]

Roman art. [*243] In any case the strange combination of various animal forms in one is certainly a practice handed down from ages long antecedent to either

Click to enlarge
FIG. 31., 32., 33.

Gnosticism or Roman history. Early Etruscan bronze amulets were very commonly formed by 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 34., 35.
 the union of two animals in one body, as well as by very rude representations of a single one. This may be seen in the cuts herewith (Figs. 31, 32, 33), from the Etruscan Museums of Bologna and Cortona, and Figs. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, from the Ashmolean at Oxford. Moreover we have the famous vision of Ezekiel in which the faces of a man, lion, ox, and eagle were conjoined, and these components have

[p. 146]

in Christian art been separated and become the symbols of the four Evangelists.

In treating of amulets it behoves us to give an early place in our consideration to that which of all others may be taken as the first, the original germ,

Click to enlarge
FIG. 36., 37., 38.

at least so far as noticeable in Greek art--the head of the Medusa, or as it is commonly called, the Gorgoneion.

The story of Perseus and of his killing the Medusa, whom he only ventured to look at in a mirror, need not here be detailed, but in it we have at least a very early incident in the primaeval belief in the evil eye. So far as Greek art goes, we have in the hideous representation of her dog-toothed, split-tongued visage, the earliest example which we can positively assert to be a prophylactic charm against the fatal glance which she was believed to have possessed; for though there are plenty of Egyptian

[p. 147]

amulets of earlier date, it cannot be certainly declared what was their precise intention. This very remarkable object is of so much importance that we must make it a subject to be treated apart; [*244] suffice it here to say that from being the earliest of amulets known to European art, so the illustration on <page 160>, Fig. 49, shows it to be one of the latest, if not the latest, used in Christian times to baffle the evil eye. We also see by the same illustration that it is one of the most debased among the many examples of declining art. It is of course out of our province, and beyond our ability, to decide whence the Greeks obtained the story, and we must leave that question to experts who are content to contract more narrowly their investigations. The obvious development of the early idea of the Gorgon's head, from its first conception of the intensest ugly frightfulness, until it became at last by the gradual refinement of taste, as shown in classic art, the ideal of female beauty, culminating in the well-known Strozzi Medusa, [*245] demands careful attention.

The step from the famous death-dealing visage, as a protection against the very evil it was believed to produce, is but short to that of hideous faces in general; and hence we find that strange and contorted faces or masks were certainly used as objects to attract the evil eye, and so to absorb its influence, and to protect the person wearing or displaying the mask. The very origin of the name mask is said to be but

[p. 148]

a corruption of the older Greek baska, whence baskania, fascina or amulets. "From this custom of regarding hideous masks as amulets can be explained a circumstance otherwise a problem to every archaeologist--the vast number of such subjects we meet with in antique gems." [*246] Not only so, but their importance is still more impressed upon us by the fact that the highest skill known to Roman art was lavished upon the engraving of masks.

Nothing, as is well known of all ages, so much attracts or excites curiosity as obscenity and indecency; [*247]

Click to enlarge
FIG. 39., 40.

and hence of all amulets, those partaking of this character were the most potent, and therefore the most used. Anything strange, odd, or uncommon, as likely to attract the eye, was considered most effectual, and consequently the objects viewed as protective against it were almost infinite in number. For the reasons given we find in compounded amulets that the commonest of all objects was the phallus, or some other, suggesting the ideas conveyed by it.

[p. 149]

Amulets then which protect against the power of fascination would naturally be of three classes. First, those whose intention was to attract upon themselves the malignant glance. These were necessarily either worn on the outside of the dress, or openly exposed to view like the grillo of Pisistratus at Athens, the brazen serpent set up by Moses, or the various household objects displayed for the same purpose. Secondly, there were all those charms, worn or carried secretly, or hidden beneath the dress; and thirdly, the written words of Scripture, Koran, and other sacred writings, or the cabalistic figures and formulae considered so powerful.

The former class were the most numerous, and of them we have the greatest number of examples, both ancient and modern. For the reason above stated, amulets consisting alone of das mannliche Glied, or compounded with it as the attractive feature, were so common that they obtained a technical name from the purpose they were intended to serve. The usual term among old writers was fascinum. [*248]

Other writers, especially Varro, call one particular form which was commonly suspended from the necks

[p. 150]

of children turpicula res, scaeva or scaevola, and he discusses at some length the development of the word. [*249]

Dodwell (vol. ii. p. 34) says: "They are frequently found in Italy of bronze, and the other extremity of the symbol is terminated by a hand which is closed; the thumb protruding between the fore and middle fingers. [*250]

This is but a very partial description of a most remarkable object much easier portrayed than described. It is of so obscene a character that it cannot here be reproduced.

A full-sized illustration of one in bronze from the Dresden collection is given (p. 81) in Jahn's Ueber den Aberglauben, etc. It is evidently a pendant-amulet, having three extra eyelets, from which probably little bells were hung, such as will be seen later on in our illustrations of the Sirens and Sea-horses. One branch of the pendant consists of a phallus such as Frommannd describes (p. 5), tam rigidum reddere quam cornu; while to balance it, is an arm ending in a fist with the thumb protruding as stated by Dodwell. The central part or body is composed of another membrum, of the kind constantly found as a separate amulet. Any number of these may be seen both as amulets and as ex votos in the private Museum at Naples, and also in the Museum of the Collegio

[p. 151]

[paragraph continues] Romano. A very beautiful specimen of a turpicula res is in one of the cases of antique jewellery in the Louvre Museum. It is of gold, and measures about an inch and a half wide, and itself forms the pendant to a complete necklace, having above it as part of the pendant a fine amethyst cut as a scarab. There may be others in other museums, but the above is by far the most elaborate known to me, and is a most interesting study. In the same case are several other amulets against the evil eye, among which is the medal (Fig. 12).

In the Naples Museum are many bronze examples of various sizes, but all similar in pattern; in all cases the thumb is between the first and second fingers. There are also many phalli with eyelet holes to enable them to be worn as charms.

The vast antiquity of the phallic necklace can be easily demonstrated: it was very ancient even in the days of Horace and Varro; and it may be that the Romans got their fascinum from Egypt. In a recently discovered tomb at Thebes, near that of Rekhamara, the account of which has not yet found its way into the guide-books, the writer was struck by a singularly fresh and distinct painting of a necklace--the colour as bright as the day it was painted, more than three thousand years ago. It is formed of a chain fastened by a serpent's head, such as may be seen in our own shops to-day. The ornaments are three pendants--the phallus, [*251] the most conspicuous, in the centre, the symbol of stability, and the ankh, or symbol of life, on either side.

[p. 152]

[paragraph continues] The necklace so carefully painted is being presented by one female figure to another, but there are no special attributes by which to decide whom they are meant to represent. The attitude of the figures, and the prominence given to the three pendants of the offering, show that it was intended to be received and worn as a protective amulet.

Although of course the turpicula res is no longer to be found in actual use, yet the fist with protruding thumb is to-day one of the commonest of objects 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 41
 worn as a charm for the watch-chain. The complete survival of the ancient amulet is no longer permitted by the papal censors, but the hand-part of it is still the ordinary baby's sucker or plaything hung upon a child's neck in Rome, where of old the grosser object held its place. In fact this hand in silver is to the Roman child of to-day what our "coral and silver bells" was to us in our childhood--the regulation christening gift. Fig. 41 is from the writer's collection; actual size. It is of silver, and was bought in a shop close to the Campo dei Fiori, where it was one of a large bunch of at least twenty exposed for sale, showing that it is an article in large and regular demand. The same thing may be seen in almost any silversmith's shop out of the beat of the ordinary tourist. This special article seems to be confined to Rome and its neighbourhood, for, as we shall see later, something

[p. 153]

very different is worn by the babies in Naples and Southern Italy.

In making purchases of this and of the many other charms in the writer's possession, it has always been his practice to inquire of the seller what was the object of the article. In every case the answer has been the same--"Contra malocchia" in Rome; "Contra la jettatura" in Naples.

The antiquity of the phallus as an amulet is shown by the number found among Egyptian sculptures. No visitor to Egyptian antiquities needs to be told this. Indeed, it was held to have been consecrated by Isis herself. [*252] The phallus was the most sacred amulet worn by the vestal virgins of ancient Rome. [*253] Moreover, we find that Sesostris of the early twelfth dynasty, who conquered Asia, set up memorials of a phallic nature among the people who had acted bravely, but among the degenerate, female emblems engraved on stelae were set up. [*254] Who shall say these objects may not have been the origin of those still to be found so universally throughout India? In the ruins of Zimbabwe, in Central Africa, are to be seen phalli carved upon stone, similar to those found in Sardinia, which are said to be Phoenician. [*255] The like have been seen by the writer on the so-called Phoenician ruins of Hajar Khem in Malta. Again, numbers of phallic amulets in bronze are found in the earliest Etruscan tombs as well as in the museums of the Collegio Romano, of Cortona and of Bologna, marked

[p. 154]

as belonging to the prima eta di ferro--a time which, like Egyptian monuments, makes the objects of Classic Rome things of yesterday. The objects on Fig. 42 are in the Museum at Bologna. In the Naples Museum are a number of vases of different shapes, ornamented with vine leaves and tendrils

Click to enlarge
FIG. 42.

alternating with a phallus, forming a belt of decoration round the belly of the vase.

The object described as satirica signa by Pliny, and so constantly referred to, appears not only upon the amulets of which the eye is the centre, but is that to be seen over so many of the doorways in Pompeii. It by no means signified that which the ciceroni now tell the tourist; [*255a] but was placed there as a protective amulet against fascination. We read [*256] that it was the common sign over a blacksmith's forge, and no doubt inasmuch as the horses who came to him to be shod were specially liable to the malign influence, so the smith would naturally provide the best possible protector for the animals by whom he got his living.

"That such representations were placed by the ancients on the walls of their cities, there is no lack of proof. [*257]They are found on several of the early

[p. 155]

cities of Italy and Greece, on masonry polygonal as well as regular." At Alatri it is tripled, sculptured in relief on the lintel of a postern or passage in the polygonal walls of the citadel. It is also tripled on the Pelasgic walls at Grottatore. Another is found on the ancient wall of Terra di Cesi, near Terni, and again on the ancient fortifications of Todi on the upper waters of the Tiber, where it is in high relief, and is well known as il pezzo di marmo. There is one on a block in the wall of Oea, in the island of Thera in the Aegean Sea, with an inscription accompanying it, which distinctly proves it to have been intended to avert the evil eye. The same thing has been found on the doors of ancient tombs at Palazzuolo in Sicily, at Castel d'Asso in Etruria, and in the Catacombs of Naples. Of all places, however, the greatest number now to be seen are amongst the tombs and temples of Egypt.

Jahn gives plates of a very remarkable kind, of objects sculptured on the amphitheatre at Nismes, to be seen at the Dresden and other museums; he pursues this subject at greater length than can be here followed. To have omitted all notice of it would have been to leave out really the part on which ancient and mediaeval writers have dwelt longest; still it is unsavoury, and we are glad to have done with it, the more so as we have so many facts and objects to be found in the life of to-day which seem to have been singularly overlooked by those who have written on the evil eye.

Repeated mention is made in these pages of the many amulets to be found in the Etruscan Museum at Bologna. Of the accompanying illustrations, Fig. 43 is taken from Burton's Etruscan Bologna,

[p. 156]

p. 68, who gives it as a pelekys or axe, which he says is an amulet against fascination. Fig. 44 is from a sketch by the writer from the same museum.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 43., 44.

[paragraph continues] It also suggests an axe in shape, about one and a half times the size of illustration, and from its being evidently for suspension, it is here suggested that it may be an amulet. Being of bronze, and very thin, it is possible that its use may be the same as the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 45., 46.

very numerous handled half-moons of about the same size, found there and in other museums, which are well known to be ancient razors. In the object here shown, there is but one possible cutting edge, that at the bottom. Figs. 45, 46 represent an Etruscan coin [*258] of the town of Luna. The devices engraved upon it almost certainly prove that they

[p. 157]

were intended as amulets. The axe and sword were each considered to be such, while as to the two crescents, we may accept one as being a rebus of Luna, and the other to be the consort of the central solar disc. The head on the reverse may be the personification of the city or of Diana.

Footnotes

^116:182 La Migration des Symboles, Comte Goblet d'Alviella, Hibbert Lectures, 1890-91: Husenbeth, "Emblems of the Saints in Art," Spectator, June 29, 1889.

^116:183 Chapman, Sermons on Symbols, 1888.

^118:184 "Emblema licet cum isto aenigmatum genere in ratione symboli conveniat, differt tamen, quod rem sublatis aenigmatum velis purius liquidiusque proponat. Est enim proprie symbolum aliquod ingeniosum, suave, et moratum, ex pictura et lemmate constans, quo aliqua gravior sententia indicari solet."--De symbolica Aegyptorum sapientia. Nicolaus Caussinus. Coloniae, 1623, p. 17.

^119:185 "On the main gateway of the Old City (Citta Vecchia) at Malta is a statue of Juno, ancient protectress of Malta, bearing her cognisance of a peacock."--Col. R. L. Playfair, Murray's Handbook to the Mediterranean, 1882, p. 199.

^119:186 Notes and Queries, 8th ser. iv. p. 531 (December 30, 1893).

^120:187 Mrs. Gaskell in Nineteenth Century, February 1894, p. 264.

^120:188 See Notes and Queries, November 25, 1891 p. 426.

^120:189 New English Dictionary, s.v. "Amulet."

^121:190 See The Gnostics, by C. W. King, 1874, p. 115. Also Frommannd, Tract. de Fasc. p. 278, who makes a long disquisition on this subject, giving the etymology and origin of talisman as Arabic.

^121:190a King, op. cit. p. 115. According to N. E. Dictionary, "a word of unknown origin."

^121:191 Natural History, xxv. 67 (Bohn, v. p. 125).

^121:192 Notes and Queries, 1st ser. vii. p. 496.

^121:193 On this see Lobeck, Aglaophamus, p. 973.. He quotes Pliny, xxix. (6) 39, but I cannot find this in Pliny. Lobeck says Hesychius calls this amulet keromia prosbaskania.

^122:194 King, Gnostics, p. 116.

^122:195 Ibid. p. 2 12.

^122:196 Genesis xxxi. 19. See Frommannd, Tract. de Fasc. p. 715, who says Luther called these Silberne Gotzen. These are called teraphim in the R.V.

^122:197 Professor Huxley says (Science and Hebrew Tradition, 1893, p. 309): "The teraphim were certainly images of family gods, and as such in all probability represented deceased ancestors," and further that Jacob was not "scandalised by the idolatrous practices of his favourite wife . . . for the teraphim seem to have remained in his camp." Other authorities say (Reginald Stuart Poole in Smith's Dict. s.v. "Teraphim, Magic." Also W. Aldis [p. 123] Wright, s.v. "Nehushtan ") "there is no evidence that they were ever worshipped. "There seems to be a consensus of opinion that the teraphim, whatever they were, had much to do with magic. It is here suggested that many of the numberless little bronze statuettes, to be seen in various museums, probably represent the Teraphim of the Hebrews and the Lares of Rome, and are not mere ornaments. Fig. 105 is surely one of these, and its original cannot be later than the time of Jacob. The terra-cotta figures too, beginning with the crude forms found at Mycenae, and developing into the beautiful artistic statuettes of later Greece, must have been of the same character; for we cannot suppose that as mere ornaments they would have been so carefully deposited along with the dead. Nor does there appear to be any evidence that the Greeks or Romans ever imbibed the Egyptian notion of placing figures of this kind with the dead, as ushebtiu, to attend on the departed in the next world.

It seems rather an assumption than a certainty that teraphim were images only of persons. It is suggested that among such may be included several other objects, looked upon as prophylactic, or otherwise sacred. The bronze bands, dealt with in the chapter on the Mano Pantea, would distinctly come into this category. Further we find proof of this in the point noticed by Huxley (p. 310), that it was not until the time of Hezekiah that the brazen serpent of Moses was destroyed. During the thousand years of its existence it had been preserved, and at length from a protective teraphim had become Nehushtan. All this seems to show that the brazen serpent, and all such objects as we now call amulets, like the grillo of Athens, the crocodiles of Seville and Venice, were not originally worshipped idolatrously, but were looked upon as magically endowed with the power of countervailing the effect of the malignant eye--the fertile source, as it was thought, of every evil to mankind.

It has been well suggested (Farrar in Kitto's Cyclopaedia of Biblical Literature, s.v. "Teraphim") that the teraphim, and to them we would add protective symbols in general, were looked upon much in the same way that pictures and images are now looked upon by Roman Catholics, who indignantly repudiate the notion of idolatry. No doubt the denunciations of the prophets point to the same line of teaching as that of modern Protestants, who can perceive no difference between the reverence paid to the image itself, and that which all would admit to be due to the person depicted.

^123:198 Smith's Dictionary of the Bible, s. v. "Amulets."

^124:199 Upon this, see Farrar in Smith's Bib. Dict. s. v. "Frontlets."

^124:200 See the remarkable Ethiopic charm in Chap. XI.

^125:201 Wilkinson, Ancient Egyptians, iii. 130.

^125:201a Ib. iii. 80.

^125:202 Plutarch, De Iside, s. 32; Wilkinson, iii. 74.

^125:203 Archeologie Egyptienne, p. 236. See also Wilkinson, vol. iii. p. 486.

^126:204 Brugsch, Egypt under the Pharaohs, vol. i. p. 468. Wilkinson, vol. ii, p. 334, gives a number of necklaces, in nearly all of which the mystic eye appears, while in some it is the only element, and in others is alternated with other charms.

^126:205 The Nile, E. Wallis Budge, p. 61.

^126:206 One of these processions showing the eye is given as Plate lxvi. in Wilkinson, vol. iii. p. 444.

^126:207 In the British Museum is a case full of these mystic eyes of all sizes. There are also necklaces composed entirely of them. Three of these in blue enamel are shown on Fig. 81.

^127:208 See Dennis, Cities of Etruria, vol. i. p. 471.

^128:209 It is suggested that the head here produced may be that of the Gnostic god Abraxas, who is very frequently represented with the head of a cock. See the many engraved gems showing this in Abraxas seu Apistopistus Johannis Macarii. Antwerpiae, 1657. Also in King's Gnostics.

^129:210 Rodolfo Lanciani, Athenaeum, No. 3313, April 25, 1891, p. 543.

^130:211 Nos. 5 and 6 have precisely the same objects upon them, though differing in size. Therefore one illustration here applies to both.

^131:212 This gem is a cameo, upon which it may be remarked, that this word is said to be Persian. "Camahem is a loadstone or fibrous haematite, the usual material for Babylonish cylinders, and in use there down to the time of the Cufic signets. The Arabs knowing no other motive for engraving of stones than their conversion into talismans (amulets), gave the name of the one most frequently used to the whole class; and the Crusaders introduced it into all European languages in this sense. Matthew Paris has lapides quos cameos vulgariter apellamus, which marks its foreign origin" (King, Gnostics, p. 112). Mr. King does not give his authority. Dr. Murray (N.E.D.) says, "Of the derivation nothing is yet known." I do not find the above among the "guesses" alluded to by Dr. Murray.

^131:213 The value of medals whether to be worn as amulets, or used as talismans to procure objects desired, or to cure diseases, is by no means a notion confined [p. 132] to the ancients. In Ireland "some five-and-forty years ago a temperance medal was found to be a specific for every ailment; not all medals, however, but only those which had been blessed and given by Father Mathew. Rubbing with one of these at once relieved rheumatic pains. I have seen ophthalmia treated by hanging two of these medals over a girl's eyes" (Le Fanu, Seventy Years of Irish Life, 1894, p. 114).

^132:214 Jahn, Aberglauben, etc., p. 98, says that "the dog as the beast of Hecate has to do with all magic" (Zauberwesen). In later times it was thought that by dogs' blood all evil witchery could be kept off.

^132:214a Since this was written the Python at the Zoo has (Oct. 1894) swallowed his mate (or his child?), thus proving the serpent to be a singularly practical symbol of Saturn.

^133:215 Pliny, Nat. Hist. viii. 51 (vol. ii. p. 302, Bohn). Diana is often represented as accompanied by a dog, the most sagacious and watchful of animals. The dog was a symbol of Diana, Thoth, Hermes, Mercury, Anubis (Payne Knight, Symb. Lang. p. 113). "The dog as a symbol of destruction was sacred to Mars as well as to Mercury" (Phurnutus, Nature of the Gods, xxi); hence "the dogs of war."

^133:216 See the story of Osiris and Isis-Athor in Wilkinson, iii. 75 et seq.; also of Isis and her connection with the Dog-star, Ib. p. 106.

^133:217 Cesnola, Cyprus, 1877. 
Click to enlarge
FIG 20.
 Appendix by C. W. King (author of Gnostics, etc.), p. 385. Fig. 20 is from Pignorius (Vetustissimae Tabulae, Venice, 1605), p. 16 in dorso, and is by him called a phallic engraved amulet.

^134:218 Wilkinson, vol. iii. p. 353.

^134:219 In the Grotta de Cacciatore, near Corneto, "is depicted a boat with a high, sharp stern and a low bow, on which is painted an enormous eye--a fashion that has descended from Etruscan times to the fishermen of modern Italy" (Dennis, Cities of Etruria, vol. i. p. 312).

^134:220 Ibid. vol. i. p. 471.

^134:221 On a vase in the British Museum representing Ulysses (tied to the mast) and the Sirens, the vessel has a large eye upon the prow--suggesting that another was upon the other side not seen. A plate of this is given in Smith's Classical Dict. p. 784, ed. 1877

^136:222 Achik, Antiq. du Bosphore Cimmerien, vol. iii. p. 210. See also Daremberg et Saglio, p. 257.

^137:223 Dennis, Etruria, vol. i. p. cxxi and p. 462.

^137:224 Ib. vol. ii. p. 160. All the illustrations from Dennis are reproduced by the kind permission of Mr. John Murray.

^138:225 The illustration here given is from Millingen's original plate, and differs in many respects from the copy of it attached to Jahn's article.

^138:226 In consequence of the stress laid by Jahn upon the eye represented being the left, I have carefully examined all the eyes upon amulets which have come under my notice, and among a great number of examples I have found no marked preponderance either way, but on the whole should say there are more right eyes than left. The very common phrase "sinister expression," come to us from classic days, may have suggested to Jahn the idea that the left eye is especially malignant, but I can see no evidence in support of it, and believe the phrase has no connection with the evil eye, but that it springs from another and quite different set of beliefs.

^138:227 Nonius, see cossim, p. 40, verb incoxare, p. 39. Jahn, p. 30.

^139:228 Striking examples of this act have not long since come under the notice of the writer, in one of which a man used this means of grossly insulting a woman--about his equal in refinement--with whom he had had a quarrel.

^139:229 This gesture was evidently of widespread use in ancient times. We are told that in the ceremony of going down the Nile to the festive worship of Bast at Bubastis the crowded boats, as they passed near a town, came close to [p. 140] the bank. "Some of the women continue to sing and strike cymbals; others cry out as long as they can, and utter reproaches against the people of the town, who begin to dance, while the former pull up their clothes before them in a scoffing manner" (Herodotus, ii. 60, quoted by Budge, Nile, p. 111).

The writer can testify to having witnessed a similar performance by a woman on London Bridge at ten o'clock in the morning!

^140:230 The trident and sword are separate amulets, as shown later.

^140:231 This is taken from Jahn, p. 30, but according to Smith, Dict. of Gr. and Rom. Antiq., the galerus was a helmet or head-dress.

^141:232 On the other hand, in the same volume (xix. of Archaeologia, at p. 99), the Rev. Stephen Weston contests this view, and tries to prove that the whole piece of sculpture is a representation of the sacred rites of Mythra; but his views in support of his Mythraic theory are speculative and fanciful in face of the materialistic story of the marble itself. Upon this point Jahn, p. 31, says: "Es kann kein Zweifel sein und ist von allen erkannt, dass es bestimmt war Schutz gegen den Zauber des bosen Blicks zu gewahren."

^141:233 Dennis, Etruria, vol. i. p. 471.

^141:234 Ib. ii. p. 364.

^142:235 Dennis, Etruria, vol. ii. pp. 77, 331.

^142:236 It is the rounded bottom of a blue bowl. The fish here compounded with l'oeil mystique, and the no less mystical lotus, is undoubtedly the sacred Lepidotus, fully described by Wilkinson (vol. iii. pp. 340 et seq.). It surely is not unreasonable to consider that a form of decoration common to Egyptians, Etruscans, and Greeks was not a mere coincidence, but had a well-understood common significance. The original bowl is in the Berlin Museum. The same illustration is in Wilkinson, vol. ii. p. 42.

^143:237 "Fascinatio est actio, qua corpori noxa visu, verbis, contactu aut effluviis malis occulto modo agentibus per vim seu naturalem seu supernaturalem inferri putatur."--Frommannd, p. 7.

^143:238 These are thus summed up by Vincentius Alsarius ("De Invidia et Fascinatione," Thesaur. Antiq. Rom. vol. vii. p. 890): "Quodam ridiculo spectatoribus objecto: . . . fortunae secundae dissimulatione; . . . casu aliquo adversa sponte suscepto et contractu," quoted by Frommannd.

^143:239 Symposia, v. 7.

^143:240 See remarks on Gurgoyles, Appendix II.

^144:241 The alternative meaning of grillo in modern Italian is said to be a classic survival: "Antiphilus jocosis nomine Gryllum deridiculi habitus pinxit, unde id genus picturae grylli vocantur" (Pliny, Sympos. xxv. 3 7).

^144:242 King, Handbook of Engraved Gems, p. 81. The four grylli here reproduced are from Mr. King's books. I am indebted to Mr. David Nutt and Messrs. George Bell and Sons for permission to copy them.

^145:243 It is certain that as works of art a vast number of the objects used as amulets were of a very debased kind indeed; but it should always be remembered that the virtue of an amulet or talisman lay in the type it embodied, and in its own material substance--the manner of execution of the potent sigil was altogether unconsidered. This will become abundantly plain when we come [p. 146] to consider the very rough and crude objects made in these latter days for constant use in Naples-where the thing represented is of the rudest, coarsest work, while all the time it is of the most imperative necessity that each article should be of sterling silver, which must be attested by the hall-mark.

^147:244 Jorio, Mimica degli Antichi, p. 235, says: "The common people (of Naples) are absolutely ignorant of everything concerning the Medusa's head; but they are fully persuaded that the eyes of the Basilisk (of which also they know nothing) have the same power as that attributed to the fabulous head."

^147:245 Another beautiful Medusa is that upon the Onyx cup in the Naples Museum, called the Tasse Farnese. A print of this is in Daremberg et Saglio, Dict. des Antiq. p. 103.

^148:246 King, Handbook of Gems, p. 85. Figs. 39, 40, come from a number of these masks in Mr. King's books, namely, the above and The Gnostics.

^148:247 "Everything that was ridiculous and indecent was also supposed to be inimical to the malignant influence of fascination by the oddness of the sight," Dodwell, Class. Tour through Greece, 1819, vol. ii. p. 34.

^149:248

	 
		"Quid? quod libelli Stoici inter Sericos
		   Jacere pulvillos amant?
		 Illiterati num minus nervi rigent,
		   Minusve languet fascinum?
		 Quod ut superbo provoces ab inguine
		   Ore allaborandum est tibi."--Horace, Epodon viii. 15.
		
		 [paragraph continues] (This epode is omitted in the expurgated editions.) See also Frommannd, Tract. de Fasc. p. 5, who says: "Per fascinum virile membrum, quod fascia tegi solet sive campestribus, hic intelligi Commentator et Cruquius dicunt. Fascinum autem vocarunt partem illam, quoniam fascinandis rebus haec membri deformitas apponi fuit solita."

He goes on to connect the reason of the name with the licentious cult of Liberus. He also writes much on the subject which is unfit to be reproduced here, referring frequently to the worship of Priapus, and to the sayings of Enothea, priest of Priapus.

^150:249 "Potest vel ab eo quod pueris turpicula res in collo quaedam suspenditur, ne quid obsit bonae scaevae causa: unde scaevola appellata. Ea dicta ab scaeva, id est sinistra, quod quae sinistra sunt bona auspicia existimantur: a quo dicitur comitia aliudve quid; sic dicta avis, sinistra quae nunc est. Id a Graeco est, quod hi sinistram vocant skaian: quare quod dixit Obscoenum Omen, est omen turpe, quod unde (id) dicitur, Osmen ex quo S extritum."--Varro, De Lingua Latina, viii. 97. Ed. Sprengel, Berlin, 1885.

^150:250 "Inserto pollice inter medium et indicem, ita ut pollex ipse insertus emineret, et apparet, reliquis digitis in pugnum contractis."--De Pollice, p. 42, Lipsiae, 1677.

^151:251 Upon the importance of the phallus, and its consecration to Osiris, with the reasons for the place it took in the Egyptian system, see Wilkinson, vol. iii. p. 77, and various notices in vols. i. ii. concerning the God Khem.

^153:252 Wilkinson, iii. p. 77.

^153:253 Smith's Dict. of the Bible, s.v. "Fascinum."

^153:254 Wilkinson, op. cit. i. p. 20.

^153:255 Bent, Ruined Cities of Mashonaland. Perrot and Chipiez, History of Art in Sardinia, p. 57. Spectator, November 26, 1892.

^154:255a That houses so marked were Lupanari.

^154:256 Dennis, Cities of Etruria, vol. ii. p. 119. It was of course not confined to this purpose at Pompeii.

^154:257 Dennis, as above. He refers to Pliny, but cannot find the passage. Dennis believes in their being thus placed to defy the enemy. I recommend the student to read this chapter.

^156:258 From Dennis's Etruria, vol. ii. p. 63.

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 158]

 

CHAPTER V

 

THE GORGONEION

WHETHER looked at as the emblem of a hideous fable or simply as a mask, the Gorgoneion has in all ages been "reputed one of the most efficacious 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 47.
 of amulets." [*259] If further proof were required to sustain this assertion, beyond the frequency of its use, it would be found in the inscription upon a gem in the collection of the late Rev. C. W. King, of which he gives a drawing (Fig. 47). On this, beneath the head is: AREGU RURUMANDARE--"I protect Roromandare."

It may have been the universality of the belief in the Medusa's power that led to masks becoming such favourites as protectors. Probably the root idea of the efficacy of any amulet lying in its strangeness, whether provocative of fear or laughter, may have led to the grotesque and impossible faces which are so frequently to be seen. Actors in classic days adopted a mask to hide their features, most likely from the general dread of the evil eye, lest among the crowd, gazing upon the performer, some may

[p. 159]

have possessed that fatal influence which Heliodorus records respecting the daughter of Calasiris. The masks, whether worn by actors or painted on walls by way of decoration, were commonly of hideous grotesqueness. In Rome, certain of these by long usage developed into conventional faces, just like 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 48.
 that of our modern Punch, two of which typified, respectively, Tragedy and Comedy. These latter are now only used for decorative purposes, on theatres and such like buildings, while the Medusa, the prototype of masks, has continued to be used as a common ornament down to the present day. The very ugly specimen depicted on Fig. 67, <page 183> (Chap. VI.) is one of the early Greek type, from a terra cotta in the Museum of Syracuse. [*260] Others, also showing the mocking split-tongue, are of probably the same age. Fig. 48 is called by Dennis (vol. i,. p. 318) "the Anubis vase." It is Etruscan black ware from Chiusi in the Museo Casuccini. It is 20 inches high and has many grinning masks, some of which are unmistakable Medusas. The rest of our illustrations

[p. 160]

speak for themselves, showing how the idea had developed from the ugliness of the early Greek ideal, to beauty in the Augustan age of Rome, and how it had again declined both in art and in comeliness during the period of Byzantine Christianity, as exhibited in the annexed (Fig. 49), known as the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 49.

[paragraph continues] "Gnostic Gorgon." The inscription upon this undoubted amulet (actual size) from King's Gnostics [*261] (p. 67) being translated, reads: "Holy, holy, Lord of Sabaoth, hosanna in the highest, the Blessed." [*262]

A Medusa's head very similar to the one last mentioned is given in Gnostics (p. 119) as the seal of S. Servatius, Maestricht Cathedral, which of course brings it

[p. 161]

down as an amulet to much later times. We know that both on seals and on coins objects prophylactic against fascination were common even in the late Middle Ages, and were used down to a period long since the Reformation. Our own Anglo-Saxon kings adopted such devices on their coins. [*263] Not only were the Greek and Etruscan Gorgons common in Europe, representing a widely-received myth, but in the East, Bhavani, the Destructive Female Principle, is still represented with a head exactly agreeing with the most ancient type of the Medusa: with huge tusks, tongue thrust out, and with snakes twining about the throat, just as may still be seen in the Etruscan tomb of the Volumni at Perugia, and such as was described by Hesiod of old. "In the centre of that tomb [*264] is an enormous Gorgon's head, hewn from the dark rock, with eyes upturned in horror, gleaming from the gloom, teeth bristling whitely in the open mouth, wings on the temples, and snakes knotted over the brow. You confess the terror of the image, and almost expect to hear

	 
		"Some whisper from that horrid mouth
		   Of strange unearthly tone;
		 A wild infernal laugh to thrill
		   One's marrow to the bone.
		 But, no! it grins like horrid Death,
		   And silent as a stone."
		
		 A lamp of earthenware was suspended over the doorway of this same chamber, having another Medusa's head on the bottom. A similar lamp was suspended from the ceiling of the central chamber.

[p. 162]

The illustration here given is from the under side of a very beautifully wrought bronze lamp in the Museum at Cortona, intended for suspension, and it would seem from these several instances, that this mode of depicting the Gorgon's head was, as we are told, [*265] a very common Etruscan sepulchral decoration. 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 50.
 Fig. 50 is from a poor print sold at the Museum, but it gives a better idea of the Medusa and her surroundings than either of the plates in Dennis's book. About this lamp he says (vol. ii. p. 402): "But the wonder of ancient wonders, in the Museum of Cortona, is a bronze lamp of such surpassing beauty and elaboration of workmanship as to throw into shade every toreutic work of this class yet discovered in the soil of Etruria." It is circular, about 23 inches in diameter, hollow like a bowl, but from the centre rises a sort of conical chimney or tube, to which must have been attached a chain for its suspension. Round the rim are sixteen lamps of classic form, fed by oil from the great bowl, and adorned with foliage in relief. Alternating with them are heads of the horned and bearded Bacchus. At the bottom of each lamp is a figure in relief--alternately a draped siren with

[p. 163]

wings outspread, and a naked satyr playing the double pipes, having a dolphin beneath his feet. "In a band encircling it are lions, leopards, wolves, griffons in pairs, devouring a bull, a horse, a boar, and a stag." The bottom is hollowed in the centre and contains a huge Gorgon's face. "It is a libel on the face of fair Dian, to say that this hideous visage symbolises the moon. . . . There is every reason to believe it was suspended in a tomb, perhaps in a temple as a sacrificial lamp. . . . It is undoubtedly of ante-Roman times, and I think it may safely be referred to the fifth century of Rome, or to the close of Etruscan independence." [*266]

Gorgon's heads are found also on the cinerary urns, "winged and snaked, sometimes set in acanthus leaves." Some of these, coloured to the life, are now to be seen in the Museum at 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 51
 Perugia.

Fig. 51 is from a vase at Chiusi, which Dennis says (vol. ii. p. 221) is typical of the early Etruscan style; but whether the Greeks or the Etruscans first discarded hideousness is uncertain. It is however clear that the latter people had done so before Roman times, for in the same tomb of the Volumni, where the frightful face is on the ceiling, is to be found an "ash chest" with a patera at each angle, having a Gorgon's head, "no longer the hideous

[p. 164]

mask of the original idea, but the beautiful Medusa of later art, [*267] with a pair of serpents knotted on her head and tied beneath her chin, and wings also springing from her brows." [*268]

Not only did the pictorial idea change and develop, but as extremes meet, so it came in time to be believed, that it was her marvellous beauty and not her hideousness, that had turned beholders into stone. [*269]

One of the most beautiful Medusas of late Greek

Click to enlarge
FIG. 52--From Naples Museum.

art is to be seen in Rome. It is a highly sculptured relief in the Villa Ludovisi, where also is the Aurora of Guercino, now unfortunately closed to the public. She is there represented as a woman of severe though grand beauty, in her dying moments. There are no snakes about her head, but her hair lies in suggestive snake-like tresses about her neck and shoulders. Her eyes are closed, but yet she does not appear dead. This beautiful sculpture is ascribed

[p. 165]

to the Macedonian period of Greek art. A much later type still is shown in the triskelion arms of Sicily, in the chapter on Crosses (<page 290>).

The legend of the Gorgoneion although apparently unknown to the Egyptians is traceable in the far East, whence indeed the story of Perseus is said to have been brought. It is known in Cambodia and Borneo, in Tahiti and in far-off Peru. 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 53.
 From Tahiti
 The accompanying illustrations amply support this statement. Fig. 53 was taken from the exhibits at the Paris Exhibition of 1889. Those from Peru are from Wiener's Perou et Bolivie, Paris, 1880. The dog-tooth Medusa seems to have been quite a common object in ancient Peru, judging from the variety of examples given by Wiener. This looks like another link in the chain of evidence whence both the South Seas and South America were originally peopled. There were almost identical heads from Cambodia. In the Museum at Taunton are several Dyak shields from Borneo. Every one has for its centre a hideous face with the conventional tusks, just like those here shown from Peru (Figs. 54, 55). These representations are doubtless the survival of primaeval habit and spring from the central idea embodied in the Medusa.

By some it was held long ago that the Gorgon's head was a symbol of the lunar disc, hence the allusion by Dennis to "fair Dian." Another theory has been broached in modern times, that "the Gorgon of antiquity was nothing but an ape or ourang-outang, seen on the African coast by some early Greek or Phoenician mariner; and that its ferocious air, its

[p. 166]

horrible tusks, its features and form caricaturing humanity, seized on his imagination, which reproduced the monster in the series of myths." [*270]

The story of the Medusa is but an incident in the early belief in the evil eye, and should be carefully

Click to enlarge
FIG. 54., 55.
 From Peru.

studied by any who are interested in the subject. After using it effectually in the turning of his enemy Polydectes into stone, Perseus presented the terrible head to Pallas, the Athenian goddess, who placed it on her aegis, and in nearly all her statues, and those of her Roman counterpart Minerva, she bears this notable mask as an amulet. [*271]

Originally the aegis was a goat's hide worn as a protective garment, but later it became a breastplate, and afterwards a shield. When Minerva is represented with a shield as the war goddess, she has the gorgon's head emblazoned upon it. Thus was

[p. 167]

first set the fashion of bearing some prophylactic device by men in battle, which should first attract the angry glance of their enemies and then baffle their malignity. A custom once begun, and by so powerful a deity as the Goddess Athena, would not long want imitators; consequently representations of fighting men, especially on Greek vases, the oldest-known European pictures, show some object or other depicted upon breastplate or shield, but always one that was considered effective as a protector. [*272] As the number of protectors came to be more numerous, so the variety of device upon the shield became greater: each warrior-chief naturally adopting that in which he placed the greatest faith. According to Plutarch, Ulysses adopted the dolphin as his special charm; both on his signet and on his shield. It is said that he chose this fish to commemorate the saving of Telemachus from drowning by its means.

Since then the dolphin has become a favourite device, and was in Roman times one of the special charms against the evil eye. [*273] On an ancient vase at Arezzo [*274] is a representation of Hercules and Telamon fighting the Amazons, who are all armed with round shields. The shield of one of the Amazons bears the Gorgoneion; another who is wounded bears a Cantharus or two-handled cup on her shield, and on her

[p. 168]

cuirass a lion. The hero Telamon bears a round shield just like the Amazons with a large lion passant upon it. Each of the figures represented may be taken as a leader, and so of course each of that leader's following would bear the same device. When under the Roman Empire the usages of war had become regulated by minute laws, the distinguishing badges of the various legions were prescribed with great exactness. The devices of several are referred to by Tacitus and also by Ammianus. They were borne by each man on his shield, and fortunately we are still able to see what many of those designs were.

A few of these devices here given (Figs. 56-66) are from Notitia Dignitatum, [*275] by Guido Pancirolo, Lugduni, 1608. [*276] Of the various subjects adopted by authority as the "cognisances" of the Roman legions, we have made a typical selection. One main idea seems to have influenced the choice of design. In all the scores of representations preserved in this remarkable book nearly all had a symbol of the sun in some form or other as its centre. There are twenty-one different insignia of the Thracian legions, of which sixteen are here given; all but one of the twenty-one had a circle in

[p. 169]

its centre. [*277] Many had the crescent as well as the sun; and one, the Thaanni, had six stars (probably the Pleiades) enclosed within the crescent.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 56--Auxilia Palatina XVIII. p. 21.

Many of the shields bore various animals as "supporters." These may have been intended to represent the sun, or as symbols of it. [*278]

[p. 170]

 

Click to enlarge
FIG. 57.--Legiones Comitatenses XXI. p. 36 (Thracians)

 

[p. 171]

In the descriptions given, it is quite clear that the colours, as well as the devices, had each their symbolic meaning. [*279] The Ascarii Seniores had their shield half white and the rest ferruginea. There were two purple hemicycles united in the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 58.--Legiones Palatinae XV. p. 20.

centre with two half-circles. Pancirolo calls the whole a skilful design of symbol (arguta symboli inventio), for purple is the imperial colour.

The description of the insignia of the Ascarii in which the above occurs, if it had been in modern heraldic language, might well apply to mediaeval coats. [*280]

[p. 172]

We are told that the Honoriani Seniores (cavalry) bore a white shield, in which a golden centre (aureus umbilicus) was surrounded by a yellow circle.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 59.--Legiones Comitatenses IX. p. 33.

[paragraph continues] The Martiarii Seniores had two jackals rampant supporting an orb with a Greek cross, surmounted by a crescent. The Cornuti had two griffins' heads joined 
Click to enlarge
FIG 60. Auxilia Palatina
 on a pedestal, with the inevitable sun circle in the centre, thus providing a "difference" to distinguish them from the Celtae, who belonged to the Western Army. [*281] Long ages before the Roman period to which these insignia belong, Grecian heroes carried on their shields what we may fairly term "armorial bearings." The earliest known pictures, such as the vase paintings before referred to, show that the device

[p. 173]

could not have been intended to distinguish any leader from his following. They give plenty of examples of both helmets and shields. None of the helmets had visors, which appeared at a much later period, while the shields had

Click to enlarge
FIG. 61.--Auxilia Palatina XVIII. p. 30.
 (All the foregoing belong to the Army of the East.)

a common device for each clan or troop--of these by. far the most frequently seen was the Gorgoneion. The various ancient representations

Click to enlarge
FIG. 62.-- Army of the West, p. 124 (Selection).

of objects depicted on shields seem to show that these were adopted at the special or separate pleasure of the individual chieftains, and the device may be said to depict his clan totem. They were, like the cognizances of our mediaeval knights in their day, not specially distinctive of family, but more like the Roman insignia, the badges of particular corps. Thus, according to Aeschylus, in a

[p. 174]

story dating from the dawn of history, the heroes at the siege of Thebes bore distinctive devices on their shields, which the poet describes, and we may at least accept his statements as of historic value.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 63.--Army of the West, p. 125.

[paragraph continues] One, Parthenopaeus, had on his shield a sphinx devouring a prostrate Theban; another, Typhon (our devil) belching forth flames and smoke. The mention of a sphinx as a device naturally leads one to Egypt, but there is a remarkable absence of anything

[p. 175]

which could be called a cognizance upon the arms of ancient Egypt, so that we of course conclude

Click to enlarge
FIG. 64.--Army of the West, p. 127.

that in this particular the Greeks obtained their notions elsewhere. [*282]

[p. 176]

The variety of devices upon Chinese shields, and the known unchangeable antiquity of everything in China, make it a fair assumption that the early Greeks and Etruscans obtained the custom of painting

Click to enlarge
FIG. 65.--Army of the West, p. 125.

their shields from oriental people, and not from Egypt. Among the Japanese, enormous fans are used as ensigns in war, with various devices painted upon them; moreover the armorial bearings, the totems of families, are painted on fans. The fan is

[p. 177]

considered as a symbol of life--the rivet end is the starting point, and as the rays expand, so the road of, life widens out. [*283] The suggestion that the original custom of emblazoning strange devices upon

Click to enlarge
FIG. 66.--Army of the West, p. 127.

warriors' shields, to catch the eye of the enemy, is an Oriental one, lends additional weight to the contention that in the Medusa's head we have the germ of armorial device, because, as before mentioned, Bhavani

[p. 178]

corresponds to and is most likely the prototype of the Greek Gorgon, whereas there is no evidence of anything analogous in ancient Egyptian mythology.

Having then, as we believe, run the original idea to its source, it is easy to see how it became adopted practically. The belief in the power of the malignant eye, especially of a furious foe, needed something to be held up before it, which should absorb the poison of the first glance. What then so effective as a strangely attractive pictorial device, to be carried in front of the warrior on his shield, on which might first alight the dreaded eye? It was thought that a protection against the dire invisible blow was a much greater safeguard than the best shield or buckler against the stroke of sword or spear. Hence the habit of presenting a strange sight to the enemy grew and developed until it crystallised into a custom which has endured to this day, but whose origin and meaning have been utterly forgotten.

To continue the chain of evidence, we find the Roman insignia continued down to Norman times. In the long interval between the placing of the Medusa's head upon the aegis of Athena, and even the Greek, or still later Roman age, a great variety of device had been adopted by fighting men, to be painted on their shields. The stranger and more bizarre the design, so much the more potent.

In the Bayeux tapestry, the figures upon the shields of the Norman knights were generally simple and single, carrying on for the most part the style of the Roman shields. This is the more easily accounted for when we remember that the Franks and Gauls had, from Constantine's time onwards, been the chief material of the Roman

[p. 179]

armies, and that after the destruction of the Empire, they would be likely to maintain, or at least not to forget, the institutions and traditions of the school in which they had been trained. We therefore expect to find that down to a moderately late period, the arms and discipline of the Franks would perpetuate, in the main, those of their Roman teachers. In another branch of our subject we see how various emblems and simple amulets came to be used not only singly, but compounded and combined, from the most simple to the most various and complicated types, in all intervening stages; so also we find that the devices called armorial bearings became compounded and complicated during the age known as that of Chivalry, until at last a systematic form of such combination developed itself into a quasi-science, which we now call Heraldry. Of course in the meantime the old notion of specially favourite amulets (shall we call them totems?) had become fixed, and thus certain devices had been adopted by heads of families or tribes which their dependants adopted as their own special cognizance, and naturally when families became united by marriage, each party contributed his or her own special family device, and hence arose what is known as "quartering of arms." This having grown into a well-recognised system with its official experts and exponents, the combination of totems, amulets, or special devices, has at length arrived at the position of a pictorial family history, read with greater pride, and, in these enlightened days, more highly valued, than any other records however compiled. It preserves the mark of lineage to the highest and the noblest born, through means which, though retained

[p. 180]

and still believed in by humbler people, are treated with scoffing and contempt by those most interested. Superstition and ignorance are the mildest words to express the opinions of the adepts in heraldry, for those who still cherish the root notions on which heraldry is founded. Who are the totemists, who are the really ignorant, but those who boast loudest of their refinement, their cultivation, their enlightenment, as proved by their long pedigree, recorded by amulets?

Footnotes

^158:259 King, Gnostics, pp. 67, 223. Lucian says: "It was an amulet against the evil eye: what could be more potent than the face of the Queen of Hell?"

^159:260 There are several similar ones, quite flat at the back, and, like this, perforated with holes for suspension, in the Museums of Palermo and Girgenti. They were evidently intended to be hung up against a wall or other flat surface.

^160:261 For permission to copy illustrations from the works of the late Rev. C. W. King, I am indebted to the kindness of Mr. David Nutt, and Messrs. G. Bell and Sons.

^160:262 Agios agios koas fauth usanas tois ypsistois eylogimenos. This legend, full of corruptions, is intended for: Agios, Agios, Kurios Sabauth, usanna tois ypsistois eulogemenos (King, Handbook of Engraved Gems, p. 377).

^161:263 A large number of these may be seen in Archaeologia, vol. xix.; and in the Proceedings of the Somerset Arch. and Nat. Hist. Society, vol. i. 1849.

^161:264 Dennis, Cities of Etruria, vol. ii. p. 441.

^162:265 Dennis, op. cit. vol. i. p. 199.

^163:266 The writer knew the lamp well, and possessed the print here copied many years before reading Mr. Dennis's description.

^164:267 Dennis, op. cit. vol. ii. p. 439.

^164:268 None of the early Medusas are given by Montfaucon, whose "Antiquity" does not seem to include anything but quite late objects.

^164:269 The accompanying heads, Fig. 52, from the Naples Museum, are simply door-knockers from Pompeii, but they admirably represent the transition period from the earlier grim and ferocious face, to the smiling and beautiful. It will be noted that the protruded tongue is retained in two, while in one there is an indication of the old splitting.

^166:270 Dennis, op. cit. vol. ii. p. 22 1.

^166:271 At Athens new-born infants "were commonly wrapped in a cloth, wherein was represented the Gorgon's head, because that was described in the shield of Minerva, the protectress of that city, whereby, it may be, infants were committed to the goddess's care" (Potter, Archaeol. Graec. ii. p. 320).

^167:272 The same objects appear over and over again in later times, avowedly as charms against the evil eye.

^167:273 See gem, Fig. 18; also Water Bottle, Fig. 179, from the British Museum.

The dolphin is the badge of the well-known Somerset family of Fitz-James, two of whom, Richard, Bishop of London, and his nephew, Sir John Fitz-James, Lord Chief justice, were the two principal founders of Bruton School, A.D. 1519. The original foundation deed, a most interesting document, is given at length by the Rev. F. W. Weaver in Som. and Dor. Notes and Queries, iii. xxii. 241.

^167:274 Plates in Dennis's Etruria, vol. ii. p. 387.

^168:275 Coloured copies of these insignia will be found in Logan's History of the Scottish Gael.

^168:276 "This valuable record," Mr. Hodgkin says (Italy and her Invaders A. D. 376 to 476. Oxford, 1880, Vol. i. p. 200) "was compiled in the fifth century. It is a complete Official Directory and Army List of the whole Roman Empire, and it is of incalculable value for the decision of all sorts of questions, antiquarian and historical." The work of Pancirolo consists of the original text, compiled as above, together with his lengthy and important Commentarium.

In the Bodleian Library is a very beautiful MS. copy (Canon. Misc. 378) of the text of the Notitia, and containing the whole of the insignia; moreover, all are highly coloured, so that the curious may learn precisely what these various badges were like. This is the more important because, even in those days, as the work fully explains, colour in itself entered largely as an element into the several designs.

^169:277 It may be accepted as a fact that recognition of the sun was quite characteristic of the army of the East, while there are many more exceptions to the rule, in that of the West.

^169:278 Surely it is no straining of Scripture to suggest that the Psalmist must [p. 170] have been well used to the device as the central ornament, and familiar with its object, when he says: "For the Lord God is a sun and shield" (Psalm lxxxiv. 11).

^171:279 "Ascarii Juniores, in luteo clypeo, quem latus limbus rubeus circumscribit, orbem aureum ferunt: unde octo luteae cuspides acutae exeunt. In Madruciatio, globus nigris lineis in septem partes dividitur, quae forte septem terrae habitatae climata referunt, eaque Imperio Rom. subesse."--Notitia, p. 39.

^171:280 Many similar allusions to the colours of the various badges might be given, but in the Oxford MS. these all tell their own tale. It will be noticed that there was another legion--Ascarii Juniores--but these belonged to the Western Army and had a different shield.

^172:281 The popular notion regarding coats of arms is no doubt accurately reflected by the leader-writer who penned the following: "Armorial bearings, we may presume, were originally adopted to distinguish a military leader in the throng of fighting men from a host of others similarly accoutred, and all with their vizors down. They served, in short, as a sort of hieroglyphics, invented in an unlettered age, before the capability of reading a more conventional form of writing had become general" (Standard, June 9, 1894). He will therefore perhaps be surprised to see how much like mediaeval shields were those of the Roman legions.

^175:282 The combination of protective symbols upon the same shield is by no means a feature peculiar to mediaeval blazonry or modern heraldry. The ancient Etruscans were adepts at it, for on a coupe found at Vulci, now in the Berlin Museum (given in Daremberg et Saglio, p. 187), is a combat between Poseidon and Ephialtes. On the shield of the former are depicted a dolphin, scorpion, stag, serpent, lizard and crab, while on that of the latter there is only a horse rampant (the modern arms of Kent) with the legend KALON.

^177:283 "Fans of Japan," M. Salwey in Spectator, Mar. 17, 1894.

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 181]

 

CHAPTER VI

 

CRESCENTS, HORNS, HORSESHOES

EVERYBODY is familiar with the lunar appearance popularly known as "the old moon in the arms of the new," in which a dark disc is seen within the crescent. Precisely this phase was adopted as one of the most frequent crests to be seen upon the head of more than one of the Egyptian gods and goddesses. Thoth or Tehuti, [*284] the scribe who weighed the souls when brought to judgment ("in one aspect he is the god of the moon"), and Chonsu, the hawk-headed, are both represented with the crescent and disc. Isis, and Hathor who was closely connected and sometimes actually confounded with her, [*285] bear the disc with the horns of the crescent much prolonged, so as to assume the appearance of the horns of a cow. Hathor is often represented with the head of a cow on a human body, and also frequently as a cow, having the disc and horns on its head. At Philae, Denderah, and elsewhere, she is represented as beautiful, while at the same time she has a sort of half-human, half-bovine face. Hathor became in late Greek and Roman times completely identified with Isis. "Isis is the female and receptive principle of generation." [*286]

[p. 182]

It is with the crescent and disc head-dress that we now have to do. Of course the deities thus distinguished by the crescent were moon-gods; but in the case of the gods Thoth and Chonsu the disc represented the sun also, from their intimate connection with Ra, the Sun-God of Egypt. Among the Greeks, who got much of their mythology from Egypt, the counterparts of Isis and Hathor were Artemis and Io, the latter of whom became at length identical with Hera; all of these were symbolised by the Crescent. [*287]

The Greek Io was frequently represented by a cow, [*288] as at Amyclae. She is said to have been changed into a cow by Hera, and she was considered in the heroic age to be the cow-goddess Hera herself. The latter is called, from her cow-face, boupis by Homer. In the battle of the gods, Hera took the form of a white cow, Nivea Saturnia vacca. [*289] Cows' heads were on the coins of Samos, where was the most ancient temple of Hera. In Corinth [*290] she had the epithet boynaia, and white cows were sacrificed in her honour. [*291] The priestesses of Hera rode in a car drawn by white bulls to her temple at Argos. [*292] It is said that the Egyptian Isis was born at Argos, [*293] and that she was identified with the cow-shaped Io, who, as before stated, was the same as Hera, and both were represented in Egypt as well as in Greece with cows' horns. [*294] In the religious mysteries of Argos, Io continued to be the old name

[p. 183]

 

Click to enlarge
FIG. 68.

 

for the moon. [*295] We are further told distinctly and repeatedly, that the cow horns of Io-Hera, who was also often represented with a cow's face, like that of Isis-Hathor, were derived from the symbolic horns of the crescent moon. [*296]

Hera, under her old moon-name Io, had a celebrated temple on the site of Byzantium, said to have been founded by her daughter Keroessa, "the horned." [*297] The crescent, which was in all antiquity and throughout the Middle Ages the symbol of Byzantium, and which is now the symbol of the Turkish Empire, is a direct inheritance from Byzantium's mythical foundress Keroessa, the daughter of the moon-goddess Io-Hera; for it is certain the Turks did not bring it with them from Asia, but found it already the "cognizance" of Byzantium. The name Bosphorus is said to be "the passage of the cow": Io, according to the legend, having there crossed into Europe in that form. [*298]

The intimate connection of Hera and all her relatives with the crescent, is shown by the remarkable figures in coarse terra cotta, of which so many were discovered by Schliemann at Mycenae, and now to be seen in the Athens Museum. The illustrations herewith (Fig. 68) are from the writer's own sketches from the original painted pottery at Athens, but a coloured plate of one of them appears in Schliemann's book on Tiryns and Mycenae. He calls them Hera images, and the strange association of the female form with the crescent rather confirms the opinion that these were the household gods (like

[p. 184]

[paragraph continues] Penates or Teraphim) of those ancient Greeks, who relied upon their protection against the evil eye. [*299] They certainly belong to that class of objects, of which we have other striking examples. They are in any case very remarkable evidences of the emblematic treatment of a divinity at a very early date; for it must be admitted that the use of the crescent as the body of the figure in each of the many examples at Athens is of itself remarkable, and it is certainly reasonable to maintain that all relate to one and the same personality.

When the several attributes of the various deities came to be represented by concrete shapes, as, for example, the "lowing one" by horns, the early figurative significations were forgotten, and they became so mixed up, confused, and conventionalised, that a cow -face, a crescent, or a cow's horns stood alike for Isis, Hathor, Io, Hera, or Demeter; while an owl represented Athena as the type of wisdom and as one of the goddesses of the dawn. In fact the cow, the crescent, the horns, and the owl became their recognised attributes or symbols-precisely as in Christian art the man's

[p. 185]

face, the winged lion, the bull, and the eagle have become the recognised symbols or attributes of the four Evangelists.

Having then shown that the same symbols represented beings which originally were held to be distinct and separate, it is not difficult to see how their separate identities became lost, and from the same symbol each and all would at last come to be regarded as one and the same person. Not only a number of goddesses did actually become mixed and confused into one, but several of the gods likewise.

"Jove, Pluto, Phoebus, Bacchus, all are one," was sung by Orpheus, [*300] thus adopting the grand principle of Hindooism--that all the various deities are but names for the different attributes of the Almighty one. In further confirmation of this idea, we find that Virgil treated Bacchus the Wine God, the god of orgies and debauch, as only another form, we may call it an effect, of the life-giving, wine-producing sun. He makes Bacchus and Ceres stand for Osiris and Isis, the sun and moon, typified in the disc and crescent. Hence Bacchus is often represented with horns. [*301] In Hebrew a 'radiated' and a 'horned' head is signified by the same word. Hence, when Moses came down from the Mount, cornuta fuit facies ejus, according to the Vulgate; and in virtue of this mistranslation hath the Lawgiver ever been graced with those appendages." [*302]

[p. 186]

Without entering into the nice controversy here foreshadowed, it is quite enough for the present purpose to point to the fact that the authors of the Vulgate translation believed, from their own training and habit, that the Hebrew meaning was that the great, almost divine Moses, came down with actual horns upon his head. Moreover, this view has been actually maintained by more than one commentator.  [*303]

As with gods, so with regard to goddesses, we find the same pervading idea; and as we proceed, this will have constant illustration in the manifold combination of attributes certainly relating to one and the same being, but in their inception belonging to many distinct personifications.

"Apuleius quoque Isin--Deum Matrem, Minervam, Junonem, Dianam, Cererem, Venerem, Proserpinam, Hecatem unam, eandemque esse praedicat." [*304] If then all these various goddesses, like

[p. 187]

the gods sung by Orpheus, are "one and the same"--mere names representing various attributes of one great divinity--our oft-recurring difficulty in explaining the strange combination of charms in one complex amulet, vanishes, and that which was obscure becomes quite clear. [*305]

The remarkable inscription found by Lanciani (see <page 129>) does but confirm what we are trying to make plain, that one and the same deity appears over and over again under different names, representing diverse attributes.

To return to Isis: she "sometimes signifies the Moon when she is represented by a crescent; sometimes the Earth, as fecundated by the waters of the Nile. Hence water, as the issue of Osiris, is carried in a vase in her processions. Osiris is signified by an eye, also by an eye and a sceptre combined: his name being compounded of Os, many; and Iris, eye." [*306] We have seen how completely Isis, Artemis, and Diana were identical, and hence all three are habitually represented with the horned crescent, as their particular accompaniment or symbol: and further by the cow's head or cow's horns so often seen. When we speak of Diana the chaste huntress, it is manifestly under a very different aspect from that of the Ephesian Diana, whose typical statues are to be seen at Naples and elsewhere. Fig. 69 is from Menetrius, [*307] and represents one of the Roman ideas of the Ephesian goddess. In these statues the great feature is the numerous mammae which

[p. 188]

mark her as the type of human fertility. This latter conception is of purely Asiatic origin, though the 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 69.
 same fertility was ascribed to Isis; moreover, the Diana of Ephesus whose "image fell down from Jupiter," is, like Isis, allowed to be in that aspect the same person as the Indian Parvati. The multiplicity of mammae was the symbol of abundance of nutriment. The same symbols are used in representations of the Babylonian Ishtar and the Indian Devaki. [*308] The wide difference between the fertile matron of Ephesus and the chaste maiden of the Romans has to be carefully borne in mind. The illustrations we give in Chap. X. of statues of the former, show how the Romans ignored the most prominent of her Asiatic attributes, and portrayed her, by way of compromise, as a portly female of uncertain status, rather suggestive of her patronage, as Diana Lucina, of the monthly nurse.

Looking at Isis as the mother of Horus, [*309] in the

[p. 189]

act of nursing him (Fig. 70, from Wilkinson, iii. 112), one of the commonest forms in which she is represented, and remembering, too, that in the use of the same symbols, those of the crescent and horns,

Click to enlarge
FIG. 70., 71.

  [*310a]

she was succeeded by Artemis and Diana, one cannot but be struck with the wonderful similarity between her and the present-day Madonna and Child.

In one of the rock chambers at Silsilis on the Nile, is a relief of Isis suckling Horus, said [*310] to be "one of the most perfect specimens of Egyptian sculpture at its best period." It is treated in such a manner, and without the usual head ornaments, that one would be ready to believe the old Italian painters Lippi and Botticelli must have gone there,

[p. 190]

and have made true copies of what they saw, to be reproduced at home as the "Holy Family." In India, the infant Chrishna, the incarnate deity, in the arms of Devaki, is another very striking example [*311] (Fig. 72) of precisely the same subject. Moreover, in this the child is black with woolly hair--a thing

Click to enlarge
FIG. 72.

strange in India. Those who have seen the black figure at the top of the Scala Santa at Rome will not fail to be struck with the remarkable resemblance not only of the mother and child, but of the ray of light or nimbus round both heads. It is of a piece with the black Virgins to be seen elsewhere. [*312]

[p. 191]

In the statues of Diana of Ephesus (supposed to represent the original "image which fell down") at Naples and elsewhere, the face, hands, and feet, are of black marble, showing that it was intended to represent a black goddess; and it is maintained 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 73
 by some writers that the primaeval belief of mankind was that the Mother of the Gods was black. [*313]

Ishtar was adored in ancient Babylon

[p. 192]

much in the same manner as the Virgin is now; and amongst her other titles was "The Mother of the Gods." [*314] Fig. 73 is Ishtar, from Rawlinson's Ancient Monarchies, vol. i. p. 176. The same figure is reproduced in Layard, Nineveh and Babylon, p. 477; and in Inman, Ancient Faiths, vol. ii. p. 254. (See Appendix I.)

Again, the analogy of Diana Lucina and Diana Pronuba, the goddess of childbirth and of marriage,

Click to enlarge
FIG. 74.

  [*314a]

represented by the crescent, is well preserved in her successor the Madonna del parto, who in the well-known attribute of "Madonna Immaculata," [*315] is always depicted as standing on the crescent. It is easy to trace the chain of ideas. We must not forget that in one of her aspects Diana was a tree spirit or sylvan deity. Like the tree spirits before referred to, she helped women in travail." [*316]

Somewhat allied to the foregoing is the belief

[p. 193]

in what is understood by immaculate conception--another of those remarkable instincts which seem to have existed throughout the ages, and long antecedent to the Jewish prophecies. In the far East the Persian Mazda worshippers looked for the birth of a Saviour from a virgin mother. In the sacred books of Zoroaster we read: "We worship the guardian spirit of the holy maid Esetat-Jedhri, who is called the all-conquering, for she will bring him forth who will destroy the malice of the demons and of men." [*317] It was this firm belief which brought the Magi, many long centuries after the above was written, from the land of Zoroaster to worship Him whom they had heard of, as born of a virgin to be the King of the Jews. Ages upon ages earlier still, the belief was current in Egypt, for, according to some, Aroeris or the Elder Horus (the Greek Apollo) was born of Isis from a conception previous to her own birth; [*318] and we constantly see the unmistakable foreshadowing by Isis and Horus of the latter day Madonna e Bambino.

We know, too, that both Greeks and Romans fully believed in the facts implied, and they further believed that certain plants had the property of rendering women pregnant.

Diana was called the "Mother of the World," [*319] strangely like the title given to the Babylonian Ishtar. The Egyptian priests styled the moon, whose personification was Isis, "The Mother of the Universe." [*320]

[p. 194]

Domestic cattle were supposed to be under the special protection of Diana, hence we may well trace the extreme prevalence of amulets, symbolic of her attributes, upon horses. Diana was also identified through Artemis with the Greek Ilithya, the servant of Hera, and goddess of birth. She also was originally a moon-goddess, and the moon was always believed to exercise great influence on growth in general, but especially of children; so the attributes of Ilithya were passed on along with her moon-symbol, and consequently all those deities, ancient or modern, whose principal sign is the crescent, are looked upon as the special protectors of women and children against malign influence. The wearing of the crescent is a visible worship of the powerful being whose symbol it is, whether known as Isis, Parvati, Devaki, Kali, [*321] Bhavani, Artemis, Athena, Minerva, Diana or Madonna, who are all, as shown before, unam eandemque.

Seeing how every phase or attribute of nature had its special divinity, we are not surprised to learn that, in Imperial times, according to Varro, there were in Rome three temples on the Esquiline dedicated to the goddess of fever, and one to Mephitis. Readers of Tacitus will remember that a temple of

[p. 195]

[paragraph continues] Mephitis was the only building left standing after the sack of Cremona. There was also an altar dedicated to the evil eye (Mala Fortuna). "Near the Praetorian Camp, there was an altar to Verminus, god of microbes, and in the very centre of the Forum an altar to Cloacina, the goddess of typhoid." Those who know the spot can join the writer in testifying that she still reigns there with unabated power. The example of ancient Rome does but illustrate how ignorant people fly to the supernatural and miraculous, whenever attacked by evils of which they cannot understand the cause. Hence the increase of divinities in pagan times, when not only aspects of nature, but every disease, and almost every idea, had its personification. In mediaeval days there was no advance in real belief, but simply a transfer of these old-world ideas: having set up separate deities, they merely transposed them into attributes of the great Christian goddess, successor of Diana, whose cult then became all-supreme. It is a curious fact that when Rome, after the fall of the Empire, relapsed into its insanitary condition, the old worship reappeared in another shape, and a chapel arose near the Vatican to the "Madonna della Febre," [*322] the most popular in Rome, in times of sickness or epidemic.

As a parallel to this here in Britain, "the goddess of love was turned into St. Brychan's daughter; and as late as the fourteenth century lovers are said to have come from all parts to pray at her shrine in Anglesea." Another similar example "is found in the confusion of St. Bridget and an Irish goddess whose gifts were poetry, fire, and medicine. The

[p. 196]

saint became the Queen of Heaven, and was adored as 'Mary of the Gael'; but almost all the incidents in her legend can be referred to the pagan ritual." [*323]

Having sketched briefly the cult which may be called Isis-Diana worship, whose principal attributes were symbolised by the horned moon, we arrive at the conclusion that, to-day, horns, in one form or another, are of all objects the most common as amulets against the evil eye, whether affecting man or beast; so much so that it has at last come to be fully believed by Neapolitans that, in default of a horn of some shape in the concrete, the mere utterance of the word corno or corna is an effectual protection." [*323a] Further than this, the common name by which every charm or amulet against the evil eye is known, even the most elaborate, such as the Cimaruta, or Mano Pantea, is simply "un corno."

In one of her aspects Hecate was identical with the Gorgon, and hence we find very numerous instances, widely separated in locality, of the Medusa being furnished with horns. In Fig. 53, from the Paris Exhibition of 1889, though the moustaches seem to imply a male face, yet it is one of several hideous masks, all of which are ornamented with horns, while the eyebrows and moustaches are alike formed of the black horns of smaller animals. Some, from Cambodia, may, with every reason, be considered to represent the oriental Bhavani, the original of the Greek Gorgoneion. From Senegal were exhibited many roughly-carved wooden figures--images or gods, but mostly with horns projecting

[p. 197]

high above the head. There were two head-dresses ornamented with cowries, charms in themselves; but above each head-dress there were two antelope horns standing up conspicuously. The central object of the exhibits at Paris from Senegal was a typical house, ornamented at the four corners of the roof with large cow's horns turned upwards. From

Click to enlarge
FIG. 75.

[paragraph continues] Tahiti was exhibited an idol, with two large horns on its head carved in wood; moreover, this figure had the right hand raised with palm exposed. [*324]

Fig. 75 is from Peru, [*325] and the horns on this mask are of much the same character as those found in Tahiti (Fig. 53).

[p. 198]

On p. 44 Wiener gives a plate showing the interior of a tomb. Above the group of figures and utensils it contains, is fixed, near the apex of the roof, a large mask with immense horns. This is evidently an amulet to Protect the dead.

Fig. 76 is a horned Medusa from the bust of one of the Emperors, in the Doria Gallery in Rome, showing that, in the time of the Empire, horns had been 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 76
 applied to the Medusa, in addition to the retention of her hideousness. These examples are sufficient to show that in all parts of the world not only is the Bhavani-Gorgoneion used as an amulet, but to add to its power, horns have been given to it; whether or not these are to replace the snakes does not appear. [*326] Later we shall show how the horns of the crescent are represented by a snake, thus combining the efficacy of two separate symbols into one powerful charm. Not only is the horn found upon the head of the dead Medusa, but in many places upon the head of the living man. In the many passages of Scripture, where it is mentioned, the horn seems to have become the emblem of dignity and honour, though it may originally have been adopted as an amulet. [*326a] There is some reason for this suggestion from the analogy

[p. 199]

of the phylactery, an undoubted amulet, worn as a "frontlet" for a protection against the evil eye.

We know how in our Lord's time the wearing of these had become a fashion; how they got to be enlarged and exaggerated, until they were looked upon as a badge of sanctity, a mark of worldly honour. So much had they become, in this way, the instruments of hypocrisy, that they brought upon the Pharisees the Master's denunciation. Why should not the use of both phylactery and horn have had the same origin? The defiling of his horn in the dust by Job (xvi. 15) and the exalting of his horn by the Psalmist (lxxxix. 17, 24; xcii. 10) seem both to point in the same direction, and to show that it was worn as a mark of distinction--something to attract attention and to bespeak respect. In the present day, the curious spiral ornaments worn on each side of the head by Dutch women, must surely be something more than a mere coincidence, in their resemblance to the ram's horns so often seen upon the heads of Jupiter and Bacchus. The women of the Druses of Lebanon wear silver horns upon their heads, larger or smaller, to distinguish the married from the single. The writer can bear witness that the Jewesses of Tunis also wear, as part of their regular costume, a sort of pointed cap, much higher on the matron than the maid. It is quite well understood there that this headdress is the survival of the Scriptural horn. In South Africa [*327] the women of some tribes ornament their heads with buffalo horns. Horns are worn as amulets by Africans of both sexes; [*328] and we see that

[p. 200]

 

Click to enlarge
FIG. 77.--From Catlin, i. 146.

 

[p. 201]

elsewhere they are not now restricted to female wear, any more than in the time of David. Catlin [*329] gives portraits of many North American Indians who wear the skins of bisons on their heads with the horns attached. We reproduce one (Fig. 77), that of Mah-to-wo-pa, as it contains another important amulet, besides the very conspicuous horns upon his head. Also it should be noted that on his spear are two horns, with a feather close by in a conspicuous place, to draw attention to them, like the pheasant's tail on the Neapolitan harness. Not only, however, were these worn on the head of the savage, but on the helmet of the warrior, as a crest which his enemy might not fail to see, in case the shield, bearing some other amulet, should not attract the first fatal glance. In the Naples 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 78., 79.
 From Naples Museum
 Museum and in that of the Louvre are several ancient Greek bronze helmets (Figs. 78, 79). Each one bears a pair of branching horns of flat plate much of the same shape as the conventional horns of Isis. In the Louvre is a full-sized Greek helmet of gold, [*330] having the high branching horns. [*331] The helmet of the ancient Belgian

[p. 202]

[paragraph continues] "was ornamented with horns and a high plume." [*332] We may reasonably conclude that the high plume was not only ornamental, but, like the pheasants' tails now stuck on horses' heads, was intended to attract the eye of the malevolent and to direct it upon the protecting horns. Who will undertake to assert that the horns on the Greek, Etruscan, Belgic, or Saxon warrior, were worn for a purpose different from those on the head of Catlin's Mandan chief?

Besides those borne on the helmet by Greeks and others, horns were worn as amulets by man and beast; 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 80
 so they are to this day. The ancient Egyptian one (Fig. 80) is from the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. It is carved out of cornelian or some hard stone. Horns of this kind are often thus made at Constantinople, of two tusks united, or like this, carved out of fine stone so as to form a crescent.

Among the Louvre ancient gems are horns of agate set in gold with eyelets for suspension, especially Nos. 726, 727, while No. 729 has three horns so set. Compare. this with the modern Italian charm, the hand holding three coral horns suspended, see centre of Fig. 81. [*333]

Necklaces and bracelets formed of suspended crescents and horned heads of oxen are common in every collection of ancient jewellery. [*334]

[p. 203]

There is abundant evidence, moreover, that our own British forefathers wore these things, for in the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 81.-From the Author's Collection.

tumuli which have been opened in various places in England, have been found "crescents made of wolves'

[p. 204]

teeth and boars' tusks, which were perforated and worn as charms." [*335]

In a Dorsetshire barrow was found a perforated boar's tusk. [*336] Crescents made of boars' tusks are favourite ornaments on horses' breasts in Constantinople, where dread of the evil eye for his horse makes the Turk forget his antipathy to the pig.

In Naples, horns both in the form of crescents and like those of animals are as common as blackberries, upon the trappings of horses. Examples of each are to be seen in Figs. 83, 84; but the single pendent horn, whether of brass or white metal, of silver, coral, pearl, or bone, may be said to be almost invariable upon man and beast in Italy. A horn of one or other of these materials is to be seen hanging to the watch-chain of nearly every Italian one meets, who wears any such things; while many wear them as hidden charms on the breast, next the skin. [*337]

Of the common Neapolitan cart harness, shown on Fig. 82, the ornaments are literally made up of charms and prophylactics. Photogravure cannot adequately represent this, for it fails to show that the whole thing is kept very bright; and all being of polished brass, it has a flashing and most attractive appearance, which cannot be overlooked, in any sense of the word. On his head the horse carries a

[p. 205]

 

Click to enlarge
FIG. 82.--From the Author's Collection.

 

[p. 206]

bell, with four jingling clappers, surmounted by a crescent; another crescent, having horns pointing downwards, shows beneath the bell. On the off cheek is a piece of the inevitable wolf skin, a warning to every versipelle whose wicked eye may light upon the horse. Outside the wolf skin is a bunch of bright, many-coloured ribbons, and upon them is hung the single pendent horn. The colours, which do not come out in the photograph, as before explained, are a part of the business, for coloured threads and ribbons enter largely into all matters relating to witchcraft. Besides all these things, the bridle or head-stall is bedecked with a pheasant's tail, another attractive object to be seen on nearly every Neapolitan or Roman horse's head-gear. The bright brass-plating, engraved with saints or angels, completes this powerful battery of resisting charms, so that an evil glance must be fully absorbed, baffled, or exhausted before it can fix itself upon the animal.

It may be well here to point out other peculiarities of horse gear which, though so very common in Naples, are not generally known, and perhaps have passed unnoticed by many, who are familiar with the general appearance. There is no bit in the horse's mouth, but a metal plate with two projecting arms rests on the nasal bone above the nostrils; to these the reins are attached, and a subsidiary strap, on each side passing through a ring, is fastened to a jointed plate with rough edges resting on the under jaw opposite the nose plate. Any pull on this latter causes the nose and jaw to be held in a powerful grip, far more effective than a common bit. Nearly all the cab horses are driven with a contrivance of this kind.

[p. 207]

[paragraph continues] Neapolitan horses being small, and the carts having very high wheels, the shafts have to be kept at a considerable distance above the animal's back, and the loads are so adjusted as to bear very little on him. The very high pommel and brightly-plated saddle are peculiar to Southern Italy and Sicily. In Naples the two brazen flags, swinging about, above the horse's back, are almost invariable. They are said to be typical of the "flaming sword which turned every way" (Gen. iii. 24), and they are no doubt intended as part of the guard, protecting the life of the horse bearing them; for they are an unfailing attraction to the eye whether evil or not. [*338] The high pommel ends in another patch of wolf skin and more red worsted round the spindle of the vanes. [*339] The figure standing upon the little round barrel at the back of the pommel is San Gennaro. This ornament varies according to the fancy of the

[p. 208]

owner, but the little round barrel is invariable, so is the row of studs on the front of the pommel; but I have never been able to learn the meaning of

Click to enlarge
FIG. 83.--From the Author's Collection.

either. These pommels are, however, like the prows of Venetian gondolas, all alike.

In Figs. 83 and 84 are examples of amulets, one or more of which are to be found upon every cab horse in Naples. The small branching horns at the left

[p. 209]

corner of Fig. 84 are carried on his head between his cars, and very few horses are to be seen without this particular article, though of course varied in form;

Click to enlarge
FIG. 84.--From the Author's Collection.

some are of brass and some of white metal. The pendent horn next the pair of horns, is that which is worn on the off cheek with the ribbons, wolf skin, and pheasant's tail. The pendent crescents are often worn fastened upon the loin strap on each side, as well as on the forehead--a favourite place for a

[p. 210]

half-moon, just as it is here in Somerset. All the other amulets shown on both figures are screwed into the pommel of the little pad on the horse's back, and in some cases form a stud for the bearing rein. In one, the screw by which it is fixed is shown. All these are avowedly carried contra la jettatura, and each owner chooses the one he thinks most effectual or ornamental. This is anything but an exhaustive collection, yet it very well represents the horse furniture of to-day. It is the result of many and long-separated visits to the shops, well known to the writer, where these things are made. Each may be taken as typical of the class of amulet to which it belongs, but there are many varieties of each kind, and of many more among the thousands of Neapolitan carosselle, which could not be procured unless specially ordered.

Of all the different objects upon the horses' backs, and no back is without one, by far the most numerous are the hands, in various positions or gestures. On a long rank of fourteen carosselle, we once saw three horses only which did not carry a hand. Of course this was rather exceptional, but it would be no exaggeration to say that up to a year or two ago, nearly every other cab horse in Naples carried a hand on his back. We shall speak of each of these horse amulets separately in its proper turn, but would here point out that the placing of the book in the paw of the lion, making him the "leone di San Marco," is the only visible sign, at least among the cabmen, of the thin veneer of Christianity, commonly overlaid upon Neapolitan paganism. In Rome these articles are not seen on horses' backs, though wolf skins, pheasants' tails, horns and crescents

[p. 211]

are plentiful enough. There, however, differing from Naples, are to be seen large quantities of silver rings, for human fingers, with a little pendent horn attached, like the one in Fig. 81. These are strung on rods, fifty or sixty in a row, and marked plainly in the shop windows, "Annelli contra la jettatura." That here shown was bought in the Piazza di Spagna. [*340]

We are told [*341] that petrified sharks' teeth owing to their tongue or horn shape were used as amulets against fascination in ancient times; probably they were fastened together, as boars' tusks are to-day, to form crescents.

Another singular form of horn amulet, is that of the combination of the two heads and fore legs of horned animals into a nondescript, as shown in Figs. 31-37. It will be seen later, from the illustrations of Cavalli Marini and other impossible animals, that charms made of a double-headed creature were rather favourites.

Horns were used as handles in various shapes for lamps of various kinds. Sometimes, as in Fig. 85, they have the crescent plainly marked with the name of the Ephesian Artemis, and in others, the plain crescent without knobs; plenty of these latter are to be seen at the Naples and other museums. Others again had handles of branching cows' horns, still pointing to the same deity in her cow-faced form (Fig. 86). Many of these lamps bore more than the single amulet of the handle: sometimes one, but often a number of objects are found upon them. That here shown has a scorpion upon it; a very

[p. 212]

common central ornament was a Medusa's head, perhaps found more frequently than any other on this kind of lamp, belonging to pagan times. These

Click to enlarge
FIG. 85--From Symbolica Diana Ephesiae Statua.

lamps are generally of bronze, though often of terra cotta. Subsequently, in the Christian period, the central ornament in lamps of this kind changed to a cock or a cross, but most commonly of all, to what is miscalled the labarum--the Greek monogram P, the initials of xristos. [*342] These are the lamps commonly found in the Roman Catacombs. A number of lamps from Pompeii is to be seen at Naples of this general shape--most of them have on the flat centre a Medusa, a Tragic mask, a hand, and for a handle a crescent, the head of an ox, horse, dog, swan, or a serpent. These latter are

[p. 213]

[paragraph continues] of course all identical as amulets with the same objects worn to-day by Neapolitan cab-horses. Who can doubt that the intention of these things upon the ancient lamps, was precisely the same as of those now on the horses, against the evil eye? [*343]

We have noticed the cows' horns affixed to the model house from Senegal. The Bataks of Sumatra also place horns of oxen on the gables of their houses by way of finials. [*344] Those who know Naples will not have failed to remark that many of the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 86.--From Naples Museum.

houses near the Porta Nolana have cows' horns, often painted blue, fixed against the wall, especially upon an angle, at about the height of the first floor, at just the height of the famous diavolo of Florence, <page 231>, Appendix II.

One of the entrances to Seville Cathedral, that which belonged to the original mosque, still retaining its horseshoe Moorish arch, leads from the famous Patio de los Naranjos (Court of the Orange-trees) into the Cathedral, and is a true relic of the

[p. 214]

noble Moslems who built the splendid tower of Seville. Over this door (Fig. 87) is hung by a chain 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 87.--At Seville
 the tusk of an elephant, and further out, but still commanding the same doorway, swings from the roof by another chain a large crocodile, sent as a present, no doubt as amulets of special power, to Alonso el Sabio in 1260, by the then Sultan of Egypt, with a request for the hand of the Wise Alonso's daughter. These two great amulets have been hanging there ever since, and lend a strangely weird appearance to the doorway of a Christian church. (See Appendix II.)

Many of our readers will probably have remarked that on the framework of that remarkable structure to be seen upon the Roman wine carts, which, rough as it is, forms a folding hood to shelter the contadino, there is almost always a small cow's horn. It is usually fixed to the side of the first piece of bent wood at the front of the hood, but in such a way, and in such a position, that it can be of no use except as amulet or ornament. Very often another cow's horn is seen hanging upon the axle, underneath the cart, along with the usual lantern.

How shall we account for almost identical objects

[p. 215]

to the crescents and horns we have been describing, when we find them in use among the negro savages of Ashantee? Fig. 88 shows three iron standards of native make, now to be seen in 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 88.
 the Museum at Taunton. They are from 20 to 23 inches in length, and by no means badly forged. They were brought from the west coast of Africa, where they are used to stick into the ground "to protect the crop sown from evil spirits," or, in other words, from the witchcraft of possessors of the evil eye.

In these objects the crescent surmounts the disc instead of enclosing it, just as it does in many examples of the insignia of Roman legions; and we cannot fail to be struck with the remarkable coincidence. One of the crescents has a prolongation of the stem ending in a flat surface, which we suggest may represent the head of the moon-goddess; and allowing for difference of treatment, and the separation of unknown ages in time, [*345] very remarkably preserves the same old notion, typified by the neck and head starting out of the crescent, of the terra-cotta figures from Mycenae, now in the Athens Museum (see Fig. 68).

[p. 216]

The third of these iron objects, used for the same purpose as the others, is more difficult to explain. It is submitted, as at least possible, and even plausible, taken in connection with its more evident companions, that this may be intended for a horn, point downwards, as in Neapolitan harness. Although we profess to be dealing with facts, yet again we submit that when such facts as we here produce can be marshalled together, it is but reasonable to deduce an intimate connection, and therefore that they are the products of one and the same idea in Naples and in Ashantee.

No doubt among savage and half-civilised races, plenty of other examples can be found of the use of crescents and horns, in positions analogous to those already mentioned: indeed a cow's horn hung up over the doorway of a stable or cowhouse may be seen anywhere in Italy, and the writer is of opinion it may often be found even here in England. Certainly there is no need to go to stables here, to find handsomely-polished pairs of horns hung up in halls; and stags' "heads" cannot be called uncommon, even in houses where the owners never saw a deer except in a park, or in the Zoo. [*346] Of course the enlightened owners would be indignant at any suggestion that these horns were put up as amulets, or for anything but ornament; yet, we ask, what first gave rise to the notion that these objects were suitable for ornament, or if there is any decorative propriety in them, say in the case of a suburban villa?

There is one custom, however, common amongst us enlightened English, as it is among Jews, Turks,

[p. 217]

infidels, and heretics all the world over, that of fixing old horseshoes [*346a] over, under, upon, or behind our doors. The English horseshoe is now somewhat of a conventional article--it is in itself an example of evolution; but an Oriental one can scarcely be called anything but the crescent, whether as represented on the Turkish ensign, on the gems of ancient Rome, or on the iron amulets of Ashantee. We may without discussion assume that the horseshoe wherever used is the handy conventional representative of the crescent. The Buddhist crescent emblem is a horseshoe, with the toe pointed like a Gothic arch" [*347] "The arch or bend of the mystical instrument borne by Isis--the sistrum--represented the lunar orbit." [*348] May we not then safely say the same of the horseshoe? At the Ashmolean Museum is a small sistrum in blue enamel, from Thebes, evidently an amulet.

Here in Somerset horseshoes are nailed on stable doors, hung up to the ceilings above the horses, or fastened to the walls of the cowhouse, "to keep off the pixies," those malicious sprites who are said to come and ride the horses at night, so that "very often in the mornin', there they be, all a-brokt out into a sweat, the very same's 'off they'd a-bin hard to work." This does not occur where the stable is properly protected by the powerful crescent horseshoe. [*349] Dwelling-houses are equally

[p. 218]

guarded against the entrance of a witch who can "overlook," by the shoe being nailed against the "dreckstool" [*350] or behind the door, especially if it be a "half-hatch." [*351]

Sometimes the shoe is found in combination with other amulets. At this moment, within half a mile of the spot where this is written, is a house with a horseshoe nailed behind the door, and above it what appears to be a book wrapped in black cloth. The present occupier cannot say what the book is, but nothing would induce him to have it disturbed or examined. He believes devoutly in its power to keep off "they there witches."

The editor of Brand (iii. p. 17) says that in 1813 he counted no less than seventeen horseshoes in Monmouth Street, London, nailed against the steps of doors. "Five or six are all that now remain in 1841." "That the horseshoe may never be pulled from your threshold!" was one of the good wishes or "sentiments" of the last century, and throws some light upon the unwillingness of my neighbour in Wellington to permit any disturbance of the protectors behind his door.

The late Duchess of St. Albans and her husband, Mr. Coutts, had two rusty, old, broken horseshoes fastened on the highest marble step, by which the house at Holly Lodge was entered from the lawn. The horseshoe has been also used for a talisman as well as an amulet; for in 1687 it was believed in Amsterdam that a stolen horseshoe placed on the

[p. 219]

chimney-hearth would bring good luck to the house. [*352]

In the tombs of the kings at Thebes (that of Rameses IX. No. 6) the king is represented as receiving the ankh, or symbol of life, from different goddesses, each of whom, in several scenes, holds him hand in hand. In one case, however, Hathor is presenting him with a double phallus, which is curiously, but evidently with intention, made to take the form of a horseshoe! In Tunis, Cairo, Constantinople, Spain, Italy, and Sicily, plenty of horseshoes may be seen in the streets fixed to the houses, as the writer can testify. At the Paris Exhibition of 1889 was a reproduction of a street in Old Cairo. Over several of the doors was hung a crocodile, a powerful amulet; on one house, however, was not only the crocodile, but on his snout, and also on his tail, were perched horseshoes, 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 89
 the crescent symbol of the pagan Diana, used as an amulet by the Mahomedan iconoclast!

The lamp shown in Fig. 85 has the crescent handle almost in horseshoe shape. The curious amulet, too (Fig. 89), from the Etruscan Museum at Bologna, can hardly represent anything but a horseshoe, while the round knobs at the heels are matched by those on the lamp; the same knobs are often seen upon crescents. There is a necklace in the

[p. 220]

[paragraph continues] Louvre consisting entirely of half-moons with these balls on the. ends. What they mean must be left to others to explain. It will be seen by Fig. 81, which exhibits no single article, except the three mystic eyes, which is not sold in the shops of Italy as distinctly contra la jettatura, that the horseshoe is one of the common charms worn on the watch-chain. This is always in addition to, never in place of, the inevitable horn of coral or metal.

Among certain people there is an aversion, an antipathy, to iron, as bringing evil to those who touch it. Possibly this may partly account for the strange though powerful amulet (phallus) adopted by the blacksmiths of ancient Rome and Pompeii to counteract the effect which the constant handling of iron might be expected to bring upon them.

The negroes of the Gold Coast remove all metal from their persons when they consult their fetish--a practice with which Freemasons will not fail to perceive reasons for lively sympathy. So the men who made the needfire in Scotland had to divest themselves of all metal. [*353] Another Scotch custom was that in making the clavie (a kind of Yuletide fire-wheel) at Burghead, no hammer might be used, the hammering must be done with a stone. [*354]

Nearer home we know that one of the sights of Exeter Cathedral is the wooden Bishop's throne, with its canopy 60 feet high, constructed entirely without nails or iron of any kind; this fact is always specially dwelt upon by the verger. We are told (Ex. xx. 25) as to building an altar: "If thou lift

[p. 221]

up thy tool (iron) upon it, thou hast polluted it." So of the temple (1 Kings vi. 7): "There was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron, heard in the house while it was in building."

"At Cyzicus is the boyleyterion, (senate house), a vast edifice, constructed without a nail of iron; [*355] the raftering being so contrived as to admit of the beams being removed and replaced without the use of stays. A similar thing, too, is the case with the Sublician Bridge at Rome." This was a sacred bridge, and it had to be kept in repair without the use of either iron or other metal. [*356]

Raja Vijyanagram, one of the most enlightened of Hindoo princes, would not allow iron to be used in the construction of buildings within his territory, believing that its use would inevitably be followed by smallpox and other epidemics. [*357]

On the other hand, the very fact that iron is deemed obnoxious to spirits, furnishes men with a weapon which may be turned against them when occasion serves. The dislike of spirits for iron is so great that they will not approach persons and things protected by the obnoxious metal. "Iron therefore may obviously be employed as a charm for banning ghosts and other dangerous spirits," [*358] to which we may add--witches. [*359] This feeling will

[p. 222]

possibly account for the iron crescents of Ashantee, and perhaps for the adoption of the horseshoe as a potent form of the crescent, especially obnoxious to witches and pixies. In Morocco iron is considered a great protection against demons. In Scotland when a fisherman at sea uses blasphemous language, the first man who hears him calls out "Cauld airn," at which every man grasps the nearest bit of iron, and holds it fast for awhile. [*360] The old binding contract among schoolboys on making a "swop," [*361] "Tick, tack, never change back, touch cold iron!" is well known as a binding form of contract in several parts of England, and may well be a vestige of the same old belief as that of the Scotch fisherman, which seems to imply a seeking of the protection of the iron against the temptations of evil demons. In Wales it was believed [*362] that touching with iron caused fairy wives to vanish. Professor Rhys tells a story of a young man at last winning a fairy maid, but she told him if he ever struck her with iron she would go away never to return. This of course recalls myths like Melusine and Undine.

According to authorities quoted by Frazer the same idea as to iron is very prevalent in India; especially is cold iron used by the performer of certain funereal rites, apparently to guard himself against the evil spirits which he may have set free from the dead man. So in North Scotland, immediately

[p. 223]

after a death, a piece of iron, such as a nail or knitting needle, used to be stuck into all the meal, butter, cheese, flesh, and whisky in the house, "to prevent death from entering them." This custom is evidently the same in idea as that of the Hindoo, and is intended to keep off the ghost of the deceased. Various people ranging from Burmah to Roumania are careful not to use sharp instruments so long as the ghost of a deceased friend is thought to be near, lest they should wound it. In Transylvania they will carefully see that no knife is left lying with the sharp edge upwards so long as the corpse remains in the house, or else the soul will be forced to ride on the blade. [*363]

Similar customs are recorded of the Chinese, the Esquimos of Alaska, the people of Celebes, Prussians, Lithuanians and Germans generally.

Professor Rhys believes aversion to iron to be a survival of the feeling implanted in man's early life, when all metals were new, and hence to be avoided. The like explanation is given respecting the dislike of first seeing the new moon through glass. Polish farmers having experienced a succession of bad harvests, set down this to the recent introduction of iron ploughshares; consequently, they gave up using them and took to the old wooden ones. Probably the same feeling, respecting the baneful effect of iron, gave rise to the many customs we read of, about not cutting the hair, especially when undertaking any important expedition. Such a custom was observed occasionally by the Romans, while the very name Lombards (Langobardi) implies that for

[p. 224]

some reason the men allowed no cutting instrument to touch their beards. Six thousand Saxons once swore they would not cut their hair nor shave until they had taken vengeance of their enemies. The Nazarite of Scripture, too, was set apart by "no razor shall come on his head." [*363a] No doubt this aversion to cutting the hair implied not only that the man should not be defiled by iron, but probably also, especially on the war path, that nothing belonging to the warrior should by any chance fall into the hands of his enemy--whose possession of so special a part of him as a lock of his hair, would enable him to work untold evil. The same dread of iron has doubtless given rise to the custom throughout Europe regarding children's nails. Everywhere, including England, it is the practice to bite off the infant's nails if too long, and not to cut them, at least for the first year, or until the child, who is peculiarly open to the attacks of all malignant influences, has grown strong. It is presumed that to postpone cutting will enable the child to get power to withstand at least one of the evils awaiting him, that which may be in the iron. English mothers in this respect hold to the same fashion, belief, custom or whatever may be the motive for the practice, as Hindoos. The latter cut the nails of the firstborn at six months, while other children, presumed to be weaker, are left for two years. [*364] The Slav, Hare, and Dogrib Indians of North America do not cut their female (the weaker) children's nails till they are four years of age.

The same anxiety exists everywhere with respect to nails as to hair, teeth, or any other part of the

[p. 225]

body, lest it should fall into the hands of an enemy; hence here in England the nails bitten off by nurses must be spit into the fire, and the cuttings taken off by knife or scissors must likewise be burnt. The same with respect to teeth-a child's milk-teeth must be thrown into the fire. The writer well remembers in his childhood being told to be very careful when "shelling" his teeth not to lose one, but to be sure to throw it into the fire, because "a dog would be safe to pick it up, and then you would have a dog's tooth." This very thing has been said with all seriousness in the writer's own house within the past few days (July 1894). A story is told [*365] of an Australian girl who fell ill of a fever, and persisted that some months before a young man had come behind her and cut off a lock of her hair: she was sure that he had buried it, and that it was rotting somewhere. She persisted that this was the cause of her sickness, and that as her hair rotted so her flesh was wasting away, and when her hair was quite rotten, she would die.

Out of all the evidence we have produced as to the aversion to iron on the one hand, and as to its potency in keeping off evil spirits on the other, we may gain some clue to the notion underlying the common use of the horseshoe: first, it is a handy representation of the powerful amulet the crescent; and next, its power is greatly reinforced by its material--the witch-hated cold iron.

Footnotes

^181:284 Budge, p. 93 sq.

^181:285 Wilkinson, iii, p. 110. Herodotus, ii. 4.

^181:286 Plutarch, De Iside et Osir. 53.

^182:287 "The emblem of Isis is that of a beautiful woman with cow's horns, just as the Greeks make Io."--Payne Knight, Symbolical Language of Ancient Art and Mythology, p. 37.

^182:288 Pausanias, iii. 18. 13.

^182:289 Ovid Metamorphoses, v. 330.

^182:290 Pausanias, ii. 4, 7

^182:291 Ib. ix. 3, 4.

^182:292 Herodotus, i. 31.

^182:293 Diodorus Sic. i. 24, 25. Apollodorus, ii. 1, 3.

^182:294 Herod. ii, 4 1.

^183:295 Eustath. ap. Dionys. Perieg. 92, 94. Also Jablonsky, Pantheon, ii. p. 4.

^183:296 Diod. Sic. i. 11. Plutarch, De Is. et Os. 52. Macrobius, Sat. i. 19.

^183:297 O. Muller, Dorier, i. 121. Steph. Byz. s.v. byzantion.

^183:298 Bostock, note to Pliny's Nat. Hist. Vol. i. p. 326 (Bohn).

^184:299 Freeman (Studies of Travel, Greece, p. 141) says of the objects found at Mycenae, that they are "of an age which, though beyond the reach of chronology, we can hardly call unrecorded . . . they are work of the period which Homer sung": consequently, they were historically ancient even in his day.

"Hera, Io, and Isis (Hathor) must at all events be identical also with Demeter Mycalessia, who derived her epithet, 'the lowing,' from her cow. shape, and had her temple at Mycalessus in Boeotia. She had as doorkeeper Hercules, whose office it was to shut her sanctuary in the evening and open it again in the morning. This service is identical with that of Argus, who in the morning unfastened the cow-shaped Io, and fastened her again in the evening to the olive-tree which was in the sacred grove of Mycenae.

"Io-Hera, as deity of the moon, would receive her epithet boupis from the symbolic horns of the crescent moon, and its dark spots, resembling a face with large eyes; whilst Athena, as goddess of the dawn, doubtless received the epithet glaykupis, the owl-faced, to indicate the light of the opening day."--Schliemann, Mycenae, p. 21.

^185:300 King, Gnostics, p. 83. The above takes for granted the identity of Roman and Greek divinities, in thus translating Zeus, Aides, Elios, Dionysos.

^185:301 Among the Gnostic gems in the British Museum is a figure of the mummied Osiris with very distinct horns on his head.

^185:302 King, Gnostics, p. 84. In Pignorius, Expositio Mensae Isiacae, p. 15 in dorso, is a head of a man, with horns growing out of his forehead, from an ancient relief.

^186:303 Smith's Dictionary of the Bible, s.v. "Horn."

Michael Angelo's famous statue in San Pietro in Vincoli, of which a copy exists at South Kensington, whereon the horns are very concrete in substance, serves to show the continuance of the old classic notions referred to above. That horns are typified by the shape of a bishop's mitre is well known, and the belief that Moses had actual solid horns must have been firmly held in the Middle Ages. Bishop Reginald of Bath, 1174-1191, is represented on his seal as having actual horns projecting from his head while in the act of benediction, besides the conventional ones of his mitre. Moreover, it is evident that horns were typified by the points of the mitre and were believed to have the power of keeping off evil and of appearing terrible to evil persons. The words now used in the consecration of a bishop in the Roman Church fully keep alive this belief. In placing the mitre on the head of the newly-consecrated prelate, the consecrator says: "We set on the head of this prelate, Thy champion, the helmet of defence and of salvation, that with comely face, and with his head armed with the horns of either Testament, he may appear terrible to the gainsayers of the truth," etc.--"Order of Consecration of a Bishop-elect." Translated from The Roman Pontifical (Burns and Oates, 1893), p. 14.

^186:304 Symbolica Dianae Ephesiae, p. 10. The author continues, "nevertheless celebrated by diverse names, and worshipped by various races in many different ways" (multiplici specie), "Isis, Hathor, Aphrodite, and Venus, are all one and the same personage" (Payne Knight, Symb. Lang. of Anc. Art, p. 35).

^187:305 On this subject see La Migration des Symboles, par le Comte Goblet d'Alviella, Paris, 1892.

^187:306 King, Gnostics, p. 42.

^187:307 Symbolica Dianae Ephesiae Statua, a Claudio Menetrio. Romae. Typis Mascardi, MDCLVII. The loan of this rare book, with permission to copy, has cleared up the Siren question in Chap. X.

^188:308 "St. Jerome says Diana of Ephesus was called Multimammia." Several paps were ascribed to Isis also. Isis had sometimes a flower on her head; Diana always a tower (Montfaucon, vol. i., p. 96).

^188:309 Pignorius, Expositio Mensae Isiacae (Vetustissimae Tabulae), p. 16, alludes to Mercury having placed horns made out of the head of a cow upon the head [p. 189] of Isis. He also later refers to the horns upon the head of Moses: "qui a congressu Domini Dei Exercituum faciem. cornutam referebat."

^189:310 Murray's Handbook for Egypt, 1888, p. 517.

^189:310a Fig. 71 is from an ancient bronze in possession of the author. Similar ones are common in most Egyptian museums.

^190:311 From Moor's Hindoo Pantheon, Plate lix.

^190:312 The idea is, however, distinctly foreign to the uneducated Italian mind. Having taken an old Italian servant who had lived with us in Florence to Rome, she of course made her pilgrimage to the Scala Santa and devoutly ascended on her knees. The thing which struck and astonished her most on [p. 191] beholding the famous painting was that he was black. "Ma! non ho capito mai che fu Moro!" was her first remark.

Upon the remarkable halo surrounding the heads of both the Indian mother and child one might almost say that it belonged to a Christian work and not a heathen. The nimbus is, however, far older than the nineteen centuries of Christendom. Rays were said to have proceeded from the head of Isis; and they have been called the proper attributes of Juno, of Isis, or the "Mother of the Gods" (Pignorius, Vetustissimae Tabulae, p. 16).

^191:313 Inman, Ancient Faiths embodied in Ancient Names, Vol. i. p. 105.

A learned writer remarks that not only was Diana black, but that so was Christna of the Hindoos. Isis, Horus, Cneph, Osiris, Buddha, Mercury, and the Roman Terminus, were typified by black stones. There was a black Venus at Corinth. "Venus, Isis, Hecate, Diana, Juno, Metis, Ceres, and Cybele, were black, and the Multimammia in the Campidoglio in Rome is also black." To this list are added Jupiter, Apollo, Bacchus, Hercules, Asteroth, Adonis, Apis, Ammon. The same author states that the Roman and Greek emperors who claimed to be gods, had their statues in black marble with coloured draperies (Higgins, Anacalypsis, Vol. i. p. 286).

The famous Virgin of Einsiedeln in Switzerland, to whom 150,000 pilgrims annually resort, is a black image. Black is appropriated to the female creator for reasons given, but not here producible, by all Oriental nations (Inman, Ancient Faiths, p. 266).

Higgins in his very remarkable book (Anacalypsis) gives much learning and many references: indeed, we strongly urge those who are interested in this particular subject to study the book. He says, in speaking of the negro Chrishna, that he presumes man to have been originally negro, and that he improved and developed as he travelled westward (Vol. i. p. 284). He also refers to Venus and the other divinities as all black; and remarks (p. 286) that "all wood and stone deities were black." This is not quite the fact in these modern days. In the Pitt Rivers Museum is a Siva, having a trinity of heads; while besides the principal pair of arms, are three other subsidiary pairs, all rising one over the other. The three faces all show tusks like the Cambodian and Peruvian Gorgons, without a protruded tongue; but the whole figure is black. On the other hand, Thagya, the Buddhist Angel of Life, a wooden figure, is represented as of a light colour.

Another author (Lieut. Wilford, "On Egypt and the Nile, from the Ancient Books of the Hindus," Asiatic Researches, Vol. iii. pp. 389, 406) says: [p. 192]"It cannot reasonably be doubted that a race of negroes had formerly preeminence in India." Professor Huxley says Australians believe white men to be the reincarnated spirits of black men (Science and Hebrew Tradition, 1893, p. 317).

^192:314 Inman, op. cit. vol. ii. p. 254.

^192:314a Fig. 74 is the Hindu Indranee and Child (from Journ. Asiat. Res. vi. 393), and is one more example of the all-pervading belief in the same motherhood.

^192:315 In the Museo del Prado at Madrid are the masterpieces of Murillo's vaporosa style, representing this subject. All these, as well as the more famous but less beautiful replica in the Louvre, represent the central figure as standing on the crescent.

^192:316 Roscher, Lexikon d. Griech. u. Rom. Mythologie, 1007.

^193:317 Dr. L. H. Mills, "Zoroaster and the Bible," in Nineteenth Century, Jan. 1894, p. 51.

^193:318 Wilkinson, Anc. Egyp. iii. 61.

^193:319 Payne Knight, Symb. Lang. p. 99.

^193:320 Plutarch, De Isid. et Osir. p. 48.

Diana was frequently represented by a sea-crab (Payne Knight, op. it. p. 100), a symbol often placed upon her statues, and to be seen upon the [p. 194] breast of the Ephesian Artemis (Fig. 69). She was the sovereign of humidity, her nymphs or subordinate personifications came to her from the ocean. She was the protectress of women, the patroness and regulator of nutrition, and of passive generation both in man and beast. As among the ancients "the moon's orbit was held to be the boundary between the celestial and terrestrial world, so Diana was held to be the mediatrix between the two."

^194:321 "Kali, one character of Bhavani, appears in sculpture as a terminal figure, the exact counterpart of the Ephesian Diana. Even the stags, those singular adjuncts to the shoulders of the latter, are seen in a similar position springing from Kali's hands. The numerous breasts of the Ephesian statue were also peculiar to Isis, who is allowed to be the Indian goddess in her form Parvati."--King, Gnostics, p. 171.

^195:322 Lanciani, Ancient Rome, pp. 441 52 et seq.

^196:323 Elton, Origins of Eng. Hist. 2nd ed. p. 269.

^196:323a Jorio, Mimica degli Antichi, p. 92.

^197:324 In the British Museum there are two masks from Ceylon. That for a man has a large boar's tusk by way of horn projecting from each side, That for a horse has one long upright horn, like that of a unicorn.

^197:325 Perou et Bolivie, Ch. Wiener, Paris, 1890, p. 649.

^198:326 Later developments of the Medusa show it with wings, while the snakes are conventionalised into curls. Such is the face in the well-known triskelion of Sicily, of which Fig. 133 is a good representation. We cannot help noticing the strange coincidence of the winged face of the Medusa with those winged faces called "cherubs" so very commonly seen on funereal monuments of the last century, and as attending in crowds the Madonna Immaculata, when standing on her crescent, especially in Murillo's pictures called vaporosas.

^198:326a In Ilton Church, Somerset, is the figure of a "horned" lady, of whom a print will be found in Som. and Dor. Notes and Queries, December 1894.

^199:327 Livingstone, Missionary Travels, pp. 430-431. See also Smith, Bib. Dict. s.v. "Horn."

^199:328 Livingstone, Zambesi, c. xxv. p. 523

^201:329 Catlin, North American Indians. 2 vols. 1844.

^201:330 A drawing of this helmet is given in Daremberg et Saglio, p. 1534.

^201:331 The ancient Etruscans wore a helmet with horns precisely like one of those here shown (Fig. 78). Like it there was a small square fork upon the apex, apparently for fixing some crest or plume to add to the attractiveness of the whole. An Etruscan helmet of this shape is given by Gen. Forlong, Rivers of Life, Vol. ii. p. 254, Pl. xii. In the Bullettino Archeologico Napoletano (An. II. Tav. XI.) is a man on horseback, apparently an ancient Roman or Greek soldier. From the back of his helmet rise two large horns, forming a complete crescent, while at the same time preserving their distinct horn shape; even the rings at the root of a cow's horn are well indicated. In the British Museum is an Anglo-Saxon helmet with two large horns. There is also an ancient Mexican helmet [p. 202] with large horns. The attachment of horns to the helmet by way of special protection must have been quite familiar to the writers of Isaiah (lix. 17) and Ep. to Ephesians (vi. 17). The horns made it the helmet of salvation or of safety. This idea is rather confirmed by i Thess. v. 8, where it is called the "hope of salvation," implying the belief in its efficient protection.

^202:332 Elton, Origins of Eng. History, 2nd ed. p. 113.

^202:333 Plutarch says (Daremberg et Saglio, p. 168) that horns of stags were offered to Diana; horns of all kinds, we know, are symbolical of her.

^202:334 At the Louvre are many--Nos. 196, 198 especially should be noted. [p. 203] No. 198 is a necklace with eight horned heads as pendants, precisely like those ornamenting the front of the statue of the Ephesian Diana, Fig. 69. No. 196 has the head of Jupiter Serapis, of a larger size than the capo di bove, as the single pendant, with two horns. This is a very fine specimen, and the head may well be compared to that of Moses. "The most ancient altars were adorned with horns" (upon this see Potter, Arch. Graec. i. 229), while the expression "horns of the altar" in Psalm cxviii. 27 is familiar to all.

^204:335 Elton, Orig. of Eng. Hist. 2nd ed. p. 145.

^204:336 Archaeologia, xliii. 540, quoted by Elton, op. cit. p. 145.

^204:337 "Mascagni, like so many other Italian artists, is also said to carry in his pockets an extraordinary collection of amulets against the superstition of the 'evil eye,' the list including corals, horns of mother-of-pearl, ivory, and ebony, some of them bearing the effigy of his patron saint, St. George, besides a goodly number of lucky chestnuts."--Daily News, June 23, 1893. Much more is said about horns as a Neapolitan hand-gesture in Chap. VII.

^207:338 "The flaming sword finds its analogue in the weapon of the Babylonian god Merodach, a revolving circular disc surrounded with flaming points. This weapon is called among other names littu, which is letter for letter the same as the Hebrew word translated flaming."--Lenormant, Les Origines de l'Histoire d'apres la Bible et les Traditions des Peuples Orientaux. Athenaeum, July 31, 1880, p. 137.

^207:339 I have often seen here in Somersetshire (even so late as 1894) cart horses, each with a bunch of many-coloured ribbons on his cheek, and others with a half-moon on the forehead. One of our commonest of crest ornaments is a small disc pivoted, in a kind of horned or crescent-shaped frame, which swings backwards and forwards glinting in the sun, as the horse moves his head. Surely this is the Babylonian disc of Merodach, analogous to the Neapolitan vanes, and moreover it must represent also the disc and horns on the head of Isis. If not, the coincidence is strange indeed. Further, Pluto was represented with a disc on his head like Venus and Isis (Payne Knight, Symb. Lang. p. 104). From Pluto to Vulcan the step is short, and they may well be confounded. If then our disc is the symbol of Vulcan, it is a most suitable horse amulet. A disc framed like this, but having also a face upon it, is on the Barone lamp in Chap. X. Not long ago I saw what I remember as very common--the "vore 'oss" of a team had a board about 18 inches long mounted on two irons, which held it well above the collar into which they fitted. This board had hung beneath it a row of about six large jangling bells which, when the horse moves, can be heard for half a mile. To complete this pixy-driving apparatus is a fringe concealing all the bells, but made of the inevitable, bright, many coloured worsted threads.

^211:340 I fear that in Rome articles of this kind have begun to find a place among the spurious curios called roba Americana, and expect soon to find the demand producing a like supply in Naples.

^211:341 Dodwell, Class. Tour, vol. ii. p. 34.

^212:342 This monogram was called xreisma by S. Ambrose; the staff of Osiris, to which it bears some resemblance, was called xresterion (Higgins, Anacalypsis, Vol. ii. p. 204).

^213:343 The subject of terra-cotta lamps is referred to again in Chap. X.

^213:344 Report of M. Jules Chaine. See Illustrated London News, Sept. 12, 1891, p. 335.

^215:345 Schliemann says (Mycenae, p. 69): "There is also a human head painted on a fragment of pottery; it has a very large eye, and a head-dress in the form of a Phrygian cap." Also (p. 71): "I have been able to gather here more than 200 terra-cotta idols of Hera, more or less broken." "The head of those idols is of a very compressed shape . . . the lower part is in the form of a gradually widening tube." To this may be added that one of those sketched by the writer is widened out so as to form a distinct stand, and perhaps to indicate female drapery.

^216:346 See Jorio's remarks upon this, post, pp. <page 263>, 264.

^217:346a See Jorio's remarks upon this, post, <page 260>.

^217:347 Inman, Ancient Faiths, vol. ii. p. 262.

^217:348 Payne Knight, Symbolical Language, p. 201.

^217:349 The same thing is done by hanging up scythes or sharp instruments to the stable rafters, by which the pixies will be cut if they ride the horses.

	 
		Hang up hooks and sheers to scare
		 Hence the hag, that rides the mare,
		 Till they be all over wet
		 With the mire and the sweat.
		 This observed, the manes shall be
		 Of your horses all knot-free.
		            Herrick, Hesperides, ed. Hazlitt, 1869, p. 305.
		
		 
		
		 

^218:350 Threshold; low half-door. See West Somerset Word-Book.

^218:351 A horseshoe may be seen to-day nailed on the outside of a stable door opening on to the principal thoroughfare of the town of Wellington.

^219:352 Brand, Pop. Ant. vol. iii. p. 18, ed. Bolin. In Cumberland this practice is very common; the writer has seen many upon various parts of the premises at Duddon Hall. One old one is nailed to the wall at the back of an ornamental temple in the garden--a building which is quite empty. The only explanation to be extracted from the natives is that the shoes are nailed up for luck. If more close and intimate relations could be established, we have no doubt of finding the way to other reasons.

^220:353 Logan, The Scottish Gael, vol. ii. p. 68.

^220:354 C. F. Gordon Cumming, In the Hebrides, p. 226; E. J. Guthrie, Old Scottish Customs, p. 223, quoted by Frazer, Golden Bough, vol. i. p. 73.

^221:355 Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxxvi. 24 (Ed. Bohn, vi. p. 345).

^221:356 It was the earliest constructed across the Tiber, by Ancus Martius, 114 A. U. C. It was called Sublician, because it was constructed entirely of wood. No iron was used in its construction, on the strength of religious tradition, nor was any ever used in repair even in Christian times down to the fall of the Empire. The fact is noted by Dionysius, v. 24; Varro, v. 83; Ovid, Fasti, v. 622. Pliny's account, assigning the rejection of iron to the difficulties of Horatius Cocles in cutting it through, is absurd (Lanciani, op. cit. p. 40).

^221:357 Indian Antiquary, vol. x. 1881, p. 364.

^221:358 Frazer, Golden Bough, vol. i. p. 175.

^221:359

	 
		Let the superstitious wife
		 Neer the child's heart lay a knife:
		 Point be up, and haft be downe,
		 While she gossips in the towne,
		 This 'mongst other mystic charms
		 Keeps the sleeping child from harms.
		         Herrick, Hesperides, ed. Hazlitt, 1869, p. 305.
		
		 
		
		 

^222:360 E. J. Guthrie, Old Scottish Customs, p. 149; C. Rogers, Social Life in Scotland, 1886, vol. iii. p. 218.

^222:361 Notes and Queries, 8th ser. v. 160, 235, 354.

^222:362 Rhys, Welsh Fairies, art. in Nineteenth Century, Oct. 1891, p. 565.

^223:363 Bastian, Die Volker des ostlichen Asien, i. 136; E. Gerard, The Land beyond the Forest, i. 312; Schmidt, Das Jahr und seine Tage in Meinung und Brauch, etc., p. 40; Frazer, i. 176.

^224:363a Judges xiii. 5.

^224:364 Punjaub Notes and Queries, ii. No. 1092.

^225:365 B. Smith, Aborigines of Victoria, vol. i. p. 467.

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 226]

 

APPENDIX I

A VERY short excursion in the field of comparative religions will show how one idea seems to have come from the far East in the early days of mankind, and to have taken root in the minds of all races who came westward. We have already referred to the faith which led the Magi to follow the star to Bethlehem. Throughout the East it was the primaeval instinct that a child was to be born of a celestial mother, who should destroy the spirit of evil and be the saviour of mankind. Not only so, but the mother was to conceive and to bring him forth from her own inherent power. [*366] With the triune male deity we find a single female associated. "Her names are innumerable, 'Mother of all the Gods,' The Lady, The Queen, Mulita, Bilta, Ishtar, or the bright, pure being. She is also Ri, Alitta, Elissa, Beltis, Ashtoreth, Astarte, Saraha or Sara, Nana, Asurah, Tanith. All these and more are Babylonish, but elsewhere she is Athor, Dea, Syria, Artemis, Aphrodite, Rhea, Demeter, Ceres, Diana, Minerva, Juno, Venus, Isis, Cybele, Ge, Hera. As Anaitis she is 'The Mother of the Child'; reproduced again as Isis and Horus, Devaki and Christna, Aurora and Memnon. Even in ancient Mexico the mother and child were worshipped. In modern times she survives as the Virgin Mary and her Son. There were Ishtar of Nineveh and Ishtar of Arbela, just as there are now Maria di Loretto and Marie de la Garde."

Indranee (and her child), consort of Indur from the cave of Indur Subha, are again one and the same person. Fig. 74 [*367] really represents Mary, whose name is synonymous with maternity, but not with ordinary maternity occurring on earth, inasmuch as throughout the ancient mythologies

[p. 227]

the celestial mother was represented as a virgin [*368]--the same "woman who has replaced in Christendom the celestial virgin of Paganism."

The same author [*369] records that in India, Christna, Chrishna, or Vishnu, is usually called "the saviour" or "preserver." "He, being a god, became incarnate in the flesh. As soon as he was born he was saluted by a chorus of angels or avators." "One of his names is 'the Good Shepherd.' Christna cured a leper, a woman poured on his head a box of ointment, and he cured her of disease. He washed the feet of Brahmins. Christna had a dreadful fight with the serpent Caluga. He astonished his tutor by his learning. He was crucified, went into hell, and afterwards into heaven. Christna and his mother are always represented as black. His statue in the temple at Mathura is black, and the temple is built in the form of a cross. As Vishnu he is painted with a Parthian coronet, when crucified. As Wittoba he has sometimes the stigmata in his hands, and sometimes in his feet, and one picture represents him with a round hole in his side: to his collar hangs a heart." [*370]

This account is so remarkable in its correspondence with our Gospel narrative that it seems almost incredible for it to be other than a paraphrase therefrom. Nevertheless, our author says "There is every reason to believe the legend to be more ancient than the Christian era." The various illustrations in other books fully support the foregoing. Chrishna is represented in Moor's Hindu Pantheon (p. 67) with a nimbus as shown in Fig. 72, while winged cherubs from above are sending down upon him rays of light, just as we are accustomed to see in pictures of the baptism of our Lord. He is also shown as crucified in precisely the same way, and with a crown of thorns and nimbus, just as we are accustomed to see in pictures of the Crucifixion. [*371]

[p. 228]

Isis and Horus were distinctly associated with a fish, for we find her represented as bearing a fish on her head 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 90
 instead of the usual disc and horns (Fig. 90). [*372] Another author says: "The most obvious and ancient symbol of the reproductive power of water was a fish. [*373] Derceto, goddess of the Phoenicians, had the body of a woman ending in a fish. We have already remarked that Diana was sovereign of humidity, and was symbolised in the aspect of the goddess of the fertilising power of water by a crab. We venture to suggest that these considerations offer another solution of the origin of the fish as a Christian symbol of Christ. The acrostic or rebus explanation of the Greek word for fish has always seemed speculative and far-fetched, when viewed by the light obtained from other well-understood objects, such as the cross, which have certainly been adopted from so-called heathenism. All these startling facts, so far from unsettling our weak minds upon the cardinal facts of our Christian belief, should but prove to us that they are founded upon an instinct planted in the breast of man as mysterious as his life, and just as inexplicable by his limited faculties. They do but point out the futility of what we in our pride call "knowledge," and suggest to us that the best motto modern savants could adopt would still be Quod scis nescis. [*374]

Further, we suggest that the celestial mother and child were not only objects of faith and worship, but representations

[p. 229]

of them were certainly used as amulets. In support of this we point to Fig. 91, a bronze 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 91. From Author's Collection
 arm from a larger figure, holding out a woman and child, in a manner which candour must admit to be conclusive. The bronze, of evident antiquity, was obtained by the writer from a native on the Nile. It is scarcely a likely object to have been forged. Another piece of convincing evidence is found in the woman and child in both representations of the Mano Pantea (Figs. 148, 156).

Footnotes

^226:366 Inman, Ancient Faiths, Vol. i. p. 98 et seq.

^226:367 From Asiatic Researches, Vol. vi. p. 393. I am quite aware that Lieutenant Wilford is said to have been imposed upon by stories invented for him. Into that controversy I need not enter, and merely give his statements for what they are worth. Prof. Max Muller refers to this in an article in Nineteenth Century, October 1894.

^227:368 Inman, op. cit. Vol. i. p. 253.

^227:369 Ib. vol. i. p. 400.

^227:370 Ib. vol. i. pp. 400-403.

^227:371 Much information on this subject may be found in Hislop's Two Babylons, pp. 30-90. It is needless to say that we have no sympathy with [p. 228] the purpose of this book nor with the spirit in which it is written. Moreover, judging from some of those we have endeavoured to verify, the references cannot be wholly relied on.

^228:372 Inman, Ancient Faiths, vol. i. Frontispiece; also p. 520.

^228:373 Payne Knight, Symbolical Language, p. 111.

^228:374 Upon this subject see Mr. Gladstone's remarks in a paper on Heresy in the Nineteenth Century, August 1894, p. 174.

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

 

APPENDIX II

THE evident defence of a Christian church by the horn and crocodile amulets of Seville naturally leads to the consideration of those very common though remarkable appendages to other Christian churches with which most people are familiar. It would be an interesting study to ascertain when the grotesque and hideous things, those nightmares in stone which we call gurgoyles, were first adopted. Where was the germ first planted? From what kind of eggs were these fanciful birds, beasts, fishes, and reptiles, first. hatched? Without waiting, however, for an answer to these questions, we may venture to assert that the idea from which they sprang must have been the same as that we have been considering. The evil glance of a wicked eye might as well be personified as the great variety of other vices, such as avarice, lust, and drunkenness, to say nothing of the virtues, graces, and higher attributes, all of which have found their representations in personal shapes. Precisely then as justice, mercy, truth, find their expression in human female beauty, so would their opposites, the ideals of evil, find theirs in the fanciful and distorted shapes commonly understood by the term fiendish. The old conceptions of Gnostic days would

[p. 230]

supply, from their grylli and other strange devices, [*374a] a link from the earlier days of Babylonian and Graeco-Egyptian times, when their gods were represented with human bodies, but with heads of birds and beasts, more or less representing the special qualities attributed to those deities. We have seen, and have further to show, how strange objects have been erected both in pagan and Christian times in many public situations, with the object of protecting place and people from the wicked and malignant influence of evil spirits, emanating from the eyes of those by whom they were possessed. These evil spirits all became actual demons to those who believed in them; and inasmuch as they were all active agents of mischief and of evil, so it was but natural to suppose their attacks would be especially directed against those buildings and persons, whose purpose was to cultivate and to strengthen the opposite principles of goodness and of virtue. Therefore amongst those who firmly believed in these evil demons, and at the same time placed much reliance upon antidotes or protective amulets against their power, we should expect to find visible and lasting precautions taken, particularly in the case of buildings so liable to devilish attack as churches. This is precisely what we do find. The Middle Ages, when churches were rising in all directions, when the highest art and the choicest gifts of the people were lavished upon their religious buildings, were precisely the epoch when the dread of the evil eye was the most real, when perhaps of all other times the personality of spirits, good and bad, had become most firmly imbedded in the belief of the people.

Therefore it was that the same idea which to-day leads to the mounting of a piece of wolf or badger skin upon a horse's bridle to scare the evil glance of the versipelle, induced our forefathers to carve in stone, and so to perpetuate their fantastic conceptions of the wicked spirits they wished to scare away from their sacred buildings. We all know that our church bells have that as their original purpose,

[p. 231]

and, a fortiori, why should not the stone demons which adorn the angles and conspicuous parts of our Gothic churches?

It is said, too, that the same idea of frightening away the evil spirits residing in them, is that which has led to the custom of our gamekeepers, to gibbet the "varmint" in some conspicuous place, so that the devils inhabiting the bodies of cats, stoats, jays, and magpies may be warned of what awaits them if they do not keep a respectful distance from preserves of respectable birds and animals.

It has been well remarked quite recently to the writer: "We never see a real gurgoyle now on a modern church; there are hideous things enough, but they have no life in them." The reason for this is not far to seek. The feeling and keen imagination which created the devils of our mediaeval churches came of a lively faith in their reality. Nowadays such things are mere decorations, servile copies of the oddities invented by our forefathers, but without either knowledge or belief as to their meaning or intention. The consequence is, the inevitable lifeless failure of the modern stone-cutter. The monks of old saw the goblins they carved through the eye of undoubting belief.

Of course as time went on these grotesque demons and goblins, having been adopted as regular items of church decoration, lent themselves to the treatment of artistic and cultivated taste; but there can be little question as to their original intention. No better example of what we are maintaining can be found than that of the famous Florentine diavolo, of which a rough sketch by the writer is annexed (Fig. 92).

In the first place, it was designed by one of the greatest sculptors of the Italian Renaissance, John of Bologna, or as he is called Giambologna, the same who created that most elegant of Mercuries standing tiptoe on a breath of air. Originally there were two of these little bronze figures attached to the angle of a Florentine palace near the once picturesque Mercato Vecchio, but one was stolen many years ago, and that here shown has, since the writer's last

[p. 232]

visit two or three years ago, been removed into a place of safety as a precious work of art. In this case the figure is of bronze, and was specially designed to be fixed to the wall of the house, just as horns 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 92
 are still fixed in Naples. Tradition says that from this spot Peter Martyr preached, and that he exorcised the devil, who galloped past in the shape of a black horse. [*375]

It will be seen by this figure that horns were not considered specially the badge of honour or of sanctity, as in the statue of Moses. On the contrary, our own popular notion of the devil is more expressed in this figure: horns and cloven feet with a barbed tail being our ideal. Here he has the hairy thighs of a goat or satyr, and short horns; but the feet are not cloven hoofs. We may however take this figure as a typical one, fully representing the idea, in art and in fact, of just what we see petrified upon the towers and angles of our churches.

There is a very extraordinary collection of grotesque figures on the towers of Notre Dame in Paris. They are "like an actual body of fiendish visitors caught and turned into stone as they grinned over the city." [*376] This idea of "turning into stone" brings back to mind the old fancy lying in the story of Perseus and the Gorgon.

Footnotes

^230:374a For these see Abraxas seu Apistopistus Johannis Macarii, Antwerpiae, MDCLVII. Also King, Gnostics, and Handbook of Gems.

^232:375 Horner, Walks in Florence, 1873, vol. i. p. 156.

^232:376 Pennell, The Devils of Notre Dame, 1894. Many of our readers will recall the grotesque bracciali upon the palaces at Sienna.

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 233]

 

CHAPTER VII

 

TOUCH, HANDS, GESTURES

ONE of the ways by which the influence included in the general term Evil Eye is communicated, is by touch. Mere bodily contact, as in the case of contagious diseases, has always been held to be of much importance as a means of conveying injury, and both by practice and precept has always been carefully guarded against. "Eat thou not the bread of him that hath an evil eye" (Prov. xxiii. 6) means, avoid his presence lest you come into contact with him; he may be blind, but his touch is malignant. Great as may be the power of mere personal presence, such as the rubbing shoulders with one possessed with the terrible faculty, the effect is tenfold greater when there is the actual and intentional touching by the baneful person. In the mesmeric performances with which we are all familiar, the influence of the operator is vastly increased when he makes passes with his hands, and still more so when he actually touches his patient. Then it is that he seems to convey to his subject the invisible influence of his own will, whether that will be in the direction of good or of evil. These evidences of the effect of personal contact, which our senses compel us to acknowledge, have been existent in all time,

[p. 234]

and the consequence has been from the earliest days, that men have regarded with intense interest the instrument by which touch is commonly, and, when intentionally, always conveyed--the hand. Not only is it the bodily member which specially differentiates man from all lower animals, but it is that by which in every way he makes his power known and felt. True that man's relatives the Apes have four hands to our two, yet his are but prehensile instruments, incapable from the partial development of the thumb, apart from the brain-power of direction, of performing those thousands of intricate acts of construction, of musical touch, of significant gesture, which the human hand performs, and which mark it out as the faithful servant, as well as the natural symbol, of a higher power, that of a perfected intelligence.

If in past ages the hand has been looked upon as an instrument of evil when used by the malignant, much more has it been regarded as an instrument of good--the powerful protector against that special form of evil which was supposed to be flashed from one person to another, whether through the eye or the touch of malice.

It has ever been recognised that the differences of shape, texture, and general appearance of the hands of individuals are quite as great as in faces. Moreover, it has been noticed by long experience that certain kinds of hand are found to belong to the possessors of certain types of faces; and just as the life and character of the individual are to be seen in his face, so is his hand also the index of the mind. Further, it is found that just as the features of a person's face distinguish his individuality and

[p. 235]

remain permanent, to be recognised by all who know him, so do the features--the shape, size, texture and markings on his hands--continue permanent, subject only to such changes as affect the features of his countenance. This fact is so well established by scientific research and record, that its results are being now applied to the identification of criminals, whose hands are carefully photographed or in other ways portrayed, as well as their faces. It is even proposed to apply the same method to the foot, which is also found to be different in every individual from that of every other. just as no two faces are alike, so are no two people's hands or feet.

The study of the hand as a quasi-science has of late become almost a mania, and the books on palmistry, or chiromancy, in all languages have become legion. Upon the hand, however, as an index of the life and character, we have no wish to enlarge, but refer the curious reader to such works as Shall I tell you your Fortune, my pretty Maid? by Mrs. John White, which the writer bought at a railway bookstall for sixpence, and which is marked "Twelfth Thousand"; to Chiromanzia, Fisiologia sulla Mano, Giulio Adrieu, Milano, 1884; Lira Una; or to the costly and elaborate compilations on the subject, which have appeared at recent dates. Indeed, so much has the fad of palmistry run riot, that one of the "up to date" enterprising soap-boilers has recently made use of it in a really clever puff upon a great hand, as an advertisement in some of the illustrated papers.

Our business, however, lies rather with the sister-science Chironomy than with this. The

[p. 236]

latter is defined [*377] as "the art or science of gesticulation, or of moving the hands according to rule in oratory, pantomime," etc. To this definition we venture to add, "the art of representing such gesticulation," etc., and this will be found later a needful qualification. As a science we are told [*378] that chironomy is of great antiquity. "Numa Pompilius, the successor of Romulus, publicly made use of the art of chironomy, or of gesture with the hands, as a means of counting" (or reckoning, per conteggiare). "Not only Pliny the historian, but also Macrobius assures us, that Numa, in establishing a religion for the fierce Romans, caused a statue of Janus to be made with two heads, or with two faces, but with the fingers bent (piegate) in such a manner as to represent, according to Pliny, [*379] the number 350, and according to Macrobius [*380] the number 365."

In considering this evidence, we speak of making by the hand a certain gesture, a certain sign, which may convey (significasse) to all the Roman populace that which is meant by the words three hundred and fifty. Here then we have the conventional sign. If Numa had used a manual gesture, unknown to all, or if he had ordered the statue of Janus to be made with the fingers folded in a way which had not been in accordance with the previous habit or convention of the people, he would have been considered the most foolish of mankind. And therefore we are compelled to conclude the Romans to have then understood (intendessero) that part of chironomy as belonging to the gesture of counting. [*381]

[p. 237]

The Abate says that the Romans obtained their gestures from the Greeks; that the Greek word

Click to enlarge
FIG. 93.

 chironomia had been adopted (into Latin) to denote the art of gesture. He asserts that the invention of gestures for manual numeration was from the heroic

[p. 238]

ages of Greece, and so of surprising antiquity; but he gives no hint as to the source whence the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 94.

[paragraph continues] Greeks obtained it. He traces the use of this ancient method, and gives details of each position of the fingers of the left hand, so as to indicate any

[p. 239]

number up to go (Figs. 93, 94). For instance he says:--

Click to enlarge
FIG. 95.

To indicate (pronunziare) the number 1, you have to bend the little finger (of the left hand) closely upon the palm of the hand. For 2, the ring finger is to be bent in the same manner. For 3, you do the same with the. middle finger. For 4, you raise

[p. 240]

the little finger alone above the others. For 5, you raise the ring finger. For 6, you raise the middle and bend down the ring finger upon the palm. For 7, you raise the other fingers, and bend only the little finger so that the nail rests upon its own root, not on the palm. For 8, you are to make the same gesture with that called the medical finger, the next to the little finger. For 9, you do the like with the middle finger. For 10, place the nail of the index finger on the middle joint of the thumb. For 20, place the thumb between the middle and index fingers. For 30, unite gently the nail of the index finger and the thumb. For 40, place the index alongside the thumb. For 50, bend the index towards the palm like g, or Greek G. For 60, make the same bend with the thumb and at the same time press the bent thumb with the index surrounding it. For 70, bend the index as for 50, and fill the space with the thumb so that the thumb nail may be beyond the joint of the index. For 80, do the same with the index as for 70; then place the thumb in such a way that the thumb-nail may touch the joint of the index. For 90, make the nail of the index touch the root of the thumb.

No signs for the hundreds are made by the left hand. "One sees an exemplification of this, when Juvenal, alluding to Nestor, said that he counted the years with his right hand." [*382]

To denote hundreds, make the same gestures with the right hand as have been described for denoting the tens with the left. Hence to indicate 100, make with the right hand the same sign as is made with the left for 10 (Fig. 95).

Consequently you denote 200 with the right hand in the same manner as 20 with the left; and so on with the other hundreds.

Thousands are denoted by the right hand with the same gestures as by the left for the prime numbers 1 to 10. Hence 1000 is made with the right hand in the same way as 1 by the left, and so on.

Our author describes the way to denote tens up to hundreds of thousands, but enough has been extracted for our purpose, and to complete the explanation we here reproduce the plates (Figs. 93, 94, 95) with which he illustrates his subject, and which make it quite clear, so far as we have dealt with it. [*383]

[p. 241]

The second part of the treatise deals with the gestures used by ancient actors and pantomimists; but inasmuch as he gives no pictorial illustrations, we despair of interpreting with sufficient plainness to be of interest to the reader.

The ancients having contrived so complete a system of manual numeration, it needs little imagination to understand how the hand, the emblem and instrument of power, naturally became in itself one of the earliest of protective amulets, probably coeval with the phallic emblems, at which we have but hinted in a previous chapter.

The earliest examples we have of the hand as an amulet against fascination--and we must take it almost as an axiom that all amulets had originally that object--are found, as we should expect them to be, singly or used separately; not combined with another object. The very rude representations of the hand shown in Figs. 96-101, from sketches by the writer,

Click to enlarge
FIG. 96.-101.

are from early Etruscan tombs; all these are to be seen, with many more, in the Museums of the

[p. 242]

[paragraph continues] Collegio Romano, of Cortona, of Bologna, and probably elsewhere. They are described as belonging "to the first age of iron," a period of extreme antiquity. The eyelets for suspension show that these objects were intended to be worn. They are mere pieces of bronze plate cut into the shapes, and about the sizes here drawn-perhaps a little larger. It is not easy to measure an article in a glass case. Fig. 100 has two hands remaining out of four which originally hung upon the same triangle. Whether or not the triangle represented anything more than a convenient shape for the suspender we cannot now decide--probably it did; but the fact of finding four hands combined shows that already in those days, 500 to 1000 B. C., there was a tendency to pile up amulets by way of adding to their power.

Among all these very early hand amulets, in only 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 102
 one is any particular gesture depicted. All the rest have the mere open palm and extended fingers; but as skill improved, we find attempts more or less successful to represent the hand in definite positions or gestures. Fig. 102 is decidedly of much later work than the others, though exhibited at Bologna in the same case with the others.

In the Ashmolean Museum are many examples of the open hand, in blue pottery, showing piercings or handle attachments for suspension as amulets. [*384]

[p. 243]

[paragraph continues] Several of these latter are Phoenician and may therefore be the same as Etruscan.

Besides the small ones intended to be worn on the person, representations of the open hand are very widely scattered, and in such a manner portrayed both in sculpture and painting that we cannot but accept them as examples of that kind of amulet which was fixed in a conspicuous place for public protection, such as the grillo of Pisistratus, the horns on houses, and the gurgoyles on our churches.

Perhaps the most striking example of the use of the hand as a symbol of power as well as of protection, is to be seen sculptured on the tombs, excavated by that monotheistic Pharaoh, Khuenaten ("the beloved of the Sun's disc"), at Tel-el-Amarna. There he and his court are adoring the sun, whose rays are stretching out towards them; but in every case, and there are several such scenes in the tombs, each ray terminates in an open hand. The accompanying illustration (Fig. 103) is from Wilkinson, vol. iii. p. 52, the only drawing available, but it is unsatisfactory, and the writer regrets he made no sketch on the spot. [*385] The date of these tombs is given as 1500 B.C., [*386] and as their history is well known, this is probably one of the most exact in Egyptian chronology. The use of the hand as a sign of the divine presence and power is thus fixed at least as early as the sojourn of Israel in Egypt, and some time before the birth of Moses; it has continued to be so used throughout the ages down to the present day-alike by pagans, Mahomedans, and Christians.

Next probably in antiquity come the Etruscan

[p. 244]

and Greek hands, made evidently for use as household amulets. Of these, two are to be seen in the Ashmolean. They are of bronze: one about six inches

Click to enlarge
FIG. 103.

high, and fixed upright upon a flat plinth; another of the same kind, but larger, is late Greek, found at Taranto, in the temple of Dionysos. These are both exactly like Fig. 104, which has lost its stand, though retaining the pin by which it was fixed; the Oxford ones are both right hands. In the Naples Museum two are alike, Nos. 5507, 550S, a right hand

[p. 245]

and a left, probably of much later date than the Etruscan, though of the same type of open hand without special gesture. The writer 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 104.
 From Naples
 believes that there are Greek examples of the like kind at the Museums of Girgenti and Syracuse; at Cortona there certainly are more than one, and also in the Museo Kircheriano at Rome; but whether these latter are Roman or Etruscan he has omitted to note. [*387]

Fig. 105 is an Etruscan statuette from the Collegio Romano at Rome. 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 105
 Here it looks rather more finished and in better proportion than the original, which is very long drawn out. The figure, about eight inches high, is one of two; unlike in other respects, both hold up the right hand as shown, with palm and fingers extended. The attitude is so marked in both figures that they can only be taken to be designed for the exhibition of this manual gesture. They are placed with other ancient bronzes found in Sardinia, and are evidently of great antiquity, probably Phoenician. Ancient statues of this kind, of

[p. 246]

unknown age, as well as modern Indian ones, [*388] show that the pose and gesture of the hands are full of 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 106
 meaning, and that many ancient statues, now regarded simply as works of art, were intended to exhibit actions that conveyed in their day very distinct ideas. [*389]

Belonging to later times, over the great gate of the Alhambra (Fig. 106) called "La Torre de Justicia," where the King or his Kaid dispensed judgment in Oriental fashion, [*390] is a large upright hand on the keystone of the outer Moorish arch, in defiance of the strict objection of the Moslem to images. It is sculptured in low relief, the palm outwards, with the fingers and thumb in natural position. On this hand Ford [*391] remarks that some consider it

an emblem of hospitality and generosity, the redeeming qualities of the Oriental. Others think it a type of the five principal

[p. 247]

commandments of the creed of Islam: "To keep the fast of Ramadan, pilgrimage to Mecca, almsgiving, ablution, and war against the infidel." Others refer to the Hebrew jadh, the hand of God, the Oriental symbol of power and providence. But the true meaning of it is a talisman over the portal against the much-dreaded "Evil Eye," at which Orientals have always and do still tremble. The Morisco women wore small hands of gold and silver round their necks, like the Neapolitans, and a substitute for the classical phallic symbol of defiance. In the Sala de los Embajadores is an inscription to the same purport: "The best praise be given to God! I will remove all the effects of an evil eye upon our master Yusuf," etc.

Fully agreeing with Ford as to its real meaning, it may be noted as a coincidence that the act of taking a judicial oath is performed by Jews and other Orientals by holding up the right hand as thus depicted, also that a hand in this position upon the shield is the modern heraldic sign of baronetcy. [*392]

In the mosaics at Ravenna, seven centuries older than the Alhambra (Fig. 107), our Lord and two angels are all in the act of holding up the right hand in the attitude of benediction. One has the hand open and extended, another angel in the same group, not here shown, has the hand in the like position; at the same time more angels have the hand conspicuously making the other gesture here drawn, which we shall explain later.

In the Church of San Apollinare in Classe at Ravenna the saint is in the main tribune standing beneath a great cross, with the Apostles on either

[p. 248]

side of him, represented by twelve sheep. He himself has both hands held up open, with palms outward, evidently in the act of benediction. Above the cross is an open hand coming out of a cloud,

Click to enlarge
FIG. 107.--From San Apollinare Nuova, Ravenna. Mosaic of sixth cent. From a Photograph.

while on either side is a figure kneeling apparently on a cloud, but each of these latter is plainly making a conspicuous gesture with the hand--one with palm open and exposed, the other showing only the thumb and two first fingers. Above the arch of the tribune is a large medallion showing our Lord in the act of blessing the holy chalice; this He

[p. 249]

holds in His left hand, while the right is raised, showing only the two first fingers and the thumb. On either side of the medallion are the typical symbol-figures representing the four Evangelists, each of whom seems to be presenting a book to the central figure.

St. Mark, the companion figure to St. Luke (Fig. 114), is shown with his right hand raised high, palm open and thumb extended. It is not of course suggested here that all these persons are making gestures against the evil eye, but they are singular pieces of evidence as to the importance of the hand itself, and of the position in which it is held both in acts of devotion and of benediction. [*393]

Considering the open hand as a distinctly used amulet of both ancient and modern times, we would call attention to its frequency at Tunis, where it may be seen displayed in a variety of ways over doors, or drawn upon walls in connection with the remarkable works of pictorial art by which the Haji announces his right to wear the green turban. These paintings upon the walls of the houses of returned pilgrims, although meant to portray animals and trees, are of such an exceedingly crude and rough sort that they can hardly be held to transgress the law that no Moslem shall make any object in the likeness of anything in heaven above or the earth beneath. In Tunis also may be seen many shallow drums, mere hoops of about two inches broad, having parchment

[p. 250]

stretched on both sides, just as if an ordinary tambourine had two diaphragms instead of one. Each of these drums has a hand upon it like Fig. 104 upon one side, and on the other a double triangle. 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 108.
 Some of these have, besides the hand, a crescent and a double triangle, as in Fig. 108: in every case the crescent is placed above the index and middle finger, while the double triangle, which we believe to represent the sun, is always over the third and fourth finger. The drawing is so rude that it is difficult to tell whether the hand is right or left.

On inquiry about the meaning of these things, they say the hand is that of the Prophet. Seeing, however, that these drums are all ornamented round the rings with cowrie shells, fixed as they always are with the opening in the shells outwards, one could but form a further opinion: cowries have always been distinct amulets against the evil eye, [*393a] and it is but reasonable to assign the same purpose to the entire decorations. Tunisian Moslems are like other people, and pile up their defences by a combination frequently alluded to. The open hand is a very common amulet upon Neapolitan cab-horses (Fig. 83); indeed it may be accepted as a well-understood and completely-recognised protective amulet among all nations, whether represented by painting, by sculpture, or by gesture. We give two more convincing examples from far-distant quarters. On one of the great marble columns in the church-mosque of St. Sophia at Constantinople is a very remarkable

[p. 251]

freak of nature. There is a white mark in the dark purple marble exactly like a spread-out hand; in fact it is so good a representation that one naturally fancies at first that it is artificial; but on close inspection it is found to be the natural marking of the marble. It is about the size of the human hand, and is really a conspicuous object when the visitor is conducted to the front of it, as he is sure to be, by the guides. The hand is near the Mihrab on the south side, about seven feet from the floor, and is held in the very highest reverence by the people as the hand of the Prophet. It is believed to protect all who go to pray near it from the evil eye. If this fine column had, as some declare, a previous existence in an ancient temple, who shall say to how many generations of men this strange piece of nature's art may have been an object of veneration? [*394]

In Fig. 77, from far-off North America upon the Mandan chief's robe, is the representation of the hand in the same position, placed there intentionally to ward off the evil eye of his enemy and to protect the wearer. How instinctively we throw up our open hand with palm outwards as a gesture prompted by surprise at any strange appearance, or to ward off any threat not amounting to actual violence! It is also thus used involuntarily to stop the undesired approach of any person or thing. In modern Neapolitan gesture-language "the raising of the hands naturally with the palms opposed to the object" signifies a negative to a question or

[p. 252]

demand. It also signifies surprise, as with ourselves, and disapproval; [*395] but to add effect to the gesture when vehemence is intended, in addition to the expression on his face, the actor violently spreads out his fingers, "le dita saranno violentemente

Click to enlarge
FIG. 109.

allargate l'uno dall' altro," precisely as drawn upon the robe of Mah-to-wo-pa (<page 200>).

Judging, however, from Canon Jorio's description of his plates, in four of which (Nos. 5, 6, 17, 18) the attitude is shown, with descriptions in the text, it would seem to be more like our own, an involuntary act of astonishment than of well-understood and significant gesture. [*396] As a sacerdotal act it is of course recognised everywhere, though he does not

[p. 253]

allude to it in that aspect, nor does be indeed to any priestly action.

Precisely the attitude we are describing is to be

Click to enlarge
FIG. 110.

seen in a very characteristic painting by Perugino on the soffit of one of the famous stanze in the Vatican,

[p. 254]

that of the "Incendio di Borgo." In it our Lord is represented as ascending into heaven, but both hands are raised with open palms as though to wave off St. John and the other saints pressing around. In the four compartments of this vaulted ceiling our Lord holds one or both hands in special attitudes: in three making the sign with two fingers and thumb, the priestly benediction, and the fourth as above described, with both hands open wide, with palms outwards.

Among the Romans the hand was a specially favourite ornament, and was constantly placed upon household articles. In the Naples Museum are seen, from Pompeii and elsewhere, handles of stoves, braziers, and of many other utensils, flattened out into broad open hands where riveted to the body of the article. Door-knockers from Pompeii, of a pattern still commonly seen in Italy, have a hand grasping a ball, with the hinge at the wrist. We cannot look upon these hands as simply decorative, but suggest that they were used intentionally as well-known protective amulets, powerful indeed when simply open, but doubly so when bent into certain well-defined and recognised attitudes.

[p. 255]

in the Ashmolean Museum among the Egyptian amulets is a clenched hand pierced for suspension; it is of rude modelling in blue porcelain, but it is evident from its general contour that it is meant for the same position as that shown in the Etruscan hand from Bologna (Fig. 102).

There is another of these in the Ashmolean which is also a small amulet to be worn, from Umrit, said to be Phoenician. The position of these hands is one which has evidently had a special meaning from very early times, and is still common everywhere, even here in England: in Italy it is so common that it has a technical name of its own, the mano fica. This has ever been a gesture of defiance and of insult among all nations. It denoted persumma ignominia to the Romans, [*397] and among all the Latin races it was connected with the fig, [*398] and so conveyed a hasslich idea. In French faire la figue, Italian far la fica, Spanish hacer el higo, all denote this particular gesture of the thumb between the first and second fingers. Our English idiom of "Don't care a fig," which expresses the contemptuous idea, and implies the gesture, has its counterpart in the German Fragen den Teufel. The gesture is everywhere perfectly well understood, though the Teuton does not connect it with the fruit. [*399] In classic times the hand in this position was well known as manus obscaena. [*400] Everybody is familiar

[p. 256]

with this gesture, which, if it has somewhat changed its meaning, has in all these ages by no means lost its force. The two following quotations seem to give it a northern habitat, but here in Somerset it is too common even to be noted.

Dean Ramsay remembered how in Yorkshire he and his schoolfellows, from 1800 to 1810, "used to put our thumb between the first and second finger, pointing it downwards as the infallible protection against the evil influences of one particularly malevolent and powerful witch." [*401]

They placed in the hand of the Midsummer Witch a vessel of the same kind with a long, narrow neck.

"It is filled with water," continued Judith, "drawn by herself from the sea on this very evening. Now, child, double thumb and come along."

Everybody knows that to double your thumb in your right hand averts danger. [*402]

We have already fully described (<page 150>) the amulet 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 111
 known as turpicula res, of which this mano fica formed one branch. Jorio, [*403] who always calls this gesture mano in fica, says that there are many meanings conveyed by this sign (Fig. 111).

The most used amongst us is as an amulet against the evil eye; and the Neapolitans utter the expression, "Te faccio na fica," as if they would say to a friend "May the evil eye do you no harm!"

This meaning is identical with that of making horns in the amulet sense; in fact when making this gesture they often pronounce the same sentence as they use in making horns against fascination.

[p. 257]

"Mal-uocchie non ce pozzano!" ([may] evil eyes not overwhelm you, literally, "throw down a well"). The only difference is that the mano in fica has a little more force than the horns in the idea of those who have faith in it.

Among Italians this gesture has the same meaning as among us and other people far and near--that of intense contempt or defiant insult. In this sense it is referred to by Dante, [*404] and twice by Frezzi. [*405] Trissino [*406] also uses it, almost copying Dante.

Jorio describes this as a most insulting gesture, equivalent to our "A fig for you! Go to Bath!" except that the Neapolitan equivalent fuori grotta, as a low, "outside-the-barrier" sort of place, carries infinitely more scorn than "to Bath." [*407]

Another meaning of the sign, beyond the limits of our present purpose, is discussed under the heading: "Invito turpe."

In offering or presenting any object to another

[p. 258]

person in order to avert any evil which may accompany it from the giver, when the article is of such a nature as to need support of the closed hand (pugno), it ought, in such case, to be held in the position of mano in fica. If the object be such, per esempio, as a plate held by thumb above and finger under, then the other fingers are to be placed a mano cornuta, of which we have now to speak.

This position of the hand is shown five times in Fig. 112 by the hand alone, also grasping a key and a flower, as amulets in silver and other materials; also on the Indian goddess (Fig. 115) grasping rings.

The Neapolitans have but one gesto to imitate horns, but so great and so many are the qualities and diversities of its signification, that these (latter) apply not only to this gesture, but also to natural horns, to their resemblances, and even to their simple name.

Thus Jorio [*408] begins his dissertation of over thirty pages upon Corna, far le corna, and after referring to the multitude of writings on the subject, says he shall consider it under the following heads:--

1. What kind of horns do the Neapolitans use? 2. The ideas they associate with horns, of whatsoever kind they may be, including the gesture and the word horns. 3. Finally, if the ancients had in whole or in part the same ideas and the same customs, or at least the same gestures, as the moderns relating to the horn. The words horn or horns are used indifferently, and apply alike to the horn alone or to the two which adorn the heads of animali corniferi.

He says of natural horns, that those of bullocks, the most used, are to be seen in gardens, on the top of palings, on the houses even of the nobility; that in these latter, the horns of Sicilian oxen are most in request. Those of rams and goats, of which wine-sellers

[p. 259]

and the lower classes make most use, are suspended in the inside of the houses, or at the door, and sometimes in the window. Less common are those of the stag, which may be seen dangling

Click to enlarge
FIG. 112.--From the Author's Collection.

at the doors of chemists' and grocers' shops, who, if they are able, obtain the horns of the elk, known as the Gran bestia. Of buffaloes' horns scarcely any are to be seen; when seen they are suspended in dark or ignoble places. These distinctions, not di rigore,

[p. 260]

are often modified according to the ease with which any kind of horn can be procured.

Artificial horns are made chiefly for the convenience of carriage on the person. Hence they are fashioned in small sizes and with much elegance. The most frequent material is coral, but plenty are to be had in gold, silver, mother of pearl, amber, or lava. One of the vendors not long since exposed for sale some exceedingly minute mani cornute, in gold, silver, coral, etc., and the business done proved that the artist knew the wants of his countrymen.

Whether through lack of horns, real or artificial, or whether it be that among us (Neapolitans) the idea of the horn is so widespread and deeply rooted that few will be without one, the fact is, that they have at length got to consider as a real horn any object whatever that resembles it. The following objects are therefore most particularly used. The claw of crab or lobster, cocks' spurs, claws or teeth of animals, as those of tigers and wild boars, horseshoes, half-moons, etc.

 The word horn. When the Neapolitan has need of a horn for any purpose, and has not either a real or artificial, nor anything resembling one, he makes use of the name, uttering the word horn or horns once or oftener according to the force he intends to give. [*409]

 As a gesture. The index and little finger extended, the middle and ring finger clasped by the thumb, as shown in many illustrations.

The hand thus posed and raised vertically gives a very good imitation of the head of a horned animal, and therefore we give to this gesture the name of the horned hand (mano cornuta). just as this unique sign imitating horns has very many different meanings, so we attach to it all the diverse ideas which belong to the word horn.

[p. 261]

As a potent gesture protecting against the evil eye, the mano cornuta is constant and persistent. A Neapolitan's right hand is almost constantly in that position, pointing downwards, just as the hand charms are made to hang downwards, and in this position they take the place of an amulet worn habitually against unknown and unsuspected attacks. Of all the ideas connected with the mano cornuta, that of fascination holds by very far the largest place.

When, however, it is desired to use the sign specially against a particular individual, the hand so posed is thrust out towards him, and if there is no fear of his person, towards his very eyes, from which so much is dreaded. That is, of course, if he be present, but if absent, the sign is made in the direction of his supposed whereabouts.

Jorio [*410] tells a story of a sprightly Napoletana who was over-credulous of the effects of fascination.

Observing that another lady whom she believed to be a jettatrice was highly praising the beauty of her husband, and especially of his well-formed thighs and legs, she wished to have recourse to the horn. Not having at hand the grand preservative, nor being able to supply it (openly) by a gesture, and what is more, not believing the repetition by her lips of the word corno, corno, corno, to be sufficient, she pretended to have need of a handkerchief. She therefore put her hand into her husband's pocket, and there made the mano cornuta. Then, with the points of her index and little fingers well extended, began to stab the thigh bone of her husband with such force, as if she wanted to pierce through it (bucarlo): indeed, if she did not pierce it, it was only because she could not. Nor did she leave off her preventive operation until the believed jettatrice turned her talk in another direction. Neapolitan ladies wear little horned hands of various materials suspended at the end of a necklace, which is ordinarily hidden in the breast; but whenever a person appears who is suspected of being a jettatore, the hand quickly goes to the necklace, and the amulet is brought out, dangling in the direction considered necessary. As etiquette does not permit this to be

[p. 262]

done openly in society, they pretend to be adjusting the kerchief, but the fact remains, that they seek to make sure of, and to touch if possible, the gran preservativo del fascino.

Over and above its use as a preventive gesture, the mano cornuta when raised vertically towards the person's own forehead denotes what some consider an ornament, the exalted horn; but on the other hand, when pointed towards the chin, it implies conjugal infidelity to the husband. This idea is not by any means confined to Italy. In Brand, under the heading "Cornutes," is a long chapter upon this subject, and we gather that at least in Brand's time the gesture made with the little and fore fingers had the same meaning here in England that it has still in Italy--where at the present day the gesture made, as last described, is looked upon as an unpardonable insult which blood alone can wipe out. Amongst ourselves the gesture seems to have quite died out and become forgotten, the result, we hope, of improved morals; but during the seventeenth century the perpetual allusion to cuckolds and horns is a distinct blot upon the literature of the period. Shakespeare has many allusions to the subject, though less in proportion than many of the coarser dramatists. [*411]

Addison complains [*412] that "cuckledom is the basis of most of our modern plays," showing that it was still common talk. We know it was a frequent topic in the last century, yet now the words seem quite to have dropped out of literature. No quotation

[p. 263]

of the word could be found for the New English Dictionary later than 1728 without going to Ford's Spain, where the word is referred back to the sixteenth century.

Both the gesture and its implication are still well known in all European countries. "Faire les cornes a quelqu'un!" "Porter les cornes"; "Far le corna a uno"; "Portar le corna"; "Llevar los cuernos"; "Einem Horner aufsetzen" ("to cuckold any one"); "Horner tragen," are all identically the same in meaning.

How the notion first arose and where, are points of great difficulty. Brand discusses the question at great length, gives many recorded opinions, but leaves it unsolved. He places its origin according to the earliest data he produces at the time of the Crusades; but Jorio declares the ancient Greeks to have used the horns, and also the gesture, in the same signification as at present: further, he dwells on the extreme antiquity of the use of the fingers as representing them. He considers the cornucopia of Amalthea the she-goat, the symbol of abundance, to have been an amulet. [*412a] Also he places the Rhyton of Dionysus in the same category, as well as the musical horn; and he winds up by declaring that their signification "e particolarmente di amuleto contro del fascino." He describes the various amulet horns, their shapes, their being deprived of all ornament except at the point, their mode of attachment or suspension, their representation in (ancient) pictures and bronzes accompanied by the phallus, especially at Herculaneum, where they appear also upon the household utensils (arnese). He also refers

[p. 264]

to the horns found among the fruits depicted on the walls of Pompeii, and says that "our Neapolitan fruiterers," who display their goods so openly outside their shops, "never fail to place among them a fine pair of horns, for the purpose of keeping off other folk's envy, evil eyes, fascination." [*413]

He refers to the only two isolated horns of metal discovered, one of bronze, the other of iron; both are solid, and so could never have been cups, and consequently they could have been of no use except for suspension. He also describes the heads of two oxen, from the mouths of which proceeds the phallus. The latter are referred to and depicted by Jahn, Taf. V. Another bronze from Herculaneum, no longer to be seen in the Royal Museum, is an ox's head, intended for suspension, on which are grouped three half-moons and three phalli.

Jorio describes at length, in much detail, a plaster (intonaco) from Herculaneum in which one of the male figures is making the mano cornuta with the left hand. He gives his full reasons why the figure is not intending insult, or for any of the other purposes (than the protective) to which the gesture is applied, and concludes the long discussion by declaring that "at such an action, one of our Neapolitans would not have hesitated a moment to exclaim: Benedica! mal-uocchie non ce pozanno!" He says the Museum has abundant examples of this gesture as an amulet contro al fascino, and concludes with: "In the vast field of amulets, every one was known to the ancients, and the moderns have not added thereto one single Corno." [*414]

[p. 265]

Again, the sixth century mosaics [*415] of Ravenna give us further illustrations. In Fig. 113 the remarkable hand appearing from the clouds, representing the Almighty, is very plainly in the position we have been considering, and looking at the scene in which

Click to enlarge
FIG. 113.--From San Vitale, Ravenna. Mosaic of the sixth century.

it occurs we cannot but regard it as a feature of great importance. In the same church and in others at Ravenna the hand is seen coming out of the clouds,

[p. 266]

especially in the scenes of Abraham's sacrifice of Isaac (Fig. 116), and of Moses putting off his shoes before the burning bush (Fig. 117); but in no other 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 114
 case known to the writer does the Dextera Dei appear so unmistakably as a mano cornuta as in Fig. 113.

A bull standing and fully represented, as the symbol of St. Luke (Fig. 114), is very rarely seen; the saint himself is shown very conspicuously making the well-known gesture as if to guard both himself and his bull from the assaults of evil eyes.

Fig. 115 is from a small brass statue of an Indian goddess, evidently of modern date, now in the County Museum at Taunton. The unmistakable position of both hands is a proof of the very widespread importance attached to the gesture of the mano cornuta, and is a convincing proof of what has been before remarked--that the gesture of the hands in ancient statues has a meaning, and is not, as in modern sculpture, dependent on the whim or taste of the artist. It is to be noted here also that this Indian statuette has one of the horned hands pointed down in true more Neopolitano.

When we see the same thing in the early Christian art of the sixth century at Ravenna, and in the present day pagan art of India, we are compelled to admit that symbolism is independent of religious faith, and that there is something in special positions of

[p. 267]

the hands, which both pagan and Christian alike recognise.

The several gestures in the Ravenna mosaics are both interesting and remarkable; 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 115.
 perhaps the more so from the fact that none of them (except the mano cornuta) are referred to as sacerdotal gestures in any of the books on modern gesture language in Italy, exhaustively dealt with by Canon Jorio. Nor does he once refer to any of those manual positions which must have been perfectly familiar to him as a priest. Three positions of the right hand raised are recognised as pertaining to the act of sacerdotal benediction. Of these, the two most usual are the open hand for deacons and inferior clergy shown by one angel, and that of our Lord and the second angel in Fig. 107; the latter is that of the Roman mano pantea. This position is that which is still the proper one for bishops of the Western Churches, but in the early Church, and down to the eighth century, a third position was used: instead of the thumb the little finger was raised; and this is still the attitude of benediction in the Orthodox Greek Church. In the early mosaics at Ravenna, dating before the great schism, we find all three positions. The Almighty hand from the clouds in both the scenes here produced (Abraham and Moses, Figs. 116, 117) has the first,

[p. 268]

second, and fourth fingers extended, with the third or annularius closed upon the palm. The same position is depicted on the angel next but one on the right of our Lord enthroned, in the famous series at San Apollinare Nuova. [*416] Again, in

Click to enlarge
Fig. 116.--From San Vitale, Ravenna.

the scene of the three men entertained by Abraham (Fig. 116), supposed to represent the three Persons of the Holy Trinity, they are severally making all three of the gestures described. Two are raising the right hand in the act of blessing, of whom the central figure makes the orthodox Greek

[p. 269]

sign, while the personage on his left makes the Western sign, and the third shows the open hand. The position of the thumb 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 117.
 and two first fingers raised seems to be the only one in which "Il Redentore" is portrayed, when in the act of lifting the right hand in benediction. The third figure in this scene, not being treated as sacerdotal in character, has his right hand laid naturally upon the table; the two others have the left.

It is certain that these gestures are intentionally depicted, and also that they denote sacerdotal rank; for later, by many centuries, we find the same thing in the Giotto frescoes at Assisi. There Saint Francis is painted with his hands displayed so as to exhibit the stigmata, but, inasmuch as he was never a priest, his hands are simply crossed upon his breast; while a mitred bishop, in the next panel, has his right hand lifted in the benedictory gesture, which by that time had become the only one used in the Western Church. [*417]

Among the simple amulets there are two other positions of the hand, as shown in Fig. 112. The forefinger alone extended is referred to by Jorio very frequently as a gesture, but not described by him as one used against the evil eye, yet the writer

[p. 270]

knows well that it is undoubtedly made and sold thus, as an amulet for that purpose. Those shown were purchased at a shop in the native quarter of Naples, and the writer believes he has seen the single forefinger, pointed up, fixed upon a horse's back, but could not find one in the shops which supply the saddlers. This gesture is, however, very clearly marked in Fig. 74, where the Indian goddess Indranee is shown as the celestial mother with her child. The hand having the points of thumb and forefinger touching, as shown in No. 3 on Fig. 118, though also extremely common, with a great variety of uses in the gesture language, is not, as a mere: gesture, an amulet according to Jorio. [*418] Jorio quotes the Abate Requeno's system of numeration, and points out that the sign so made means thirty (Fig. 94), and that in number-lore thirty signifies le nozze (marriage), while sixty represents widowhood. We cannot follow these authors into all their ramifications, which are outside the evil eye, but the hand in this position is, we repeat, commonly made and sold as an amulet against it, although the gesture itself is not one. I t will be noted from Fig. 118, No. 3, and Fig. 119, No. 5, that it is made with both right and left hands, whereas the left only signifies thirty, while the right in this position denotes three hundred. As a horse amulet this position of the hand is rather a favourite; and we may consider it to be adopted by those cabmen who, desire the custom of ladies-it being well understood by all what the gesture indicates (le nozze). As a gesture, however, it may be one of the most insulting,

[p. 271]

 

Click to enlarge
FIG. 118.

 See Description, <page 274>.

 

[p. 272]

though its chief significance, according to Jorio, [*419] is inimicizia (enmity); but by slightly altering the shape so as to form a circle it has a totally different signification, disprezzo (contempt). In both these meanings there is a distinct flavour of defiance, and perhaps on that account it may have been adopted as an amulet in the concrete form. [*420]

Examination of any varied collection of charms will show that the hand is a common amulet in itself, also that it is used in combination with other objects: sometimes merely grasping them, and sometimes, while grasping the actual charm, making at the same time the important protective gesture. [*421]

The silver hand grasping the dart is a prominent one on Fig. 112, and is one of the commonest to be seen. Another in coral holding a short sword appears on the same plate just above the serpents. In the Woburn Marble (Fig. 24) the gladiator is grasping a short sword; and again in the Cimaruta (Chap. X.) one of the branches ends in a hand grasping a sword. Moreover this arm grasping a dart, spear, or sword in various positions is one of the commonest of heraldic crests of the present day. One of the charms (on Fig. 112) is a key, and another the lotus; both are in mano cornuta. Two others are the mano in fica, one combined with a shell and the other with a flower-bud of some sort. The important one, however, is that at the end of the spada or sword. This is a hand grasping the lotus, and is no doubt considered a very potent charm.

[p. 273]

 

Click to enlarge
FIG. 119.

 See Description, <page 276>.

 

[p. 274]

[paragraph continues] The spada is of silver, about six inches long, and is worn in the back hair by any girls rich enough to procure one. The specimen here shown has been much worn, and is a decidedly bright and effective ornament. Another coral arm is grasping a fish; a hand grasping a fish, perhaps a dolphin, is also to be seen on the Cimaruta. The fish is an undoubted amulet, as may be seen on the gems, Figs. 16, 18.

None of these things are alluded to by Jorio, and we may accept it therefore as an axiom that the only two gestures, apart from the concrete, which of themselves constitute protective amulets, are the mano cornuta and the mano in fica.

We have reproduced here, as not out of place, the three pages of illustrations given by Jorio of the principal gestures in common use among Neapolitans of to-day. Concerning these, he has given full explanations and descriptions in the text. They are not, of course, strictly connected with our subject, yet so much has been said respecting manual gesture, and so many amulets exist in which the position of the hand is an important factor, that we cannot think these numbered attitudes, with a translation of their corresponding interpretations, will prove uninteresting.

FIG. 118.

  1. Adagio. Minaccia. Mediocramente.  1. Gently, soberly. Threat, menace. Indifferently, middling, so so. 
  2. Mano cornuta. pei suoi diversi significati.  2. Mano cornuta in its various significations. 
  3. Giustizia. Perfetto. Minaccia.  3. Justice. Perfection, all right. Threat. 
  4. Poco.  4. Little (in quantity). 
  5. Additare (v. l'Indice III). Indice solo disteso.  5. To point with the forefinger. (He gives no less than twenty different meanings for this gesture.) 
  6. Schioppetto pei diversi suoi significati.  6. A gun, a musket, in its various significations. 
  7. Ladro.  7. Thief. 
  8. Bere. Additare.  8. Drink. To point. 
  

 

[p. 275]

 

Click to enlarge
FIG. 120.

 See Description, <page 276>.

 

[p. 276]

Of course, where two or more significations may be given by the same position of the hand, the meaning is supplemented by facial and other expression. Jorio gives 32 pages to the explanation of No. 2, Fig. 118.

FIG. 119.

  1. Mano in fica.  1. (Sufficiently explained.) 
  2. Danaro.  2. Money, coin. 
  3 and 4. Stupido.  3 and 4. Stupid, blockhead. 
  5. Amore.  5. Love, liking, attachment. 
  6. Chiedere.  6. To ask, to beg, to request. 
  7. Condotta versipelle.  7. Cunning, malicious conduct or behaviour. 
  8. Schioppetto.  8. Gun, musket. 
  9 and 10. Disprezzo.  9 and 10. Contempt, disdain. 
  

 

FIG. 120.

  1. Silenzio.  1. Silence, hold your tongue. 
  2. Negativa.  2. Denial, no. 
  3. Bellezza.  3. Beauty. 
  4. Fame.  4. Hunger, I want food. 
  5. Besseggiare.  5. To make a long nose, to mock, etc. 
  6. Fatica.  6. Labour, fatigue. 
  7. Stupido.  7. Stupid, blockhead, donkey, asses' ears. See <page 416>. 
  8. Guercio.  8. Squint-eyed. 
  9. Ingannare.  9. To cheat, to deceive. 
  10. Astuto.  10. Crafty, cunning. 
  

 

Only a study of the curious book itself can afford full information upon all these gestures.

Footnotes

^236:377 New English Dictionary, s.v. "Chironomy."

^236:378 Scoperta della Chironomia ossia dell' arte di gestire con le mani, Dell' Abate Vincenzo Requeno, Parma, 1797, p. 13.

^236:379 "Janus geminus a Numa rege dicatus, qui pacis, bellique argumento colitur, digitis ita figuratis, ut trecentorum quinquaginta dierum nota per significationem anni, temporis, et aevi se Deum indicaret."--Pliny, xxxiv. 7.

^236:380 "Simulacrum ejus plerumque fingitur manu dextera 300 et sinistra sexaginta quinque numerum tenens, ad demonstrandam anni dimensionem."--Macrobius, Saturn. i.

^236:381 Abate Requeno, op. cit. p. 14.

^240:382 Abate Requeno, op. cit. p. 40.

^240:383 Before venturing; to reproduce this interesting system for which the Abate claims such antiquity, great pains were taken to ascertain if it is known and practised in our English systems of teaching the deaf and dumb. The [p. 241] constant reply of experts, as to whether this or any similar system of manual numeration was taught, has been: "I know of no ancient system"! Only by a negative process has it been found that this system is not used by modern teachers. It is therefore here recorded as bearing much on what has to be said upon gestures of the hand, so intimately connected with the belief in the evil eye.

^242:384 Jahn, Aberglauben, etc., frequently uses this argument as a proof that the objects he is speaking of were used as amulets, e.g. p. 47, of a female figure with the hand on the mouth he says: "Die sich zum Theil durch den Henkel als Amulete ausweisen."

^243:385 Another plate, with the sun's rays terminating in a hand, is in Wilkinson, i. 40.

^243:386 E. Wallis Budge, The Nile, p. 13.

^245:387 In the Ashmolean Museum are three small Egyptian amulets evidently for suspension. They are open hands of the usual blue pottery, but small, and almost identical in type with many a coral hand to be seen to-day in the Naples shops. No doubt the open hand has been worn as a protection throughout the thirty centuries since these little charms were made.

^246:388 See Fig. 115, <page 267>, which, though modern, probably represents by Oriental unchangeableness equal antiquity.

^246:389 This is fully supported by the account given by the Abate Requeno of the statue set up by Numa Pompilius, in which the pose of the hands was specially ordered.

^246:390 Deut. xvi. 18; Dan. ii. 49; i Kings vii. 7.

^246:391 Murray's Handbook for Spain, 1855, vol. i. p. 301.

^247:392 The arms of Ulster are simply a large hand in this position, filling up the entire "field." Perhaps the most apt and the best-known illustration of the holding up of the hand as a powerful gesture is the account in Exodus xvii. 11: "And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed; and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed." Then because he could not hold it up continually it was held up by Aaron and Hur. The Scriptures are full of examples showing the great importance of manual gestures.

^249:393 The frequent reference in Scripture to the lifting up of the hands fully confirms the importance of this attitude of prayer: "Lift up your hands in the sanctuary" (Psalm cxxxiv. 2). The lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice" (Psalm cxli. 2). "I stretch forth my hands unto thee" (Psalm cxliii. 6). "He lifted up his hands, and blessed them" (St. Luke xxiv, 50). See also Psalm xxviii. 2, lxiii. 4, cxix. 48, and many other passages.

^250:393a See Fig. 13. Jahn also explains what these shells typify. Phallic students will readily understand them.

^251:394 This hand shows precisely the same gesture as those over the arch at the Alhambra, and upon the drums of Tunis. "The open hand was represented on the coins of some of our Saxon kings in the tenth century; on one it is accompanied by Alpha and Omega" (Twining, Symbols and Emblems of Early Christian Art, p. 6).

^252:395 Mimica degli Antichi, Andrea de Jorio, Napoli, 1832, p. 227.

^252:396 Fig. 109, No. 17 of Jorio, is from a Greek vase published by Millin--vas. ec. V. I tav. 66, by Inchirami, Galleria Omerica, ec. tav. 76. He says that of this picture Minerva is the protagonista, the central object towards whom the eyes of all the other figures are directed. The scene appears to represent a council of armed heroes, amongst whom Minerva brandishes her lance. A careful study of the gestures leads to the conclusion that there is a difference of opinion between those on her right and those on her left, for reasons which he points out.

[p. 253]

Minerva turns her face to the right, while she raises her left arm with the hand open; she seems to be in the act of stepping forward to the left, and is pointing her left hand while brandishing her lance in the same direction. The old man sitting on her right is holding his right hand spread out and reversed, as if to signify "Go gently," or "Don't excite yourself." The woman standing raises her left hand with palm extended as if saying to the goddess, "Listen! Keep quiet!" These two figures then being in tranquil attitudes seem to say, "Wait; go carefully; the business is doubtful." The sitting warrior has his left band open, palm upward, a little raised--a position when the hand is flat denoting a question asked, while the raising it upward denotes much disapproval of the words of his opponents. The standing figure behind him has his right hand raised so as to show vivacity in his whole body, and indicates his entire and active disapproval of the counsel of the others. The whole picture represents Minerva proposing some great operation, which those on her right discountenance, and advise prudent waiting, while those on the left support and urge it with heat and animosity.

The whole picture is one of manual gesture telling a plain story.

Fig. 110, No. 18 of Jorio, is from a vase in the collection of Sir John Coghill, and is fully described by Millingen. Jorio says the principal figure [p. 254] is Bacchus, closely watching the conversation of the other persons, who are at the same time making gestures as ancient as they are modern, relating to a special quarrel between the two women. The one on the left, fixing her eyes on her companion, and thrusting out her right forefinger to accentuate her look, says with emphasis, 'Thou!' That this 'thou' is intended as a reproach may be argued from her look; but more certainly from the attitudes of herself as well as of her companion. Indeed she also stares back at her, lifts up both her arms in angry surprise and denial at the same time. Further, with the like significance, she throws back the upper part of her body, so as to enable her to steady herself on her feet. The other person, perceiving the anger of her opponent, raises her left hand and with thumb and forefinger makes the sign of love or friendship (see 5, Fig. 119). Jorio points out how cleverly the artist has told the story, and how plain all these things are to a Neapolitan: how that jealousy is shown in the left-hand woman, while the satyr goes on playing his pipes in apparent unconcern, while Bacchus also is taking the liveliest interest, etc.

^255:397 John Praetorius, De Pollice, Lipsiae, 1677, p. 42. He refers to the Italian phrase "far le fiche."

^255:398 "The fig and the phallus were carried in processions in honour of Bacchus. Hence in Italy arose the term far la fica."--Payne Knight, Symb. Lang. p. 30.

^255:399 "To fig" (a person) is, "Einen durch Trotz oder Verachtung andeutende Verwegungen mit den Fingern beleidigen" (Hilpert).

^255:400 This is described by Ovid (Fast, v. 433): "Signaque dat digitis medio cum pollice junctis."

"Favebant ii, qui manum in obscaenum modum formabant."--De Pollice, 43.

^256:401 Atkinson, Forty Years in a Moorland Parish, quoted in Athenaeum, May 23, 1891, p. 662.

^256:402 Walter Besant, Dorothy Forster, 1885, p. 7. Scene laid in Northumberland.

^256:403 Mimica degli Antichi, p. 155.

^257:404

 

	 
		"Al fine delle sue parole il ladro
		 Le mani alzo con ambeduo le fiche,
		 Gridando: Togli, Dio, che a te le squadro."
		                            Inferno, Canto xxv. 1-4.
		
		 
		
		 

^257:405

 

	 
		"E fe le fiche a Dio 'l superbo vermo."
		                                      Il Quadrir, ii. 19.
		
		"E fe le fiche a Dio il mostro rio,
		 Stringendo i denti ed alzando le braccia."
		                                              Ib. iii. 10.
		
		 
		
		 

^257:406

 

	 
		"Poi facea con le man le fiche al cielo
		 Dicendo: Togli, Iddio; che puoi piu farmi?
		                      L'Italia Liberata, Canto xii.
		
		 The latter authors are quoted by Cary.

^257:407

	 
		"Se poi viene un susurrone
		 E lodando vi scompone,
		 Presto il pollice volgete
		 Sotto l'indice, 'l tenete
		 A lui ritto ritto in faccia
		 Sin che parti, ovver si taccia."
		            Marugi, Capricci sulla Jettatura, p. 134.
		
		 The author says in a note: "This is the most efficacious of all the expedients up to this time practised. Make trial of it, and you will be grateful to me."

^258:408 Mimica degli Antichi, Napoli, 1837, p. 89.

^260:409 Mimica degli Antichi, Napoli, 1837, p. 92.

^261:410 Mimica, p. 100.

^262:411 "It shall hang like a meteor o'er the cuckold's horns" (Merry Wives of Windsor, Act ii. Sc. 2). "An old cuckold with horns on his head" (Much Ado about Nothing, Act ii. Sc. 1). Marston in his Malcontent, Act iv. Scene 5, calls Agamemnon, Prince Arthur, and Hercules, cornutes. So also Ben Jonson in Every Man in his Humour, Act iii. Scenes 3 and 6, also in Act v. Scene 5, alludes to both horns and cuckolds.

^262:412 Spectator, No. 446.

^263:412a See Mano Pantea, post, p. 318.

^264:413 Mimica degli Antichi, p. 109.

^264:414 Mimica, p. 120. It has already been remarked that every species of [p. 265] charm of whatever kind soever against the evil eye is called in the vernacular un corno; hence the above. Later on we shall see that he is mistaken, or at least some have been invented since his day.

^265:415 The illustrations from the Ravenna mosaics are all from photographs in the writer's possession, obtained on the spot.

^268:416 This angel is not shown in Fig. 107, but in the great mosaic it appears next the angel with the open hand.

^269:417 The importance attached to manual gesture in the rites of the Roman Church is proved by the minute directions as to the position in which the celebrant is ordered to make the sign of the cross at Mass. He is to turn the little finger of the right hand towards the object which he is to bless, keeping the right hand straight with the fingers extended and joined together with the thumb (from Pontificale Romanum, Venetiis, 1836).

^270:418 The hand in this position is, however, made and sold as an amulet. One of these is on Fig. 83 as a horse amulet, and a small one in coral is on Fig. 112, among the charms for personal wear.

^272:419 Mimica, pp. 46, 126.

^272:420 This gesture is called the Phallic hand (Forlong, Rivers of Life, p. 461).

^272:421 This is seen again in the Indian goddess, Fig. 115, who is grasping two large rings while making the mano cornuta with both hands.

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 277]

 

CHAPTER VIII

 

THE CROSS

AMONG modern amulets, used specially and avowedly against the evil eye, the cross finds no place; for the simple reason that it has taken its position as the great Christian symbol, whereby its connection with times preceding Christianity has been severed, and its meaning modified to its later purpose.

Of all simple signs it is the easiest to make and the most common, whether ancient or modern. In these latter days it is often but a mere mark, like the chalk cross made by an artisan upon his work, or the sign-manual of our parish marriage register, yet in many of its forms and uses it has a very distinct and special meaning.

Among the ancient Egyptians the cross was very common. Standing on a heart (as in Fig. 121) it was the symbol of goodness [*422]; the same form in hieroglyphic writing is the ideograph nefer or the phonetic n. [*423] It is shown thus on a tablet depicted by Maspero [*424] together with a Calvary cross. These tablets (dalles), found in considerable numbers, were slabs of stone, whereon were sculptured models, to teach the apprentices their trade

[p. 278]

and they show examples of stone carving in all stages from the mere outline to the finished work.

At the Ashmolean Museum are undoubted amulets from ancient Egypt, such as Figs. 121, 122. Quite as ancient as any of these is a small ornamental cross

Click to enlarge
FIG. 121-3.

amulet of gold, found by Schliemann in the third sepulchre at Mycenae, now in the Athens Museum (Fig. 123) [*425] rather suggesting serpents in combination. Several other cross ornaments were found in the same tomb, but they are not of this distinct character. We are told that the Spanish conquerors of Mexico were astonished at finding the cross in common use by men whom they knew to be heathens, and that they managed to ingratiate themselves with the natives by displaying the cross upon their standards. Many crosses appear also on the ancient Peruvian hieroglyphs (Fig. 126).

What the true symbolical meaning of the cross may be, is a vexed question. On the one hand, many hold it to be distinctly phallic; in India it is always so considered, while others say the "theory is monstrous and devoid of evidence." [*426] All authorities, however, agree that the T or tau

[p. 279]

cross is the symbol of life [*427] in both its forms, i.e. either the simple T or with the loop handle attached. The latter is the crux ansata or ankh, seen in the hand of most of the Egyptian gods of the later period. In one or other of these forms it is traditionally held to have been the mark set upon Cain; also upon the houses of the Israelites in Egypt, to preserve them from the destroying angel.

The rod Moses stretched over the Red Sea and with which he struck the rock is supposed to have been topped with a cross; on the Tau the brazen serpent was upraised. Mediaeval writers thought the two sticks gathered by the widow of Sarepta a type of the cross; but in Ezekiel ix. 4 the mark to be set on "the foreheads of the men that cry," etc., was certainly the T; for the Vulgate has: "Et signa Thau super frontes virorum gementium." Many authorities accept this rendering: St. Jerome "refers again and again to this passage"; SS. Cyprian, Augustine, Origen, and Isidore allude to it; also Bishops Lowth and Munter; "but there need be little doubt as to the passage." [*428]

In the roll of the Roman soldiery after a battle it was customary to place T against those who were alive, and Th against the killed.

In the Roman Catacombs is found the T or St. Anthony's cross; in those very early days of the Church it symbolised the belief in the eternity of that life upon which the departed soul had entered. This was probably the transition period, when the cross had not yet been fully recognised as the special symbol of the Christian faith.

[p. 280]

The ancient Britons worshipped the T or Tau as a god, and among Northmen of old the same figure was "the hammer of Thor," the Scandinavian Jove; reversed thus , it is the yoni-lingam symbol of the Hindoos. [*429]

The crux ansata form is exceedingly

Click to enlarge
FIG. 124.-125.

 

[p. 281]

wide-spread. [*430] Not only is it found in the sculptures from Khorsabad, from Nineveh, and in the Palmyra sculptures now in the Louvre, but further east in Persia and India. More remarkable still is it to find the same sign in far-distant Peru, where it appears as an actual shape cut through great blocks of granite (Figs. 124, 125), both ancient and modern at Cuzco, and also in the remarkable hieroglyphics of the Incas reproduced in Fig. 126. [*431] The ancient Cuzco block at the time of the Conquest was used for the execution of criminals. The head was inserted face down in the round aperture, and a piece of wood jammed into the slot so as to hold the neck tight; the body was then seized, violently lifted, and the neck dislocated. [*432] There are no means of ascertaining what the Incas intended by this crux ansata, but the fact remains that it existed, and is found repeatedly in ancient Peru. The cross was known in South America in several other forms besides the ankh, as appears from the hieroglyphics of Peru.

[p. 282]

 

Click to enlarge
FIG. 126.--From Wiener, Perou et Bolivie, p. 775.

 

[p. 283]

A device almost exactly similar [*433] is found on coins of Asia Minor, Cilicia, and Cyprus. It is placed on a Phoenician coin of Tarsus beneath the throne of Baal. Another is on a Sicilian medal of Camarina.

It is, however, in Egypt that this symbol, sometimes called the Cross of Serapis, [*434] is most commonly to be seen in the hands of kings and gods alike. One scene [*435] represents Amenophis II. having a double stream of these figures, alternated with the symbol of purity, poured out upon him by the gods Horus and Thoth. This same act is also a subject of sculpture at several places, and by the outpouring of life and purity denotes the king's purification, to fit him to stand before the god of the temple. In each case the king so purified also held the ankh in his right hand. [*436]

Besides these, the same cross is in a way personified with arms and hands holding the symbol of purity. Especially were these noted by the writer at Medinet Habou and at Edfou (Figs. 127, 128). At both these temples the figures are repeated in rows, side by side, so as to form a decorative dado.

The meaning of the crux ansata wherever found is testified "in the most obvious manner," [*437] denoting fecundity and abundance in the way universally understood by this symbol throughout India. [*438] And

[p. 284]

we may remark that the use of this cross as the symbol of fertilisation is perfectly consistent with the sign being that of the kind of life therein typified. [*439]

All these examples are of ancient usage, but there

Click to enlarge
FIG. 127., 128.

will be little difficulty in showing that it has been used throughout the Middle Ages, and that it is found today in a form but slightly modified. At the present day in Cyprus the women wear this cross as a talisman. [*440] It is believed to keep off the evil eye and to prevent or cure barrenness.

Fig. 129 is a coin of Ethelward: [*441] besides a smaller one in the inscription, there is a cross on the centre of each side; one of these is the crux ansata in a form which is still more "obvious" than that usually seen in the hands of Egyptian gods or kings, or even upon the Indian Iswara.

[p. 285]

[paragraph continues] The object of a cross on each side of this coin was the customary one, of placing protective amulets against the evil eye upon coins, medals, and seals, as well as upon buildings, public and private. One of these amulet seals, having the sun and moon upon it, was in actual use by the Dean and Chapter of St. Andrew of Wells (Fig. 137),

Click to enlarge
FIG. 129.

down to a comparatively late period--long since the Reformation. A careful consideration of the coin of Ethelward will help us to understand its later developments, especially if we look upon both crux in corde (Fig. 121) and ansata, undoubted amulets for suspension, as practically the same things; for we cannot fail to see that all the devices are but modified forms of one and the same symbol. On a cylinder from Babylon [*442] there is a figure holding a crux ansata, reversed from its usual Egyptian position, and having the cross upwards and the ring beneath.

Our next stage is shown in Fig. 130 where the Third Person of the Holy Trinity, the "Lord and Giver of Life," holds this same symbol, but slightly changed, in His hand. Again, in Fig. 131 the Father Almighty holds the same symbol under His left hand. The only difference is that in both of

[p. 286]

these examples the cross is upon the globe as well as above it. [*443]

On a bas-relief from the Roman Catacombs is a representation of the Lamb, but instead of the usual flag He holds a staff, with a ball and cross on the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 130., 131.

top, precisely like the conventional orb and cross in the hand of kings and queens. [*444] The historic gradation of the use, from remote ages to the present day, of this symbol of life in perpetuity as the badge of sovereignty, makes it clear, however unwilling

[p. 287]

devout worshippers of royalty may be to assent, that the object we know so well as the orb and cross, is nothing else but a powerful amulet against the evil eye.

Those who remain sceptical as to our chain of facts will perhaps be convinced by the following. In days when brewing used to be done at home, the writer, as a boy, has often watched and helped the operations. When the malt was steeped in the "mashing vat" our old man used to cover it up with cloths "to let it steevy"; but before doing this he never failed "to zet the kieve." 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 132
 This was to make upon the surface of the mash "two hearts and a criss-cross," as in Fig. 132. Inquiry always brought the same answer: "Nif didn zet the kieve, they there pixies wi'd safe to spwoil the drink." The figure of a heart is made with the utmost ease by placing the two forefingers together at the indentation, and then moving each simultaneously so as to meet at the bottom, and make the two sides. Precisely the same sign used constantly to be made on the fine soil of a bed after sowing any special seeds, such as cabbage, onions, etc., so that it may not be overlooked. [*445] Here then we have a distinctly modern

[p. 288]

amulet of the same identical elements as that on the coin of Ethelward; for by merely bringing the two hearts together, and slightly rounding them, with the cross placed on the top, we have the "obvious" figure itself.

Whatever may have been the notion of the designers of St. Peter's in Rome and St. Paul's in London, the fact remains that each of these great Christian churches bears on its highest point the orb and cross of royalty, no other than the crux ansata (a symbol of the perpetuation of life in one aspect, and a potent amulet in another), raised high above the people, like the famous cricket of Pisistratus at Athens, the crocodile at Venice, the devils on Notre Dame, and the diavolo at Florence, protecting them from the wicked glance of the evil spirits expected to lurk around when the bells are silent. Of course all this will be set down as pure speculation; but of such cavillers we would ask, first for a better explanation of the ball and cross, and next for any explanation whatever of the maintenance of bells other than that they represent an ancient custom, founded, like the orb and cross, on an ancient belief. [*446]

That the cross was actually worn as an amulet in ancient times is clearly proved by the fact that two

[p. 289]

men called Kharu (Syrians) appear on Egyptian sculptures actually wearing it suspended to the neck. [*447]

At the British Museum may be seen a large cross amulet suspended from the neck of Tiglath Pileser in the great tablet from Nimroud. At this day necklaces made of a string of crosses are worn by the Indians of Peru, [*448] but these latter may be from Christian sources, though that is by no means even probable.

There are other kinds of cross among the variety used in heraldry or ornament, which certainly have a mystery about them, and some of which are amulets. [*448a] Foremost among these is the svastika of the Hindoos, the fylfot-cross or gammadion, called also by some the "catch L," 

Among the Hindoos this was the mark or sign of Vishnu, [*449] the beneficent preserver of life. It is proved now to be a sun symbol, by Mr. Percy Gardner, who has found a coin of the ancient city of Mesembria in Thrace, on which is the fylfot with a sun on its centre. The name of the place means the city of "Mid-day," and this name is also figured on some of its coins by the legend MES. , [*450] which clearly and decisively proves its meaning. This form of cross was early adopted among Christian symbols, for it is found in the Roman Catacombs of

[p. 290]

the fourth century. [*451] As a mystic sign it is said to have travelled further than any other symbol of antiquity. [*452] It was known in Iceland in the ninth

Click to enlarge
FIG. 133.

century; it is known all over Asia, including Japan;

[p. 291]

all over Europe from Iceland to Greece, Sicily, and Malta. It is found on the oldest Greek coins, on Etruscan vases, and on the Newton Stone, an ancient Celtic monument at Aberdeen. [*453] Comte Goblet traces it to the Troad as its birthplace, some thirteen hundred years before Christ. Schliemann found at Mycenae a terra-cotta dish, on one side of which "are engraved a number of s, the sign which occurs so frequently in the ruins of Troy." [*454] He says the same sign was often found on vases and pottery. [*455]

From its appearance on coins and from its being a sun sign we may accept the conclusion that the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 134.

 fylfot was an amulet against the evil eye "of wonderful diffusion." We are told that the triskelion or triquetra is a modification of the fylfot, and that it was adopted as the badge of Sicily by Agathocles about 317 B.C. and later by the Isle

[p. 292]

of Man. [*456] We are told [*457] that the arms of Sicily and the Isle of Man consist of three human legs of identical pattern, except that the latter are 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 135.
 spurred. With all deference to high authority we would point to the illustration Fig. 133, which is from a photograph of an ancient relief at Palermo, with the Gorgon's head in the centre, whereas the Manx arms are plain and have no head. The same device with the head was found on a Greek altar in Malta (Fig. 134) [*458] and on a gem (Fig. 135). [*459] The Manx arms are borne by several old English families, and are said to have been brought to England by Crusaders returning via Sicily. All this does but support and confirm what we have remarked as to the real meaning and basis of modern heraldry.

Footnotes

^277:422 Wilkinson, vol. iii. p. 352.

^277:423 Budge, Nile, pp. 55, 65.

^277:424 Arch. Egypt. pp. 190, 191.

^278:425 He (Schliemann, Mycenae and Tiryns, p. 66) says: "The cross with the marks of four nails may often be seen" upon vases and other pottery.

^278:426 Baring-Gould, Myths of the Middle Ages, p. 358.

^279:427 Budge; Wilkinson; Baring-Gould; Smith, Dict. Bib. etc., wherein many ancient authorities are quoted, forming the basis of modern research.

^279:428 Baring-Gould, op. cit. p. 377.

^280:429 Much discussion has taken place from time to time as to what was the real shape of the cross on which our Lord was crucified. The famous graffito found on the Palatine, now in the Kircherian Museum in Rome, seems to settle the question. Whether it is an actual blasphemous caricature, as most people believe, or whether it was, as King (Gnostics, p. 90) says, "the work of some pious Gnostic, of his jackal-headed god," is the question. A close examination of the photographs or of the original shows that the man who scratched it used two strokes to form T, and that he afterwards added a short one over, to carry the superscription; for the line is perfectly distinct from the main upright line of the cross. Had he not been accustomed to the tau cross and none other, as the one with which he associated crucifixion, he would not so carefully have made his down stroke exactly meet the horizontal one, but would, as we should, have begun at the top, some way above the line of the arms. A comparison between King's plate, p. 90, and a photograph from the original, will show very clearly what we mean, In King's, the upright line is continuous from the superscription to the feet. In Lanciani, Ancient Rome, p. 122, is a photogravure which completely confirms the writer's own close observation, and enables him entirely to dispute Mr. King's explanation. In the photographs from the original, there is nothing to suggest the head of a jackal; it is even in his own drawing distinctly equine. Moreover, being in Rome a very short time after the find, the writer saw, and knows well, the spot whence the whole piece of plaster had been removed to the Museum, and there close by on the same wall was another graffito, possibly by the same hand, of a donkey turning a conical mill-stone with a plain inscription, [p. 281] which read, Labora asine, etc. This has also been removed. Inasmuch as the graffito is known to have been almost contemporary (A.D. 69) with the event depicted, it forms a most convincing link in the chain of evidence that our Lord suffered upon a tau cross. The spirit which would lead to such a graffito as that here discussed is abundantly exhibited in Acts xxviii. 22. Probably it was drawn while St. Paul was in Rome, when "this sect" was spoken against.

^281:430 This subject is treated at great length by an anonymous writer in a volume called Phallism (London, privately printed, 1889), but his facts are different, and do not lead to the same conclusion as those here produced.

^281:431 A close examination of these inscriptions shows a strange general resemblance to Egyptian characters. It will be noticed that the cross in various shapes is very frequently used. The writing here reproduced is reduced to one-fifth; the original is now in the Museum of Cuzco. Wiener says that although written about the end of the sixteenth century, the style and characters are those used before the Conquest. The document was found in the valley of Paucastambo, "dans le pays perdu de la Bolivie, a Sicasica."

^281:432 Wiener, Perou et Bolivie, p. 724

^283:433 Baring-Gould, op. cit. p. 362, who gives illustrations (Figs. 19, 20, p. 344) and quotes Raoul Rochette, Mem. de l'Academie des Inscr. tom. XVI.

^283:434 Payne Knight, Symbol. Lang. p. 238.

^283:435 Wilkinson, Anc. Egypt. iii. 362.

^283:436 In Fig. 103 it will be noticed that one of the Sun's hand-rays is holding the symbol of life to the lips of Khuenaten. In the other plate referred to (Wilkinson, i. 40) two of these same hand-rays are holding the ankh to his lips and to those of his wife.

^283:437 C. W. King, Gnostics, p. 72.

^283:438 Ardanari Iswara is represented (Forlong, Rivers of Life, vol. ii. p. 374. Pl. xiv.) as a female standing on a water-lily with the crux ansata as her only [p. 284] ornament. Her right hand is raised in the position on which we have more to say--that of the mano pantea.

^284:439 "In solemn sacrifices all the Lapland idols were marked with the venus from the blood of the victims. . . . It occurs on many Runic monuments in Sweden and Denmark long anterior to Christianity."--Payne Knight, Symbol. Lang. p. 30. One author (Forlong, op. cit. i. 317) asserts that this symbol was adopted as the ancient pallium, which was shaped thus. He gives an illustration of it, as worn by a priest.

^284:440 General di Cesnola, Cyprus, p. 371.

^284:441 From Archaeologia, vol. xix.

^285:442 Munter, Religion der Babylonier. Kopenhagen, 1827.

^286:443 Wilkinson, vol. ii. p. 344, gives a number of necklaces made up of amulets such as we have dealt with. Among these is a large scarab with the T cross upon it, just as is seen upon the orb in the hand of the First and Third Persons of the Holy Trinity, Figs. 130, 131. See also Fig. 141.

^286:444 These figures are from Symbols of Early and Mediaeval Christian Art by Miss Louisa Twining, to whom I am indebted for kind permission to reproduce.

^287:445 The same thing was done all round the countryside when people used to bake at home. The barm put into the dough is called "setting the sponge." The batch is then lightly covered and left all night "to rise." It is at this time that the "two hearts and the criss-cross" were and are made upon it, precisely similar in kind, and for the same purpose, as upon the mash in brewing, or on the seed-bed. It is of course to this old custom that Herrick refers in his Hesperides:

	 
		This I'll tell ye by the way,
		 Maidens, when ye leavens lay,
		 Crosse your dow, and your dispatch
		 Will be better for your batch. [p. 288]
		 In the morning when ye rise,
		 Wash your hands and cleanse your eyes.
		 Next be sure ye have a care
		 To disperse the water farre;
		 For as farre as that doth light,
		 so farre keeps the evil spright,
		
		 

^288:446 This belief is not merely a superstition of the early or mediaeval Church, but of much more ancient times. Bells were adopted from heathendom by Christians, though they have been rejected by Mahomedans.

	 
		          "Temesaeaque concrepat aera
		 Et rogat ut tectis exeat umbra suis."
		                                       Ovid, Fast. v. 441-2.
		
		 

^289:447 Wilkinson, Anc. Egypt. i. 246.

^289:448 Wiener, Perou et Bolivie, p. 667.

^289:448a Those especially known as fleurie, and fleurettee, have each limb tipped with the fleur-de-lis, while the cross botonee is tipped with the fig-leaf. Both of these fantastic ornamentations have distinctly phallic meanings which add power to the cross as an amulet. See Inman, Anc. Faiths, pp. 150-165.

^289:449 C. W. King, Gnostics, p. 229.

^289:450 Goblet d'Alviella, Migr. des Symb. Athenaeum, No. 3381, p. 217. See Letter from Prof. Max Muller, Athenaeum, No. 3382. Also R. P. Greg, On the Meaning and Origin of the Fylfot and Svastika. 1884.

^290:451 Brownlow, Roma Sotteranea, vol. ii. p. 177.

^290:452 It occurs on an old stone cross in company with Ogham inscriptions at Aglish (J. Romilly Alien, Christian Symbolism. p. 97) in Kerry. On these the arms are reversed so as to make it appear to turn against the sun. In King's Gnostics the svastika is shown both ways.

^291:453 King, Gnostics, p. 176.

^291:454 Mycenae and Tiryns, p. 77. This would put the date indefinitely further back than Comte Goblet does.

^291:455 Ib. p. 66.

^292:456 On an ancient Etruscan vase found at Volci, now in the Museum of Rouen, is a scene representing a fight between Athena and Enceladus. On the shield of the fallen giant is the triskelion: the legs are naked, meeting in the centre, without the Gorgoneion (Daremberg et Saglio, p. 102).

^292:457 Goblet d'Alviella, op. cit. Athen. 3381, p. 217.

^292:458 From History of Malta, Boisgelin, 1805, p. 18.

^292:459 King, Handbook of Gems, p. 361.

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 293]

 

CHAPTER IX

 

THE MANO PANTEA

THE hand in the attitude of sacerdotal benediction, having the two first fingers and thumb extended, was an amulet against the evil eye long before the Christian era. Fig. 136 is from the Naples 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 136.
 Museum (about eight inches high), No. 5505/1737, from Pompeii. Being mounted on a stand, its purpose is evidently the same as the plain open hand (Fig. 104).

Jorio [*460] has nothing whatever to say about this position, henceforward called that of the Mano Pantea. As a gesture by the common people it is not used at all, but is evidently left for the priests alone, [*461] being specially the attitude of our Lord in the act of benediction, as shown by the Ravenna mosaic (Fig. 107, <page 248>).

Of the three men entertained by Abraham, the one who may be supposed to represent the Second

[p. 294]

[paragraph continues] Person of the Trinity, as already described, holds the right hand thus, while the central figure, the First Person, is making the Eastern sign of benediction, also explained, with the first, second, and fourth fingers. Again, in the great twelfth century mosaic of our Lord on the tribune of the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 137., 138.

[paragraph continues] Cathedral of Monreale in Sicily the attitude is the same as in Fig. 107 though six centuries later, and twelve centuries later than Fig. 136. Although this position of the hand is that usually assigned to Him, it is by no means restricted to the Second Person, for there are several instances where the Almighty Father is shown in this attitude, and, further, the Holy Spirit is portrayed in human form with the right hand raised in this gesture [*462] (Figs. 130, 131).

[p. 295]

There are very interesting examples of this special attitude, attributed not only to all the Persons of the Holy Trinity separately, but in two cases Miss Twining [*463] (in Plates xxxiv. xxxv.) represents the Trinity by one single, seated figure, who,

Click to enlarge
FIG. 139.

in both plates, is lifting the right hand in the position we are now discussing. There are many other examples of this attitude attributed to the Almighty Father, where the hand alone, or Dextera Dei, in this position is shown coming down from the clouds. Fig. 139, from the Norman tympanum at Hoveringham, Notts, [*464] shows this Almighty hand reaching down to St. Michael fighting with the dragon. [*465]

[p. 296]

As a modern amulet to be worn, the writer has 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 140.
 never seen a simple hand thus posed, but always with other attributes placed upon it. Thus combined it is one of the most remarkable of all the composite charms known against the evil eye, whether of ancient or modern times. The original from which Figs. 147, 148 are taken is now in Berlin,

but there are in the Kircherian Museum in Rome

Click to enlarge
FIG. 141., 142.

two or three others similar in type, but widely differing

[p. 297]

in detail. They are all from 6 to 8 inches high.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 143.

All are in the same attitude that we have been

Click to enlarge
FIG. 144., 145.

describing, but each one has a varying combination

[p. 298]

of symbols upon it. One of these hands is in the British Museum (Figs. 156, 157), two are at Cortona, 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 146.
 well known to the writer, in addition to those in Rome, mentioned above. Besides all these, Jahn gives particulars (p. 101) of fourteen other examples known to him, of which he says some are about the natural size, and some a little smaller; but he seems quite ignorant of the fact that they are made in Rome to-day and worn as amulets. Of these so-called "votive hands" Jahn says (p. 102) that two have inscriptions upon them; of these, one in the Barberini collection in Rome has

CECROPIVS . V . C . VOTUM . Solvit,

and the other in London, in the possession of Lord Londesborough, has:--

He says the first lines are clear, i.e. Zouporas eyxamenos

[p. 299]

[paragraph continues] anetheken Sabaxiui Not so the last. In a note he says: "Keil" (Arch. Anz. 1854, p. 517) "recognised the word epekoui, which is common in votive inscriptions, without explaining the rest." Jahn

Click to enlarge

himself offers no explanation. The position of the hand, he says, is still the one used in taking the oath, [*466] and a sign used by priests.

[p. 300]

On Fig. 112 will be seen two specimens of this hand as a modern amulet, bought at two different shops in Rome. One is a charm to be suspended from the watch-chain, and the other is mounted as a brooch. As these are so small, the writer tried to get a full-sized bronze specimen, and among other shops went to that of Sig. Finocchi, in the Piazza Minerva, whom he well knew, and from whom he was sure of getting information. They are only made as charms contra la jettatura, in gold or silver, he said, and while talking about it, showed the one he was himself wearing, just like the two on Fig. 112, but of gold. In Rome this little hand is well known, and is called by everybody the Mano Pantea. The same charm in silver, quite complete, possibly of Roman make, is in the shops at Constantinople, but has not been found by the writer either at Smyrna, at Athens or elsewhere in Greece. The name is well established; it appears upon the brooch itself, and further upon the printed description, given with the article to the writer, by the jeweller who sold it. This description is given below in full. [*467]

The reason for giving a printed description is, that this article is of very superior workmanship to the ordinary charm, and so needs some explanation to account for its costliness; also to explain that it

[p. 301]

is an exact copy of the antique, and therefore superior in every way to the. ordinary goods sold, etc. The term Pantheus is dealt with by Mr. King, Gnostics, pp. 80, 81. It signifies a combination of many attributes, expressing the amalgamation of several ideas into one and the same form. [*468]

Comparison with the illustration here printed shows that it differs from that given by Jahn (Taf. IV.), although the symbols are nearly the same. Jahn's represents the top of the index and middle finger broken off, has no scarab, nor the nondescript article called oggetto ignoto by the Roman jewellers, but which it is here suggested is the whip of Osiris or courbash of modern Egypt, of which two separate ones are plainly shown on the British Museum hand (Figs. 156, 157). The whip is the symbol of rule [*469] and government; in Egyptian sculptures always in the right hand of Osiris. [*470] This explanation of a doubtful object is rather confirmed by its being placed immediately over the Vase or Cantharus, one of the recognised symbols of Osiris. Apuleius says that water in an urn represented Osiris. It was consecrated to him as the life-giving water-god-the Nile. This two-handled vessel was sacred to Bacchus in Roman times, and that it was a veritable amulet is proved by the fact of its being the sole device

[p. 302]

upon the shield of one of the Amazons, painted on a famous vase at Arezzo (see Dennis, Etruria, vol. ii. p. 387 ). [*471] Moreover, when we consider that the whole of the symbols here combined, beginning with the bust of Serapis, are essentially Egyptian, it is but reasonable to interpret the unknown from the well known. [*472]

Serapis, or Jupiter Serapis, the Egyptian divinity whose bust is placed upon the mons Jovis of the hand, was chiefly worshipped at Alexandria. His cult was introduced into Greece in the time of the Ptolemies, and afterwards, against much opposition, [*473] into Rome. One ruined temple at least still exists in Italy called a Serapeon, and others called Iseons, in which latter, Isis as well as Serapis was worshipped. The best known of the former is at Pozzuoli, and of the latter at Pompeii. That at Pozzuoli specially recalls the connection of that port with Alexandria. In a ship of Alexandria trading with Italy St. Paul sailed, and so landed at Pozzuoli (Puteoli, Acts xxviii. 13). The Egyptian divinity was Osiris, called Osiris-Apis or Serapis, [*474] who in Egyptian sculpture often has the head of the bull Apis, crowned with the disc and horns like Isis. He was essentially a sun-god; so also is Jupiter Serapis, an attribute symbolised by the flower-basket or calathus upon his head, to express the height of the sun above us. [*475] Innumerable are the statues,

[p. 303]

bas-reliefs, and gems connected with the worship of Serapis, who, though lord of the sun, cannot be separated from Isis and other moon goddesses." [*476]

On gem talismans the bust of Serapis is very common, having the legend, either in full, EI??C? ThEO??C? ??C?ARAPI??C?, or abbreviated, E.Th.??C?. "There is but one God and he is Serapis." EI??C? ZUN ThEO??C?. "The one living God." Who can fail to note here the prototype of the Mahomedan "Allah il Allah"?

Often the intention of the amulet is fully expressed, as NIKA O ??C?ARAPI??C? TON FThONON, "Baffle the evil eye, O Serapis!" [*477] In the later Roman fashion, the Almighty Jove most usually wears the castle-like crown, [*478] something like that of the Ephesian Diana, again showing the direct link between Osiris-Isis and Jupiter-Diana. It is remarkable that on the dome of the so-called Arian

[p. 304]

[paragraph continues] Baptistery at Ravenna, of the sixth century, where there is a representation of our Lord's baptism, the dove is descending in visible form, but the First Person in the Trinity is represented sitting on a rock, as an old man with white beard, and on his head a sort of crown identical in shape with that upon Jupiter Serapis (Fig. 148). [*479]

Most, if not all, of the other symbols upon the Mano Pantea, like those upon the every-day-of-the-week amulet (Fig. 19), also belong to one or other of the last-named deities of the sun and moon.

At the bottom of the palm is a kind of semicircular frame, found in all these hands known to the writer, besides six of those named by Jahn, containing a woman suckling a child, in this one with a bird keeping guard over them. 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 149.
 Who can doubt these to be the same persons as those shown in Chapter VI. and Appendix I.--Devaki and Crishna, Isis and Horus, or the universal celestial mother and child? The bird is perhaps the cock, found on so many other amulets, gems, and medals. He represents the dawn, which in all ages he has proclaimed, and so typifies Diana, explained later; or he may mean Phoebus, another name for Osiris, the Sun,

[p. 305]

watching over his consort the Moon (Isis), who is nursing their son Horus. [*480] It may be, however, that this bird represents the eagle, another symbol of Jupiter, and often seen with him on gems and statues. A very remarkable comment upon this bird (in Jahn's plate it is quite nondescript, and looks like a goose with eagle's beak), and upon the attitude here displayed, is in Dr. Phene's description of some Hittite monuments in Asia Minor. He says: [*481] "The symbols are a crouching bird on a level with the face of Sesostris, and close to it a sceptre. . . . The bird usually found in Hittite inscriptions . . . is the eagle, and the position is one of majesty, which he considered implied kingly power, and hence the crouching and humbled bird was a king bereft of his power." The bird on the Mano Pantea cannot be said to be crouching, neither was it in the illustration which Dr. Phene gave, nor is either of the birds represented on the Woburn marble (Fig. 24). [*482]

Upon the figure of the woman and child, Jahn remarks (p. 104): "It has been rightly considered that these hands are ex votos for a safe delivery, and that the others, on which are other objects, are ex votos for other good fortunes." To this opinion we take objection, upon the ground that all these hands are constructed to stand upright, upon a flat surface, whereas ancient as well as modern ex votos, such as phalli, hands, legs, etc., were prepared for suspension.

[p. 306]

[paragraph continues] Moreover, ex votos, when intended simply as such, were in old times generally mutilated or broken, and the writer has never seen or heard of a bronze one. [*483] These hands were therefore intended to be placed somewhere in the house, and not in the temple. Further, all have a number of objects upon them, each in itself a well-known amulet, specially used against the evil eye, and fashioned in a very lasting material. All these devices would be useless and meaningless upon a mere ex voto, which in old days, as now, we know to have been some single object--an arm, a leg, a breast, or an ear--representing in itself more or less accurately the benefit received or the member healed. Moreover, we have the complete analogy of compounded and complicated amulets in the many gems and medals among the ancients, while among the moderns we have the striking example of the Cimaruta in its manifold forms. Of this latter, Jahn never seems to have

[p. 307]

heard, though he mentions the mano fica and one or two other modern charms. With all deference to learning, it is stoutly maintained that all these hands were not votive, but prophylactic, pure and simple. Thus the whole amulet would be specially potent for the protection against fascination of mothers and new-born infants, as well as for adults in general. Our deliberate opinion is, that these hands, having such pantheistic symbols upon them, were for the same purpose as the Teraphim of Scripture, or the Lares and Penates of classic days. They were probably held in much the same estimation as a crucifix is to-day by a devout Christian.

It is suggested that what Jahn calls a bracket supporting the bust, may be meant for a cornucopia, and if so, its meaning would be at once evident. [*484]

The next of the amulets, the scarab, is of all others, perhaps not even excluding the mystic eye, the most commonly seen and found in Egyptian tombs.

Its frequent occurrence in sculpture, no less than the authority of numerous ancient writers, shows the great importance attached by the Egyptians to this insect. "It was the emblem of the sun, to which deity it was particularly sacred." [*485] In the scarab we have another symbol of Osiris, the Sun-God, and consequently of his successor Serapis, the supreme divinity of our complex amulet.

Pliny [*486] says: "The insect in its operations pictures the revolution of the sun." These "operations" are

[p. 308]

the habit it has of making pellets of clay, and rolling them along. The scarab was also a symbol of the world, and as a hieroglyph, under its name Ptah-Xeper, it signified the Creative Power. [*487]

From the belief that there were no females, and that all of the species were males, it was considered the symbol of virility and manly force, hence it was engraved upon the signets of Egyptian soldiers. [*488]

The scarab may be considered [*489] as: "(1) An emblem of the sun; (2) Of Ptah, the Creative Power, and of Ptah-Xeper; (3) of Ptah-Socharis Osiris; (4) of the world; (5) connected with astronomical subjects; [*490] and (6) with funereal rites."

Upon the Mano Pantea we may safely consider it under either, or all of the four first meanings; and hence as it was in Egypt a powerful amulet to guard both living and dead, so we may well believe it was adopted as such by the Romans along with the Serapis cult. It will be noticed that our jeweller's description passes over the scarab, which is nevertheless very distinct on the original bronze.

On the back of the hand we have the frog, which our friend calls a toad (rospo). [*491] This is a common

[p. 309]

amulet against the evil eye. In Naples the simple frog amulet is called a Sirena, like the more elaborate one of which a description follows later. It is not only now worn (see Fig. 112) by Italians, Greeks, and even Turks, but it appears on many ancient gems and medals (see Fig. 17). It is commonly of metal, but when cut out of amber or coral is of greater power. The frog also was among Egyptians "a symbol of Ptah," because, as Horapollo says, "it was the representation of man in embryo, that is, of the being who, like the world, was the work of the Creative Power, and the noblest production of his hands." [*492]

"The importance attached to the frog in some parts of Egypt is shown by its having been embalmed, and honoured with sculpture in the tombs of Thebes. The frog was the symbol of hefnu, 100,000, or an immense number. [*493] It sat on a ring or seal, a sign occasionally used in lieu of the Tau or 'life.'" Again we are told, "la 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 150.
 grenouille rappelait l'idee de la renaissance." [*494]Fig. 150 is from Maspero's Archeologie, p. 235. Jahn gives a plate (Taf. IV.) of a terra-cotta lamp, now in the Berlin Museum, having an eye for centre, round which are the frog, scorpion, phallus,

[p. 310]

snail, and two monkeys' heads (cynocephalus); the spout is formed of a horned mask. The frog is shown on the Kertch necklace (p. 135) as one of the special amulets. There is also an ancient bronze frog amulet, [*495] prepared for suspension, in the Ashmolean Museum.

Pliny says: [*496] "To this the Magi add some other particulars, which, if there is any truth in them, would lead us to believe that frogs ought to be considered much more useful to society than laws." He gives directions for a particular manipulation 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 151.
 of the frog, by which a wife conceives an aversion to all paramours. One kind (phrini), known to the Greeks, have protuberances like horns. He also says, there is a small bone on each side of a frog. That on the right side has many wonderful properties one is, that if thrown into boiling water it will immediately cool, and that it will not boil again till the bone be removed. The little bone from the left side, on the other hand, has the property of making it boil. It will also assuage the fury of dogs, and if put into drink it will conciliate love and end discord or strife. It is also worn for a talisman as an aphrodisiac. [*497]

[p. 311]

One of the two frog charms on Fig. 112 is that common in Rome, while the clumsier one is Neapolitan. The two shown immediately 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 152
 beneath the Mano Pantea on the same plate are from Constantinople, sold openly as charms in the bazaars. Evidently the frog as an amulet is widely used among various races, ancient and modern. [*498]

Little need be said as to the importance of the serpent as an amulet. Serpent worship has prevailed throughout the ages. It is the type of eternity, and with its tail in its mouth the symbol of perpetual union.

There is hardly a country of the ancient world where it cannot be traced, pervading every known system of mythology. [*499] Babylon, Persia, India, Ceylon, China, Japan, Burmah, Java, Arabia, Syria, Asia Minor, Egypt, Ethiopia, Greece, Italy, Northern and Western Europe, Mexico, Peru, North America, all yield abundant testimony to the same effect respecting serpent

[p. 312]

worship, and point to the common origin of pagan systems wherever found.

The intimate connection of the serpent with the idea of the Medusa adds to the evidence that her 
Click to enlarge
FIG 153.
 myth came from the East; for there the serpent has always been the symbol of an evil demon. [*500] On the other hand, the Phoenicians adored it as a beneficent genius, [*501] and in Egypt, one of the earliest homes of serpent worship, [*502] it was looked upon as a protector, tutela loci, the guardian of tombs. Every tomb of the kings yet opened there has the serpent sculptured erect on each side of the door way as the symbol of the watchful, protecting deity. It was called Thermuthis, "and 
Click to enlarge
FIG 154.
 with it the statues of Isis were crowned as with a diadem." [*503] It was the mark of royalty. Egyptian kings and queens have an asp on the front of their crowns as a sign of the invincible power of royalty. There was another serpent called Aphophis, the giant, which was looked upon as the type of evil. It was said to have been killed by Horus, and this myth is no doubt the same as that of Apollo and the Python in Greek mythology. In Egypt the serpent was both worshipped and hated, probably at different times, and in accordance with

[p. 313]

the origin of the several dynasties maintaining the cult. We find the same thing as regards the crocodile. At one place it was worshipped as a god, and at others, e.g. Edfou, it was hunted and slain as a venomous beast.

A very large live serpent was kept, according to Aelian, in the temple of Aesculapius at Alexandria, and according to Pausanias there was another in his temple at Epidaurus; both were carefully tended as objects of worship. We all know that a serpent is the usual accompaniment of ancient statues of the god, and in this connection is said to typify health. It is also said [*504] to denote the condition or duration of the disease, and hence it may be described as the symbol of diagnosis. Livy [*505] and several authors relate that when a pestilence broke out in Rome, the Delphic oracle advised an embassy to Epidaurus, to fetch the god Aesculapius. While they were gazing at the statue of the god a "venerable, not horrible," serpent, which only appeared when some extraordinary benefit was intended, glided from his hiding-place and, passing through the city, went direct to the Roman ship, where he coiled himself in the berth of Ogulnius, the chief ambassador. On arrival in the Tiber the serpent leapt overboard and escaped on an island. Here a temple was erected to him in the shape of a ship, and the plague was immediately stayed. [*506] Delphi was the

[p. 314]

stronghold of serpent worship in Greece, and a singular fact remains. The oldest known monument in Europe, an undoubted relic of ancient serpent worship, is now to be seen still standing in the Atmeidan or Hippodrome at Constantinople. It is the original column, brought from the temple of Apollo at Delphi, and was set up where it now stands by Constantine, about A.D. 324.

It consists of [*507] "the bodies of three serpents twisted into one pillar of brass. Their triple heads had once supported the golden tripod which, after the defeat of Xerxes, was consecrated in the temple of Delphi by the victorious Greeks." It bears the only known inscription still extant, which is actually contemporary with the Persian wars. It was erected soon after the battle of Marathon. [*508] The surface of the Atmeidan is now several feet higher than the base of this famous column, which stands in a sort of pit. Originally the serpents had three heads, now all have disappeared--one is said to have been knocked off by Mahomet himself, who exclaimed against it as an idol. No sooner had he done this than a great number of serpents began to be seen in the city. [*509] The writer can testify to the great veneration with which this precious relic of the past is still regarded by the Turks, who look upon it as one of the great protectors of the city. [*510]

[p. 315]

In Greek and Roman mythology the serpent Agathodemon was the attribute of Ceres, Mercury, Aesculapius, and Hecate-Diana, with, of course, their Egyptian prototypes in their most beneficent qualities; while Python was a fearful monster, which only a god could overcome and destroy. The same fierce enmity, abject fear, submission and worship regarding the serpent, are found to-day among Hindoos and Mahomedans of India, as well as among savages of Africa and America. Without attempting to explain the story of the brazen serpent in the wilderness, it may be pointed out that to the Israelites, just come out of Egypt, the worship of Agathodemon was perfectly familiar, and that it was to them the symbol of life and health.

The temples in Cambodia, of which the French produced large models at more than one Paris Exposition, show that they were guarded by a great avenue of serpents, and the same objects are seen at the entrances to Chinese temples.

That our Celtic forefathers were Ophiolaters [*511] is proved by the so-called Druidical remains at Abury and elsewhere. just as serpents are carved on the rock to guard the tombs of the kings at Thebes, so, the writer observed in the early Celtic tomb of Gavr Innis at Locmariaker, in Brittany, are two serpents sculptured on the rock inside the entrance. [*512]

[p. 316]

We are all familiar with the two serpents, called the Caduceus, in the hand of Mercury. This was a true amulet which he carried as the staff of a messenger to guard him against the malevolent glances of those who would impede his errand. 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 155
 The two serpents in congress are the Rod of Life. [*513] The caduceus, the special symbol of Mercury, was used sometimes alone as an amulet on engraved gems. Of one of these Mr. King gives a specimen (Gnostics, p. 70). Among modern amulets the two bone specimens, bought at Sienna, shown on Fig. 112, bear signs of much wear, and so prove that the same belief as of old still survives. [*514]

In West Africa the serpent is still used as an amulet to protect the crops. Fig. 155 Is an iron one from Ashantee, now in the Somerset County Museum along with the other objects shown on Fig. 88. Lastly, on Fig. 8 the serpent is shown in connection with the crescent; and upon the Cimaruta (Fig. 162) it forms the horns of the half-moon, thus

doubly augmenting its power as a protection against the evil eye. The serpent plays so large a part in Egyptian worship, [*515] that we may well consider it to

[p. 317]

be closely connected with the worship of Serapis, as well as the moon-goddesses, and therefore we find it upon every Mano Pantea known to the writer. That it was an ancient Graeco-Roman amulet, is proved by the several gems and medals (Figs. 14-19) which were avowedly against the evil eye. We see serpents also in the hands of the three-formed goddess shown on Figs. 149 and 163.

The annexed drawings (Figs. 156, 157) are from a bronze hand in the British Museum, belonging to the collection of the late Rev. Payne Knight, which does not appear to have ever been

[p. 318]

published, and which is not one of those described by Jahn.

In this beautiful, nearly life-size hand, the serpent is by far the most conspicuous amulet upon it, for it

Click to enlarge
FIG. 156, 157.

is evidently intended to be seen from whichever side the hand is looked at. In this case, moreover, there is not only the large serpent, but also a small one, so as to seemingly pile up the power of this protecting, watchful guardian. It is suggested that the smaller represents the Asp of Egyptian royalty. A

[p. 319]

comparison of the two (Figs. 147, 148, and 156, 157), which may be considered as typical of all the known hands, will not fail to show points of agreement in them, and prove that, whatever their purpose may have been, it was the same in all alike.

In five out of the six medals and gems (Figs. 14-19) there is a serpent; in both these hands he is in connection with the third or medical finger, as the representation of the healing god Aesculapius, and in both cases he is given the same position on the back of the hand.

The woman and child in the arched frame are on both hands alike, but in the Payne Knight hand there is no bird to watch over them.

The frog, it may be noted, in both cases seems to have its proper position, and that well known, aphrodisiac, was surely placed by design in close relation to the middle finger, the ancient digitus infamis. The ram's head occupying nearly the same position as the head of Jupiter, appropriately upon what is known to palmists as the mons Jovis, must be taken as the symbol of that divinity, who is constantly depicted with ram's horns upon his head.

The Cantharus, or two-handled vase, appears on both hands. The remarkable table with three flat cakes upon it, is much more difficult of explanation. It seems to be an offering of bread to the Almighty Jove, and one cannot but be struck by the coincidence of these three cakes with those shown on the table in Figs. 113, 116, on the altar of Melchisedec, and before the three strangers entertained by Abraham. We do not assert the connection, but the threefold aspect of Egyptian gods is dwelt upon elsewhere, and these cakes may well typify offerings

[p. 320]

to the greatest of the gods in his threefold character. All the known hands of this class appear to be Roman, and of the period of the empire before Constantine.

The crocodile, also on both the hands, was an Egyptian amulet: it was worshipped as a god, called Sebek in Lower Egypt, and there was a city called Crocodilopolis by the Greeks, from the cult there practised; [*516] hence it here finds an appropriate place. [*517] As the type of the generation of divine wisdom, we understand the crocodile upon Minerva's breast, in those gems and statues where she is not wearing the aegis, but which represent her as the goddess of wisdom and learning.

As an amulet to be worn on the person, the crocodile does not appear to be very commonly used; but as a protector against the evil eye it has been adopted by many people. Among the amulets on the necklace shown on Fig. 21 is the head of a crocodile. Its present use in Cairo and Tunis does but perpetuate the belief which displayed itself in the gift of the crocodile, now hanging over the door of Seville Cathedral (Fig. 158). This was an undoubted amulet in 1260, and all must remember also the crocodile upon the column on the Piazzetta at Venice, on which stands St. Theodore. Now this column, with its companion bearing the lion of St.

[p. 321]

[paragraph continues] Mark, was erected in 1329, only seventy years after the famous Lagarto was set up in Seville; and we maintain that as Pisistratus set up a column bearing a cricket, in the Agora at Athens, to 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 158.
 guard the people from the evil eye, so did the Venetians set up their columns for the like purpose. We are told [*518] that these columns so completely formed a part of the idea of Venice, that they were repeated in "most of the cities subject to its dominion." What could be the idea other than that here suggested? We see how in Naples to-day the lion of St. Mark is placed on the horses' backs, avowedly as an amulet, contra la jettatura; is there not then every reason for believing that the dread of that influence was quite as great, and that the means taken to counteract it were as many, if not even more numerous, in the Middle Ages than at present? It cannot therefore be unreasonable to assign the same meaning to the mediaeval crocodile and lion at Venice as to the modern lion at Naples, and the modern crocodile at Tunis and Cairo.

In Portugal a favourite object in pottery is a lizard or crocodile, so made as to hang flat against the wall. The writer has one such, which he bought in Lisbon certainly as an amulet, and always regards as such.

In Figs. 14-17 the crocodile appears in every one of the five combinations, while even the serpent is wanting in one--clearly proving the importance attached to it as an amulet for wear in Roman times.

[p. 322]

The crocodile was believed to conceive by the ear and to bring forth by the mouth--a strange notion indeed, yet it has been perpetuated as a Christian one in the hymn [*519] of S. Bonaventura, the Seraphic Doctor, [*520] who (born 1221 in Tuscany) lived at the precise epoch when the cult of the B.V.M. had begun to occupy such a disproportionate place in the Services of the Church, [*521] just at the time when the legend of ancient Egypt respecting Isis, itself derived from still older sources, had been adapted to her successor. An ancient gem, belonging to the late Rev. C. W. King, shows Serapis seated: before him stands Isis, holding in one hand the sistrum, in the other a wheat-sheaf, with the legend E KYRIA I??C?I??C? AGNE, "Immaculate is our lady Isis." "The very terms applied afterwards to that personage who succeeded to her form, titles, symbols, rites and ceremonies." [*522] Her proper title, Domina, the exact translation of the Sanscrit Isi, survives, with slight change, in the modern Madonna" (Mater Domina).

The scales, so prominent upon most of these

[p. 323]

hands, are passed over by Jahn, but they serve at least to confirm the Egyptian character of all these amulets. At the time when these hands were made in Italy, the weighing apparatus was always, as it is to a large extent to-day, of the steelyard type. Of all the scales in the Naples and Pompeian Museums every one is a steelyard; whereas in the innumerable representations of weighing, found on Egyptian paintings and sculptures, whether of souls by the recording Thoth, or of merchandise by various persons, the machine is nearly always an equipoised beam and two scales. [*523] In judging then of the true meaning of the scales upon the Mano Pantea, we must take into account the fact that, as a representation, they were conventional, of an object not unknown, but at least such as the Roman users of these hands were unaccustomed to. [*524] Although the Egyptians had another kind of balance it is rarely seen.

As a separate amulet the scales are not used so far as the present writer is aware, nor can he pretend

[p. 324]

to explain their meaning in these combinations. Jahn, too, says (p. 106) that he cannot explain them. In Egyptian art the scales appear whenever Osiris sits in judgment upon a human soul, and they are accompanied by Thoth the scribe. The same idea has descended through the ages into Christian art. In pictures of the Last Judgment, the Archangel Michael is often represented as holding the scales of Justice, in which the soul shall be weighed. That the scales on both our hands do represent an amulet, we must maintain, for they form one of the signs of the Zodiac, and nearly all the other objects are known to be amulets. [*525]

The tortoise appears on both the hands here shown, as well as on the Florentine gem (Fig. 17). Moreover, Jahn says that "there are little ones made of bronze, of precious stones, and of amber, sometimes with other amulets hanging on a necklace, so that the meaning of the tortoise as an amulet cannot be doubted." [*526] Of the hands catalogued by Jahn, no less than twelve have the tortoise upon them.

Pliny says: [*527] "The flesh of the land tortoise . . . is highly salutary for repelling the malpractices of magic and for neutralising poisons." He gives many diseases for which, when eaten, the flesh is a cure; also "the blood of the land tortoise improves the eyesight and removes cataract." In one way which he details, the shavings of the shell are an antaphrodisiac, and in another strongly the opposite.

[p. 325]

[paragraph continues] The urine, according to adepts in magic, has marvellous properties; the eggs also are a remedy for scrofula and other evils. The catalogue of remedies given by Pliny, for which the tortoise can be used, is no less than sixty-six. [*528]

A tortoise-headed god occurs as one of the genii in the tombs; but it does not appear that the tortoise held a rank among the sacred animals of Egypt. [*529]

The tortoise is very often depicted with and as an emblem of Mercury, like the Caduceus. [*530] Jahn gives particulars of the various symbols on the hands known to him, and thus proves that all were similar in type though differing in detail.

On the British Museum hand (Figs. 156, 157), which Jahn had never seen, is a remarkable feature, not uncommon, though the writer has seen one only. Jahn says the pine-cone appears upon no less than nine of the hands known to him. It is also among the amulets strung upon the Kertch necklace (Fig. 21). The position given to it upon the tip of the thumb marks it out as an object of considerable importance, and its frequent use shows it to have been considered as a powerful amulet. The pine-tree was sacred to Zeus, and an attribute of Serapis; it was beloved of virgins. Ovid calls the pine pura arbor. [*531] The cone had however a phallic meaning, and Layard says the pine-cone was most used in the cult of Venus. [*532]

The fig-tree on the hand had also a phallic

[p. 326]

meaning. It was borne in the processions of Dionysos at the Eleusinian mysteries.

The bee was a symbol of Diana (see Fig. 17).

Three objects near the tail of the serpent are probably intended for a knife, a strigil, and a distaff.

The horseshoe figure with two rings at the ends is difficult to explain. There is an object almost exactly like it upon the breast of a Greek statuette in the Ashmolean; and also it is very like the small amulet (Fig. 89) from Bologna. The hand from the British Museum shows a greater number of amulets upon it than any other with which either Jahn or the writer is acquainted.

In six of those catalogued by Jahn is found the frame with the woman and child at the breast. One especially, he says, possesses images of the gods Cybele and Mercury. Two others have Mercury, and two have a bearded figure in a Phrygian cap. This latter seems in a way to connect them with the famous Woburn marble (Fig. 24). Moreover, one of the heads of Diana Triformis is represented as wearing a Phrygian cap. [*533] Another has a full-length figure sitting on the palm of the hand in Phrygian tunic and hose, and having both hands uplifted, pointing with the forefinger extended as in the Phrygian worship of Cybele, Bacchus, and Mercury.

Only three known hands have the Serapis head. On four an eagle sits on the two upraised fingers, grasping a thunderbolt in its claws. The oak-branch of Jove is found on two; on another is the lyre of Apollo. The Caduceus is on three; the pincers of Vulcan are on two. One has the egg-shaped

[p. 327]

helmet worn by the Dioscuri (Castor and Pollux) two others have the Thyrsus; one a vine-branch and no less than nine of those known to Jahn have the two-handled Cantharus. One has the moon, which Jahn says is perhaps the badge of Mars (der Harnisch dem Ares). Besides all these there are the symbols of the Phrygian orgies--the tympanum on one, bells on one, crotala (kind of cymbal) on two; cymbals on three; the Phrygian flute on four; knife on two; and the whip on four. The ox head is on two, and the ram's head on five. Egyptian cultus is again represented by the sistrum upon two of these hands. What seems like a round offering cake, divided by cross lines into four parts, appears upon two hands. They are precisely like the round, flat cakes found at Pompeii, now in the Naples Museum, and at Oxford, except that the terra cottas in the Ashmolean are not only imitation loaves, but smaller than real ones, thus doubly cheating the dead. [*534]

The scales are found on no less than nine, and Jahn gives besides a list of animals depicted on these hands--a bird, unknown, on two; a frog on ten; a tortoise on twelve; a lizard or crocodile on nine; but he does not say on how many he has noted the serpent. He remarks that it is certainly not by chance that we meet again and again with the same animals; which play so significant a part among protectives against the evil eye; all the less so (i.e. by chance), as amongst the other symbols met with, come out the well-known signs of the phallus on one, and the vulva also on another.

[p. 328]

If we would now finally settle the proper meaning of these animals, the fact is distinctly proved that in all those allied religious representations which display the richest arsenal of superstitions and witchcraft, a signification is given to those animals, which makes them serve forthwith as amulets. [*535]

He winds up his treatise with a description of six different magic nails. One of these, now in the 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 159.
 Collegio Romano, is here reproduced (Fig. 159). [*536] Jahn remarks that nails have much to do with human superstitions; that the well-known ancient Etruscan custom of clavum figere was not merely intended to mark the date, but, as Livy relates, it is said over and over again by tradition of the

[p. 329]

ancients, that pestilence was stayed when a nail was driven by the dictator. [*537]

It is also shown by Pliny how disease could be cured in this way; [*538] and by the Romans the mere utterance of the word defigere implied a nail driven, and thereby an act by which fascination or witchcraft was countervailed. [*539] In Greek tombs nails have been found amongst other amulets used for the dead as well as for the living. In the present day it is sought by human wisdom to strengthen the power of these nails; hence a nail by which some one has been slain on the cross, or a nail from a shipwrecked vessel, has quite a special power; the first against intermittent fever and epilepsy, and the latter against epilepsy.

Many of these nails had inscriptions and symbols Of magic power engraved upon them, and once more we repeat that each added symbol was supposed to increase the collective power of the whole. Most of the separate symbols found on these nails have been already described as protectives against the evil eye--a fortiori, the nails were potent amulets. Moreover when we perceive in these latter days that all these same animals and objects, together with cabalistic writings, appear in constant use as

[p. 330]

avowed protectors against fascination, we are not only confirmed in our judgment of their meaning in the ancient form, but we are taught how strong, how lasting, and how universal, is the belief.

In the light gained from ancient amulets we easily see the meaning of most of the other objects on Fig. 112, every one of which is openly sold today as contra la jettatura.

The large tiger's tooth in the centre is by no means uncommon. Real tigers' teeth set as a brooch, forming a crescent, are plentiful enough here in England, though their owners hardly look on them as amulets. Much value is placed on every part of a tiger as a protective charm in India.

Pliny says: [*540] "The canine tooth of the wolf, on the right side, is held in high esteem as an amulet." Also: [*541] "A wolf's tooth attached to the body prevents infants from being startled, and acts as a preservative against the maladies of dentition; an effect equally produced by making use of a wolf s skin, attached to a horse's neck (it) will render him proof against all weariness, it is said." If wolves' teeth were so precious in olden times, while they were tolerably plentiful, of how much greater value would be that of one of a gran bestia, like a tiger! We see the analogy of setting greater value upon the scarcer article, in Jorio's remarks on Neapolitan shop and house keepers (<page 259> sq.). Again, in Pliny's day, the wolf skin was an amulet; we see and know the use made of it to-day.

The medal with St. George and the Dragon is with some a favourite, but of course we can only now

[p. 331]

consider it as an adaptation of the story of Perseus and Andromeda to the exigencies of mediaeval saint-lore. San Georgio is a favourite saint both in Italy and in Greece; we have seen that Mascagni always carried him.

The Gobbo or hunchback is much more common, and is an undoubted survival from ancient days. The Egyptian god Bes is represented as 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 160.
 From Peru.
 deformed, [*542] and he is frequently seen in connection with Horus, when the latter typified death. The number of statuettes of Bes still in existence shows that he was looked upon with veneration, and his cultus may well have descended to the modern Gobbo, an undoubtedly favourite charm. Among the Egyptian amulets in the Museo Kircheriano are many veritable Gobbi, almost exactly like those represented on Fig. 112, though of course without their modern dress. The Gobbo is sold as a charm in silver at Constantinople. [*543] There are also one or two small Phoenician figures in the Ashmolean, which are undoubted hunchback amulets. Monte Carlo gamblers did not invent their lucky Gobbo.

The bull and the cow are of course the symbols of Osiris-Serapis, and of Isis-Hathor respectively.

[p. 332]

[paragraph continues] Capo di bove is a very favourite ornament of Etruscan and Roman times, seen alike on the famous Cortona lamp, on the mausoleum of Cecilia Metella so well known to all tourists, but more than all upon the Ephesian Diana (see Fig. 69).

The elephant appears as an amulet on ancient gems (see Figs. 15, 16), and has more said about him by Pliny than perhaps any other animal. In Egyptian sculptures he appears among "the presents brought by an Asiatic nation to an Egyptian king," [*544] but from the representations of ivory, brought from Ethiopia, he would not seem to have come first into Africa from Asia. He may therefore be taken to represent a present of a different or superior breed, just as an Arab barb may be sent now as a present to England. He was not a sacred animal, though the hippopotamus was.

Mercury is frequently depicted [*545] riding on an elephant, and from his exceeding intelligence he was a symbol of Mercury. The elephant is said by Pliny to be very fond of women; and the old seventeenth century Jesuit, Nicholas Caussinus, says that "Ad adspectum virginis mitescit." [*546] The evidence is abundant that from the earliest times he has been looked upon as something more than a mere beast, and has had a higher intelligence accorded to him

[p. 333]

than to any other animal. Our experience in India confirms the opinions expressed by both Tertullian and Caussinus.

Of the pig and wild boar, both of which appear on Fig. 112 as modern amulets, we have somewhat more direct evidence. In Egypt both were held in abhorrence as unclean animals unfit for food. It was unlawful, says Herodotus, [*547] to sacrifice the pig to any gods but to the moon and Bacchus, and then only at the full moon. Except on this occasion the people were forbidden to eat its flesh. Even then they did not eat the pig, which was sacrificed before their door, but gave it back to the person from whom it was purchased. Plutarch considered the pig to be connected with the worship of Osiris, and it also appears in the legend of Horus. There were "many small porcelain figures of sows . . . found, of a later period," and probably we may with reason consider them as amulets. The boar is represented in a tomb at Thebes, and he was "an emblem of Evil." In the Judgment scenes, when on weighing the soul it is found wanting, it is condemned by Osiris "to return to earth under the form of a pig, or some other unclean animal." [*548]

In Greek mythology the pig as an amulet becomes clearer, and helps us further in the explanation of another important modern charm of which we have yet to speak. [*549]

The pig was sacred to Demeter, [*550] and of course

[p. 334]

also to her "daughter and double," Proserpine, whom we have proved to be unam eandemque. It came at length to be "an embodiment of the corn-goddess herself "; and at the Thesmophoria, a festival confined to women, representing the descent of Proserpine into the lower world, it was customary for the women to eat swine's flesh, to throw pigs, cakes of dough, and pine-branches into the megara, or chasms of Demeter and Proserpine. These appear to have been sacred caverns or vaults. We are not told where these caverns were, but we assume that they were either at or near Eleusis, the centre of the Demeter cult. The limestone rocks at the back of the temple of Eleusis might well have many caves in them. In Crete, also an ancient seat of Demeter worship, the pig was esteemed very sacred and was not eaten.

The Greeks could not decide whether the Jews worshipped swine or abominated them, "for they might neither eat nor kill them," so that if eating was forbidden on account of uncleanness, the unlawfulness of killing them tells still more strongly for their sanctity. Frazer believes that swine were rather sacred than unclean to the Jews, and that, in general, so-called unclean animals were originally sacred, and that they were not eaten because they were divine. [*551]

Wilkinson [*552] gives a full account of the Eleusinian

[p. 335]

mysteries, the most noted solemnity of any in Greece; instituted in honour of Ceres, by which name be always speaks of Demeter. (Frazer also uses the Roman name Proserpine when referring to the Greek Demeter.) There were gradations in these as in some more modern mysteries, to which the initiated appear to have been advanced according to merit. "About a year after having sacrificed a sow to Ceres, they were raised to the greater mysteries, the secret rites of which . . . were frankly revealed to them." The "manner of initiation" is described at some length, also the different names of the various parts, properties, and several persons concerned. A perusal of this very accessible description is recommended to students of modern Freemasonry.

Wilkinson says the mysteries were derived from Egypt. Another great authority [*553] says: "The tale of Demeter and Persephone, with all the adornments of Greek fancy, is thoroughly Sikel in its essence, the natural growth of a creed in which the power of the nether-world held the first place." We are told previously that the Sikels were one of the early races of settlers in Sicily, from whom the island took the name of Sikelia. Whence these people came we are not told, but their primitive worship seems to have been overlaid by the "gorgeous trappings of Greek fancy." "The Sikel deities and their worship were merged in the Greek deities and their worship."

The Greek conquerors of Sicily adopted the preexisting sacred spot of the Sikels, nearly in the centre of the island, the ancient Enna, now Castrogiovanni, a hill-fortress well suited for a religious

[p. 336]

centre. To this famous spot the fancy of the Greeks transferred their legend of Demeter and Persephone, and it is [*554] very pertinently asked whether the Latin Ceres, Libera, and Dis were approximations in sound to the names of the original deities of the hill of Enna (as it is called by Italians, not of Henna, as the exact Professor persistently writes it).

Although no mention of swine occurs in the account of the Demeter cult of Enna, yet we may reasonably conclude that their traces are to be seen in the very remarkable terra-cotta vases, shaped like a pig, with only a small aperture in the back, to be found in the Museum of Girgenti. The writer made two sketches of these, and believes there are others at Syracuse, but has no note of the fact; he has, however, never seen any of the sort elsewhere.

It should not be forgotten that in Roman lustrations also, the sow was one of the regular animals sacrificed to the Olympic gods. It stands first in the compound word for these--suovetaurilia; and the sow is a prominent object on two of the monuments still existing on the Roman Forum. At the Ashmolean, among the Egyptian amulets, are seven sows in porcelain, all pierced, and of the size intended to be worn, or to be attached to the dead. These were, of course, sacred to Isis. There are also several pig amulets, marked late Greek, among the so-called ex votos. The pig or boar appears as the badge of more than one Roman legion in Pancirollo; and a boar's head is common in modern heraldry; but evidence enough has been adduced to show that

[p. 337]

the modern Italian charm sold in the Roman shops is a true survival of a very ancient cult.

Immediately under the pigs in Fig. 112 are placed four remarkable figures: of all the modern charms here depicted these have most the appearance of a savage fetish, or a South-Sea idol, and yet strangely, they alone pretend to be Christian. They represent St. Anthony of Padua, and were purchased on a great Fair day at the door of the mosque-like cathedral there. There were two mat-baskets full, each containing a number far too large to be even guessed at, but in quantity much over a bushel in each! It will be seen that each is furnished with a ring, for suspension, and the immense number on sale proves the greatness of the demand by the contadini coming to the Fair. The prompt answer of the woman who sold them--contro malocchio--to the question what they were worn for, is sufficient proof of their being used as amulets against the ever-present evil eye. We have said that Christian saints per se are not amulets, and, excepting these curious objects, the medal of St. George, and perhaps the saints on Neapolitan harness, none have been seen during the many years the writer has been on the look-out for these things. Nor does the saint in either of the two former cases form more than a convenient peg on which to hang a long antecedent belief.

Frazer [*555] asks: "May not the pig which was so closely associated with Demeter be nothing but the goddess herself in animal form?" and then he says: "But after an animal has been conceived as a god, or a god as an animal, it sometimes happens

[p. 338]

that the god sloughs off his animal form and becomes anthropomorphic." Precisely so, and by merely carrying the argument to the next stage, and applying it to the case in point, we see that the pig, a well-known and potent amulet, would be improved upon and strengthened by the Padovani through the adoption of their patron saint, not as such, but as the personal embodiment of his own saintly attribute, the pig. Thus we are brought to a modern development of this very ancient idea, and in St. Anthony, as a charm against the evil eye, we see him first as the embodiment of his favourite animal, and through it of Demeter, and so also of Isis.

It will at once be objected that the pig never was the attribute of the Franciscan Saint Anthony of Padua; but no difficulty whatever arises from any such contention. At Padua their patron is Il Santo, they recognise no other, and just as the individualities of the heathen gods and goddesses have been transferred, combined, and assimilated, so all the legends and miracles of the earlier and more famous hermit Saint Anthony are appropriated and ascribed to the mediaeval monk who adopted his name. It is but the old story repeated: "Argos destroyed Mykene and took its glories to itself." [*556]

The real Saint Anthony, the founder of the Cenobites, or, in other words, of Monasticism, was a native of Alexandria, and was canonised in A.D. 357.

The ancient custom of placing in all his effigies a black pig at his feet, or under his feet, gave rise to the superstition that this unclean animal was especially dedicated to him and under his protection. The monks of the Order of St. Anthony kept herds

[p. 339]

of consecrated pigs, which were allowed to feed at the public charge, and which it was a profanation to steal or kill: hence the proverb about the fatness of a "Tantony pig." [*557]

The facts here given show that the effigy of St. Anthony as an amulet is a development of mediaeval and later times; but its power in the particular locality of Padua is none the less, probably all the greater, on that account. The facts are interesting, moreover, as demonstrating how charms grow up and take root.

The story of the sow and her thirty pigs in connection with Alba Longa seems to have no bearing on the case of the pig as an amulet.

It will be evident that many of the remaining charms in the writer's collection, a few of which are shown on Fig. 112, belong to the same category as St. Anthony, but not having so clear a history, are far more difficult of explanation.

The fleur-de-lis as an amulet is, of course, in its present shape, quite modern, or at least a recent development. It is said to represent the phallus, [*558] which is also typified by the trefoil and the fig-tree. Again it is said [*559] that the lily, of which the fleur-de-lis is the conventional sign, is the same as the lotus. This latter we know was a symbol of Isis, and was indeed the sacred flower of the ancients, typifying the combination of the principles of the earth's fecundation, [*560] and therefore of fertility. It is this attribute of Isis which the lotus specially symbolised.

By a singular permutation, the flower borne by each (Isis and Madonna), the lotus, ancient emblem of the sun and fecundity,

[p. 340]

now renamed the lily, is interpreted as significant of the opposite quality, [*561] i.e. of chastity, virginity.

This is no more strange than the fact that their connecting link, Diana, should by some be taken as the type of virgin chastity, and by others, in her Ephesian form, as that of prolific maternity. Later we shall see the lotus-lily playing an important part; and accepting the fact that the fleur-de-lis is a modern representation, we are fully supplied with a reason for its adoption as a modern charm contra la jettatura.

As to the fungus or toadstool, it is another phallic symbol, and has connection with the worship of Priapus; but, not desiring to pursue that branch of the subject, the writer omitted to note the reference, and cannot now recover it. He must therefore frankly place the fungus among his oggetti ignoti, merely stating that it is commonly worn with the same object as all the rest.

The skulls must be considered as portions of the skeleton, which seems [*562] from early times to have been considered as a protective amulet. In our day these objects are rather looked on as representing Time or Chronos in his aspect of Death, and so as a memento mori; but of their use as charms throughout Italy there is no question. The harlequin too, which is really quite an ingenious little toy, throwing out his legs and arms when the chain is pulled, must be accounted for as an amulet, from being rather like a skeleton; if not, it also can only be explained by the fact that it is something strange, and likely to attract the eye.

The owl is, of course, the symbol of Athena-Minerva,

[p. 341]

and appears upon an Athenian coin, now in the British Museum, representing the patron goddess [*563] "The owl on the reverse proves it to be Minerva." [*564] To the same goddess were also sacred the serpent, the cock, and the olive-tree. Montfaucon gives many representations of the owl in company with Minerva.

Two others appear among our small charms, these are the monkey and scissors, and the sabot, about which nothing can be said further than that they are strange, and likely to attract the attention of a beholder, thereby baffling his evil eye.

It is remarkable that the camel, though known to have been in Egypt at least as early as the time of Abraham, has never yet been found on any paintings or hieroglyphics; [*565] nor does it appear to have been sacred to any deity. The only reason the writer can suggest for its being among modern charms is, from its being held nowadays by Arabs and all camel-owning people to be, with the horse, the most subject of all domestic animals to injury from the evil eye. Certainly a camel never journeys without his amulet. The commonest protection is a string, of coarse blue-glass beads hung on his neck, and a little bag containing words from the Koran; these are used also for the horse. It may be that, the animal itself being so highly sensitive to the effects of fascination, its effigy is considered attractive to the malignant glance, and so may absorb its influence to the protection of the wearer. This notion probably contributes to the frequency with which representations

[p. 342]

of all domestic animals are used as protectors.

The lion, the dog, and the goat are sacred to Jove, to Mars (or, as Mr. King says, to Mercury), and to Pan or Priapus. They have been already dealt with.

[paragraph continues] P.S.--The little figures of St. Anthony, each with a ring for suspension, are referred to in connection with the fair at Padua, by Miss Symonds in Days spent on a Doge's Farm. 1894.

Footnotes

^293:460 Possibly Canon Jorio was a Freemason as well as a priest. In either capacity he would be quite familiar with the gesture.

^293:461 In a scene (Canon. Misc. MS, 378, Bodleian; before referred to in connection with Roman insignia, Chapter V.) representing a dispute between Epictetus and Hadrian, both are represented as making this sign. This mediaeval design is, of course, only historical, as relating to the period in which it was produced, but it is nevertheless a valuable testimony to the then universal practice of significant manual gesture.

^294:462 In Fig. 131 all the Persons of the Holy Trinity have the right hand in the same attitude. The seal of the Dean and Chapter of Wells (from an autotype in Canon Church's Early History of the Church, from the "Wells Manuscripts," 1894), here reproduced (Fig. 137), which was in constant use down to the [p. 295] last century, has the Dextera Dei in the attitude we are describing. Moreover, it contains the Gnostic pagan symbols of the sun and moon, and on that account we can but consider them as placed on the seal as a protective amulet, like those so frequently seen on other seals and coins.

^295:463 Symbols of Early and Mediaeval Christian Art, 1852. Fig. 138 "is from Plate xxxiv., the Benedictional of St. Ethelwold, a Saxon MS. of the tenth century." The Trinity in Unity is the idea set forth in both examples referred to.

^295:464 J. Romilly Allen, Christian Symbolism, 1887, p. 163.

^295:465 In Miss Twining's book are many representations of the First Person by the hand alone in several positions, especially on Plate ii., where it ap. pears in the usage of the Eastern Church, from a Greek MS. of the tenth century. On the same plate are seven examples of the hand posed as in [p. 296] Fig. 140. This hand is from the portal of the Cathedral of Ferrara, of the twelfth century. This was the form of the ancient "Main de justice," surmounting the staff which was used in France at coronations, and was pre. served in the treasury of St. Denis. This hand appears on the seal of Hugh Capet, and was continued till the time of the Renaissance (Twining, op. cit. p. 6).

Plate xxxii. shows two examples of the Almighty and of the Holy Spirit in human form, each of whom has the right hand thus raised.

Plate xxxviii. shows the Holy Trinity (Fig. 141) as two persons seated, both holding up the right hand as before, with the dove descending between them (from a MS. in the British Museum, of the fourteenth century). Both Persons are holding the orb with the left hand, on which is the sacred T of life. A second Fig. on this, and another on Plate xxxix. show all three Persons in human form, and all with the right hand thus raised, from a French MS. of the fourteenth century in the Bibliotheque Nationale. Again, [p. 297] the orb and T are shown in the left hand of the Father. These are all from Miss Twining s book.

Fig. 142 represents Christ in Glory on the tympanum of a doorway in Ely Cathedral. Fig. 143 is the same subject, also on a tympanum of a doorway at Essendine, Rutlandshire. Fig. 144 is another Christ in Glory, from a MS. of the Gospels at S. Gall in Switzerland. Fig. 145 is a very early [p. 298] treatment of the same subject from a sculptured slab on the Saxon church of Daglingworth in Gloucestershire.

In all these illustrations the right hand of Christ is raised in the same attitude, and examples might be multiplied to any extent, but enough have been produced to show distinctly that it was not represented by accident, but that it was the recognised gesture throughout the Middle Ages, especially onward from the time of the separation of the Eastern and Western Churches.

I am indebted to Mr. J. Romilly Allen for his kind permission to copy these cuts from his Early Christian Symbolism, 1887.

Fig. 146 is from a coffin-lid, at Lullington in Somerset, of the thirteenth [p. 299] century, and is the only example of the use of the Dextera Dei known to the writer on a tomb or coffin; but of course there may be others.

^299:466 In either the Graphic or the Illustrated News of December 17, 1893, is a large picture of German troops swearing fidelity to the Kaiser; every man has his right hand raised in this position.

^300:467 MANO PANTEA. Contro il Fascino. (Giojello per Ciondolo.) "Questa mano e esattamente imitata in piccola proporzione da quella di Bronzo al naturale che gia era nel Museo di Gian Pietro Bellori in Roma, e se ne ha il disegno nell 'Opera del Grevio, vol. xii. p. 763, donde fu ricavata.

"L'alto delle dita e i simboli che la ricoprono, cioe il Busto di Serapide, divinita propizia agli uomini, il coltello, il serpe, il ramarro, il rospo, la bilancia, la tartaruga, due vasi, la figura della donna col bambino e un altro oggetto ignoto, formano un gruppo di Simboli che uniti insieme si credevano essere potenti a respignere gli effetti del fascino; e queste mani grande le tenevano in casa per proteggerla contro ogni cattivo influsso della magia o del mal occhio, quelle piccole le portavano indosso per esserne difesi."

^301:468 In Daremberg et Saglio, p. 256, are remarks upon the various attributes collected upon single amulets called "Panthees" (Pantea signa), e.g. of Harpocrates, Fortuna, Venus, Cupid, Minerva, etc. Montfaucon says of a representation he is describing: "Panthea or Polythea, that is adorned with the symbols of many divinities" (Montfaucon, Antiquity, etc., Trs. by D. Humphreys, vol. i. p. 10).

^301:469 E. A. Wallis Budge, The Nile, p. 80.

^301:470 The flagellum in the hands of Osiris had another meaning as a restorer of virile power, which, in the light of Egyptian sculptures, seems very probably to be the idea, leading to its adoption upon the Mano Pantea. Upon this subject see Hargrave Jennings' Phallicism, p. 273. Apuleius says the flagrum is the proper sign for a seminator (see De Pollice, p. 211).

^302:471 There are plenty of Egyptian vase amulets, pierced for suspension, in the Ashmolean Museum. Their shape and general type show their object conclusively. At the same place is an Etruscan necklace of gold canthari.

^302:472 Pretorius has learnedly explained that a brazen jar typified the brightness of the Great Goddess (De Pollice, p. 210).

^302:473 Smith's Classical Dict. s. v. "Isis."

^302:474 Wilkinson, Anc. Egypt. vol. iii. p. 87.

^302:475 King, Gnostics, pp. 65, 66.

[p. 303]

The god is reputed to have answered a question of Nicocreon, King of Cyprus--

	 
		A god I am such as I show to thee:
		 The starry Heavens my head, my trunk the Sea,
		 Earth forms my feet, mine ears the Air supplies,
		 The Sun's far-darting, brilliant rays, mine eyes.
		
		 "Hence it is apparent that the nature of Serapis and the Sun is one and indivisible. Isis, so universally worshipped, is either the Earth, or Nature, as subjected to the Sun." This is the true idea expressed plainly on the statues, as well as in the word multimammia, before referred to as one of the names of Diana, who was Isis herself.

^303:476 Even here in England the worship of Serapis existed in Roman times. In the Museum at York is a dedicatory tablet, found in ruins of Roman brickwork, which clearly proves that a temple stood there. The inscription is  DEO SANCTO  SERAPI  TEMPLUM A SOLO FECIT C. L. HERONYMIANUS LEG.  LEG. VI. VICT.. Perhaps the most curious fact about this monument is one which nobody seems to have noted. On each side of the inscription is repeated a sort of compound amulet, of which two caducei and a sun are plain enough; but there is another object, called in the guide-books a "moon-shaped shield," but which close examination shows to be nothing more nor less than the double phallic fascinum, the common amulet in Rome at the time of the Serapis cult.

^303:477 King, Gnostics, p. 70.

^303:478 This was called the calathus, which really means a work-basket (see King, Gnostics, p, 64). This head ornament is probably the second vase, referred to by the Roman jeweller; otherwise there are not due vasi.

^304:479 The same kind of crown is shown on the three heads of Diana Triformis on Fig. 149 from King's Gnostics, p. 205, No. 5, The obverse of this medal shows Abraxas having the head of a cock, and ending in two serpents, with a pair of pincers gripping the tail of each; beneath lies a thunderbolt. The god is holding an elliptic-shaped shield over his left arm, while he brandishes a mace with his right. The threefold figure is said to represent Bhavani, whom we have shown to be the same person as Isis or Diana. On p 202 is a gem having Serapis with this calathus crown; three others are given in King's Handbook of Gems, pp. 72, 367. All of these latter have the curled ram's horn, often seen upon and marking them as Jupiter heads.

^305:480 The cock also typifies Mercury (see Montfaucon, i. p. 79), and is also the attribute of Abraxas, the Gnostic Sun God, the later form of Osiris and Jupiter.

^305:481 Brit. Assoc. Report, 1892, Cardiff, p. 814.

^305:482 It may be that this bird is the crow, which appears on the Woburn marble, and is figured on several Gnostic gems (Abraxas Joh. Macarii, Antwerpiae, 1657, Tab. V.) in the same attitude.

^306:483 We have seen how Chinese kill their money, and other people the arms offered to the dead. The following shows a continuance of the custom among Europeans:--

At Isernia in the Terra di Lavoro, during 1780, at the church of SS. Cosmo and Damian especially, but also "Nella fiera ed in Citta vi sono molti divoti, che vendono membri virili di cera di diverse forme, e di tutte grandezze fino un palmo.

"Sopra delle tavole in ogn' una vi e un bacile che serve per raccogliere li membri di cera. Questa divozione e tutta quasi delle Donne, e pochissima quelli, o quelle che presentano gambe e braccia, mentre tutta la gran festa s'aggira a profitto di membri della generazione. Io ho inteso dire una donna 'Santo Cosimo benedetto, cosi lo voglio,' etc.

These offerings of wax were received by a priest, who said in response to each gift: "Per intercessionem beati Cosmi, liberet te ab omni malo" (Payne Knight, Worship of Priapus, 1865, p. 10). The strange part of this business was that all these wax figures thus offered to SS. Cosmo and Damian were broken before being placed in the basket. The actual breaking of the gift was part of the devotional offering.

It is said (Murray's Handbook to Southern Italy, 1868, p. 52) that the sale of the objectionable membri was prohibited by the Government in 1780, but ten years later than that Sir R. Colt Hoare was able to procure these specimens of the forbidden emblems. Similar ones, though of the classic period seventeen centuries earlier, are to be seen at the Naples Museum.

^307:484 This opinion is strengthened by the undoubted cornucopia upon the similar hand (Fig. 157). Later, the cornucopia will be noted upon two of the statues of Diana (Figs. 175, 177), and also on the grillo (Fig. 28). Cornucopias are often seen on gem amulets, and are said to have the same potency as the horn on which we have already said so much.

^307:485 Wilkinson, Anc. Egypt. vol. iii. p. 345.

^307:486 Nat. Hist. xxx. 30 (vol. v. p. 454, Bohn).

^308:487 Wilkinson, Ib. iii. 345, 346. E. W. Budge, Nile, pp. 55, 63. Wherever seen as a hieroglyph it is always drawn with wings folded, so as to exhibit plainly the T of life on its back.

^308:488 Plutarch, De Iside, 10, 73.

^308:489 Wilkinson, Anc. Egypt. vol. iii. p. 346.

^308:490 It occurs in some zodiacs in the place of Cancer. Ib. iii. 346.

^308:491 In this manifest error he is not alone; indeed it is not at all uncommon here in England, for people living in towns not to know frogs from toads. In a Catalogue Descriptif d'une Collection d'amulettes Italiennes envoyee a l'Exposition Universelle de Paris, 1889, by Dr. Joseph Bellucci, Perouse, 1889, frogs are all written crapaud. Signor Bellucci has published also a Catalogo della collezione di amuleti, Perugia, 1881, but I have not been able to compare the French with the Italian. There is, however, no manner of doubt that rana and not rospo is the creature intended. Bellucci's catalogue contains almost none of the charms and amulets we are dealing with. No doubt in his search for curios, he, like Jorio, Valletta, and others, overlooked the common things under his very nose. He appears to have collected upwards of four thousand [p. 309] objects, but they seem to be largely composed of stones, meteoric and other. One only (No. 25, Tab. XI. p. 66), "Sirene en os, contre le mauvais oeil et la fascination," may be a frog.

^309:492 Wilkinson, Anc. Egypt. vol. iii. pp. 15, 340. Pignorius (Mensae Isiacae Expositio, p. 23) says the frog and the cynocephalus are symbols of Isis; but the cynocephalus standing, with its hands raised towards heaven, Horapollo considers to have been the symbol of the rising moon.

^309:493 Wilkinson, iii. 353. Budge, Nile, p. 57.

^309:494 This idea arose from its being born without feet, and in an altogether different form from that it grows into. Moreover, it was said to typify the decline of disease, and by the growth of its feet the gradual power of the [p. 310] patient in convalescence to walk about (Pretorius, De Pollice, Lipsiae, 1677, p. 211).

^310:495 The frog was evidently an amulet among the Incas of Peru. Fig. 151 is a bracelet from Wiener's Perou el Bolivie, p. 669.

^310:496 Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxxii. vol. vi. p. 22 (Bohn). All this is dwelt on by Delrio, Disq. Mag. iii. p. 32. He shows the connection of frogs with Diana.

^310:497 Looking at the frog from this point of view, it is indeed in strange [p. 311] company when we find it combined, not with the crescent merely, but with that symbol, manifestly in its adoption as a Christian one. The book, under the paw of the lion of St. Mark, representing his Gospel, is the only combination of pagan and Christian with which we are acquainted, save and except the solitary example here produced in Fig. 152. This amulet, belonging to my friend Mr. Neville Rolfe, has every mark of having been much worn, and we cannot but suppose that the original possessor, while believing in the virtue of the pagan symbols, was also up to her light a devout Christian, and without reflecting upon the incongruity, desired, as so many others have done, to pile up appeals for protection just like Lucius Zethus of old, lest any on whom reliance was placed might feel themselves overlooked. The writer believes this particular modern frog amulet to be absolutely unique. Frogs made of gilt metal and cut in amber are worn as amulets by children in Burmah. Necklaces consisting entirely of strings of little frogs of these materials are to be seen in the Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford, from Mandalay.

^311:498 From Figs. 151, 153, 154 it will be seen that the frog was used commonly as a decoration in ancient Peru. These are also from Wiener's Perou el Bolivie. It would seem that in Peru frogs retain their tails, although, as is well known, in Europe the tail disappears as the legs grow, making it still more apt as a symbol of man in embryo, who has lost his tail by evolution.

^311:499 Kalisch, History and Critical Comment. on Gen. iii. i.

^312:500 Inman, Ancient Faiths embodied in Ancient Names, vol. ii. pp. 710; 712, Also vol. i. pp. 497, 498.

^312:501 Smith's Dict. of the Bible, s.v. "Serpent."

^312:502 Ophiolatreia, privately printed, 1889, p. 1. This book deals very fully with the subject, but gives no references.

^312:503 Wilkinson, Anc. Egypt. vol. iii. p. 334.

^313:504 De Pollice, Lipsiae, 1677, p. 210.

^313:505 Livy, x. 32. Lanciani, p. 69, says this happened in A.U.C. 459, and that the Sibylline books were consulted. The answer was: "Aesculapium ab Epidauro Romae arcessendum." There is confusion between the Sibylline books and the Delphic oracle.

^313:506 This temple of Aesculapius was on the island now called S. Bartolomeo, and became the greatest sanitary establishment in the metropolis. It is a striking proof of the vitality of tradition, that not only the island, but the very [p. 314] spot on it where once stood this temple, always has been, and is now, the seat of a hospital, that of San Giovanni di Calabita (Lanciani, Anc. Rome, p. 70).

^314:507 Gibbon, Dec. and Fall. Milman, vol. ii. 1846, p. 13.

^314:508 Professor Mahaffy, Nineteenth Century, May 1894, p. 859.

^314:509 Ophiolatreia (privately printed), p. 87.

^314:510 Those who have seen this famous old-world monument, said to have the name of Mycenae engraved upon it, cannot but be struck with its singular resemblance to many of the twisted columns at Venice and elsewhere in Italy. Who knows but the idea in them may have sprung from the Delphic pillar? Looking again at the serpent as the guardian of doorways: may not [p. 315] the very usual twisted mouldings, following the sides and arches of doorways in Venice, be also descendants of the serpents of Delphi? In fact, may we not apply this to mouldings in general of that type which generally go by the name of cable? The armour of Agamemnon was ornamented with a three-headed serpent. Menelaus also had one on his shield. Spartans and Athenians said they were of serpent origin, and called themselves Ophiogenae.

^315:511 See Sir R. C. Hoare's Ancient and Modern Wiltshire; Davies's Mythology of the Druids; Borlase's Cornwall; Stukeley, Abury, a Temple of the British Druids, 1793.

^315:512 Even in far-off Peru we see a serpent carved upon the pier at the [p. 316] entrance of a bridge over the Pachachaca near Chavin (Perou et Bolivie, p. 561).

^316:513 Forlong, Rivers of Life, p. 223.

^316:514 An object very similar to one of them, with an animal mounted upon it, is represented on a terra-cotta plaque (Fig. 181) from the collection of the late Sir W. Temple, found at Pozzuoli, and now in the British Museum. This is probably a goat, which in Egypt (Wilkinson, Anc. Egypt. vol. iii. p. 30) was a sacred animal, a favourite of Isis. In Greece, according to Herodotus, the goat was sacred to Pan, and in Roman times we well know that it was the symbol of Priapus. Hence its obvious meaning as a modern charm.

^316:515 Upon the subject of serpent worship see King, Gnostics, p. 26, who gives a chapter on Ophites, and again, at p. 73, another on Agathodemon [p. 317] Talismans or Serpent Amulets; but the best account is by Dr. Moritz Winternitz (Der Sarpabali, ein altindischer Schlangencult, Wien, 1888). He gives an immense array of authorities and many remarkable facts.

Traces of serpent worship may be seen, not only in the architectural features at Venice and elsewhere, but in the peculiar spiral and interlaced ornament found upon the early Greek tombstones at Mycenae--represented in Schliemann's Mycenae and Tiryns, pp. 81-96, especially those on p. 91, which are certainly intended to represent serpents. Strangely, we find here in Great Britain sculptured ornaments identical in idea and almost in fact. The writer was attracted to the Greek tombstones on the spot at Mycenae, and in the museum at Athens; he has therefore rather had his eyes open since then for similar objects. There is, in one of the Dolmens of Brittany, near Locmariaker, a stela-shaped stone at the end of one of the tombs, on which the device rudely cut is manifestly serpentine.

Mr. J. Romilly Allen in his Monumental History of the Early British Church gives as a frontispiece two panels, which he calls plaitwork, from a cross at Llantwit Major; also on p. 211 there is a similar design from the cross of Gilsuith and Berhtsuith at Thornhill in Yorkshire; and at p. 212 is an interlaced design from the cross of Utr and Froka, at Kirk Braddan, all of which are serpent patterns, while the latter shows unmistakably two serpents' heads.

Again, in Dolton Church, North Devon, there is a very remarkable font of early date, having the same interlaced serpent pattern upon it. The like is on a stone in the pavement of Saxilby church in Lincolnshire, and on a slab at Northampton, and on the shaft of a cross at Rothley Temple in Leicestershire. On the Dolton example the Rev. G. F. Browne says: "The centre panel shows two serpents, head downwards, biting their own and each other's tails." Four photographs of these panels are published by Mr. Winslow Jones in an article in the Transactions of the Devon Association, vol. xxiii. p. 200. There are also sculptured stones of the same character in various parts of Italy, all seeming to show that at least the recollection of serpent worship has existed in Western Europe down to the early Middle Ages, and long since the adoption of Christianity.

^320:516 E. W. Budge, The Nile, p. 162.

^320:517 Like the serpent, the crocodile as a dreaded monster was hated as well as adored. At Edfou we see Horus spearing the crocodile, and of course recognise him as the antitype of Michael and the Dragon. Indeed by some it is held that the Leviathan and Dragon of the A.V. of Scripture referred to the crocodile (Smith, Dict. of Bib. s.v. "Dragon "). As Sebek (Wilkinson, iii. 189; E. W. Budge, Nile, p. 94) he was a sun-god, and worshipped as the life-giver; thus he fitly became a Gnostic symbol. Pignorius (Vetustissimae Tabula, p. 23) says the lizard or crocodile (Lacertus), like the lion, dragon, and eagle, was sacred to the sun.

^321:518 Murray's Handbook to Northern Italy, 1860, p. 343.

^322:519

	 
		"Gaude, Virgo, Mater Christi,
		 Quae per aurem concepisti
		 Gabriele nuncio.
		 Gaude quia Deo plena
		 Peperisti sine pena
		   Cum pudoris lilio."
		
		 The whole idea of the conception by the crocodile is but another example of the strong belief in the power of the senses to convey actual tangible effects to the body. Hence the Crocodile or Lizard "is the type of the generation of the Word, i.e. of the Logos, or Divine Wisdom." Here is a satisfactory explanation of the crocodile placed upon Minerva's breast, as seen on some gems. The crocodile denotes both the accession of wisdom and the silence of the wise. Of old it was considered to have no tongue, and hence it was the symbol of silence. Pliny says it is the only land animal which lacks the use of its tongue (Pliny, Nat. Hist. Viii. 25; Vol. ii. p. 287, Bohn). The lizard and the crocodile seem to have been regarded as the same species.

^322:520 Jameson, Legends of the Monastic Orders, p. 288.

^322:521 "Savaric," by Canon Church, in Archaeologia, Vol. li. p. 24.

^322:522 King, Gnostics, pp. 71, 72.

^323:523 Wilkinson, ii. p. 247. The steelyard is found in Egypt, but of distinctly Roman type, and of a late age when Egypt was much tinder Roman influence. By his admirable illustrations of the Distribution of Mythical Beliefs at the British Association at Oxford, 1894, Dr. Tyler showed not only the widespread similarity of the idea. of the actual weighing of souls in the next world, but also that the method of representation was equally diffused; in fact it would appear that the belief itself, and the form of the scales in which the weighing is represented, have gone together as part and parcel of the whole conception. Early Egyptian, Japanese, and Christian English, each in his own peculiar fashion, depicted the same equipoised balance, with the soul in a suspended scale on one side, and the goddess Mut (Truth), or some other counterweight in the other. Moreover the demon, depicted according to the several popular beliefs, was in each case awaiting the result, and if possible to claim his victim.

^323:524 The scales are said to represent September, the autumnal equinox, and thereby the seventh month of the disease, and so of convalescence, for certainly by the seventh month the patient has regained his health. The three fingers upraised of the hand described "denote 200, that is six months and twenty days--the time between the two equinoxes" (Pretorius, De Pollice, Lipsiae, 1677, p. 213). Here we have another system of numeration, this sign differing from that given on <page 239>. It is, however, very interesting, as proving the importance attached to manual attitude.

^324:525 Libra was an aphrodisiac talisman. Proserpine was the holder of the balance in old Zodiacs, and the Romans called her Libera (Forlong, Rivers of Life, vol. i. pp. 171, 172). This somewhat helps our argument as to the meaning of the Sirens in Chap. X.

^324:526 Jahn, Aberglauben, etc., p. 99. -

^324:527 Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxxii. 14 (vol. vi. p. 15, Bohn).

^325:528 The tortoise was sacred to Cybele (De Pollice, p. 212). The tortoise was a phallic amulet, and being considered an androgynous animal, was an apt symbol of the double power (Payne Knight, Symb. Lang. p. 29).

^325:529 Wilkinson, Anc. Egypt. vol. iii. p. 329.

^325:530 Montfaucon, vol. i. p. 79

^325:531 Ovid, Fast. ii. 25-8.

^325:532 Forlong, op. cit. i. 59. I cannot find it in Layard's books.

^326:533 Montfaucon, vol. i. p. 94.

^327:534 We would refer again to the cakes upon the tables in Figs. 156, and 113, 116 from Ravenna. In any case the coincidence is remarkable.

^328:535 Jahn, Aberglauben, etc., p. 106.

^328:536 "It has on one side the inscription IAU??C?ABAUTh (Jao-Sabaoth), together with two signs, obscure to me, and three stars." One of the doubtful objects is, we suggest, the pincers seen upon many Gnostic amulets, and especially in the three plaques (Figs. 181, 182, 183). "The other three sides are inscribed with cursorily drawn animals amongst these are (a) two serpents, two birds, a bee, a frog, then an unknown creature; (b) a long serpent, then a th; (c) a stag, a lizard, a scorpion, and a hare, with another unknown, doubtful animal--besides these there are placed on either side three stars and a little indistinct sign." The object next to the stag, "unknown," is certainly like one upon the tablet of Isis (Fig. 185), whatever it may be intended to represent.

On this large nail are the same objects and animals with which we have been dealing already. The only new one is the hare. Even this we see on the insignia of the Constantia Legion (Fig. 64), jumping over the sun's disc. Moreover, we know that hares were held in much esteem among the ancient Britons as magic-working animals. Caesar says that they made use of hares for the purpose of divination. They were never killed by them for food. Queen Boadicea is said to have had a hare concealed in her bosom, and after haranguing her soldiers to raise their courage, she let go the hare so that her augurs might divine whether the omens were good or evil from the turnings and windings made by the frightened animal. The omen was favourable, and [p. 329] the multitude set up a shout of joy, upon which the Queen seized the opportunity, led them to the battle, and gained the victory (Borlase, Antiq. of Cornwall, p. 135). No doubt it is this old belief in the hare as an ominous animal that has survived in our steadfastly held modern one that it is an ill omen to see a hare cross the path.

^329:537 "Repetitum ex seniorum memoria dicitur pestilentiam quondam clavo ab dictatore fixo sedatam" (Livy, vii. 3; viii. 18, 12; ix. 28, 6). Cf. the use of the words praefiscini and favere explained elsewhere. They were the colloquialisms, the slang of the Roman populace.

^329:538 xxviii. 6, 17, as quoted by Jahn, p. 107. I cannot find this passage.

^329:539 How remarkably this custom of ancient Rome is perpetuated, according to Jorio, in modern Naples, where the mere utterance of the word corno is a defence against the jettatura!

^330:540 Nat. Hist. xi. 63 (vol. iii. p. 59, Bohn).

^330:541 Ibid. xxviii. 78 (vol. v. p. 364, Bohn).

^331:542 Wilkinson, vol. iii. p. 148 et seq.

^331:543 Fig. 160, judged by its eyelets for suspension, is an undoubted amulet. It is from a "figurine en bronze trouvee pres de Cotahuacho," in Peru (Wiener, Perou el Bolivie, p. 715). Comparison will show how strikingly like this figure is, in general type, to two others upon the Kertch necklace (Fig. 21). Upon the same page from which this was taken are seven others which we can only consider of the same sort. One of these is wonderfully like Bes, and bears witness again to the world-wide idea, that grotesque, gurgoyle, devil-like images, were protective against the spirits they were supposed to represent. In these illustrations Peru and the Crimea are brought side by side!

^332:544 Wilkinson, Ancient Egypt. vol. iii. p. 295.

^332:545 Montfaucon, vol. i. p. 80.

^332:546 De symbolica Aegyptorum sapientia. Coloniae Agrippinae, 1623, p. 320. He says that his fury is instantly tamed by the arrival of a beautiful woman, quoting Aelian for his statement. Also that he is the type of the incarnation, and of conjugal fidelity.

"Pudicitia flos morum, honor corporum, decor sexuum, integritas sanguinis, fundamentum sanctitatis, praejudicium omnis bonae mentis."--Tertullian, De pudicitia.

The elephant is said to be duplex in heart and in disposition, and that it is well known he may be both incensed with anger or pacified and made docile by the speech of black men (De symbolica, p. 322).

^333:547 Herodotus, ii. 47. Wilkinson, iii. 167, 297 et seq.

^333:548 For illustration of such a scene see Wilkinson, iii. 466.

^333:549 The pig was sacrificed to Artemis, as may be seen by a relief on a sarcophagus at Constantinople (Daremberg et Saglio, p. 168).

^333:550 Frazer, Golden Bough, ii. 44-60. The whole subject of the pig is carefully and elaborately worked out; inter alia, the times and mode of eating of its flesh are produced (p. 47) as evidence of a sacramental partaking of the body of a slain god. See also Lobeck, Aglaophamus, p. 831.

^334:551 Golden Bough, ii. 51. In England, where pork was the only meat in general use, it came as a surprise when the Crusaders told their countrymen of other people besides the Jews who held swine in abomination. The wild stories current were believed and recorded even by so famous a historian as Matthew Paris who says that the Mahomedans despise pork because the Prophet, having gorged himself till he was so insensible as to fall asleep on a dunghill, was attacked there by a litter of pigs, and so suffocated. For this story, and more of the same kind, see Buckle, Hist. Of Civil. i. p. 314 et seq.

^334:552 Ancient Egyptians, vol. iii. p. 387 et seq.

^335:553 Freeman, History of Sicily, vol. i. p. 169.

^336:554 Freeman, History of Sicily, vol. i. p, 177.

^337:555 Golden Bough, vol. ii. p. 44.

^338:556 Freeman, Studies of Travel--Greece, p. 112.

^339:557 Mrs. Jameson, Sacred and Legendary Art, 2nd edition, 1850) p. 436. On "Tantony Pig," see also Hone, E. D. B. i. 1826, p. 119.

^339:558 Inman, Ancient Faiths, vol. i. p. 522.

^339:559 King, Gnostics, p. 72.

^339:560 Inman, op. cit. vol. ii. p. 396.

^340:561 King, Gnostics, p. 72.

^340:562 Ibid. p. 213.

^341:563 Smith, Dict. of Antiquities, s.v. "Drachma."

^341:564 Montfaucon, Antiq. vol. i. p. 86.

^341:565 Wilkinson, vol. ii. p. 101; vol. iii. p. 301.

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 343]

 

CHAPTER X

 

THE CIMARUTA, SIRENE, TABLETS

AMONG those who have written upon Neapolitan superstitions, one only is known to the writer who has even alluded to the most curious of all the many charms worn there against the evil eye. Mr. Neville Rolfe, in Naples in 1888, gives a description of this remarkable amulet, to the infants of Naples just as common to-day as the "coral and bells" were until recently among ourselves. Like many other everyday facts, such as local names for common objects, they are so familiar that nobody notices them, or perceives that they are at all strange; otherwise we cannot suppose that residents, like Valletta, Marugi, or Jorio, would have failed at least to make some reference to what must have been as familiar to them as their own garments. [*566] The number of specimens in the writer's collection [*566a] show how common they are; and moreover that every single one is different from every other. Of these any number of duplicates might have been obtained, and further search will no doubt bring to light many fresh examples. A careful study of these curious objects,

[p. 344]

which neither Story nor the writers of guidebooks ever seem to have heard of, shows a likeness in the general plan, maintained even in its most simple and elementary forms, that amply justifies the name by which it is universally known. The cima di ruta, or, in Neapolitan, the cimaruta, "sprig of rue," tells its own tale.

Although so complicated, and in some cases compounded of so very many different individual amulets, yet all are traceable to one and the same root.

We cannot find any notice of this charm throughout the Roman or mediaeval periods, nor indeed is 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 161.
 there any amulet like it, known to the writer, in any of the museums where one would expect to find such things, [*566b] except one. In the Bologna Museum among the very earliest Etruscan amulets is a small bronze object of which Fig. 161 is a careful drawing, and about the actual size. Comparing this, and its clearly ostensible purpose as an amulet for suspension, with the elaborate modern charm, every candid observer must admit the remarkable similarity of general form and evident design in both. It is much to be regretted that no other ancient example of this kind can be produced; but even so, and while living in hopes of further finds, it is not unreasonable nor speculative to conclude that we have here the germ,

[p. 345]

and that the "sprig of rue" is one of the very oldest of existing amulets. We may safely give it an Etruscan or early Phoenician origin; for we must always remember that 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 162.
 From the Collection of Mr. Neville Rolfe.
 the objects among which it appears are labelled by experts, as found in tombs, "della prima eta di ferro."

Looking, too, at the almost oriental unchangeableness of the Neapolitan character, it is no less reasonable to look upon the name itself of the amulet as a tradition of remote antiquity; and it is easy to see, even without evidence to prove it, how upon the simple sprig new symbols have been grafted, so that each of its tips has been made to carry a charm in itself, until at last we have the multiplied aggregation comprised in the modern amulet (Fig. 162).

Worn upon the breasts of infants in Naples and the neighbourhood, it is considered their special protector against the ever-dreaded jettatura.

Mr. Neville Rolfe [*567] gives a list of eight different symbols, but in addition to these we have to point out several other features which may be recognised in it.

[p. 346]

To begin with the title-role: No plant had more virtues ascribed to it in ancient times than rue, and the belief in these has continued down to the present day.

Pliny [*568] says the ancients held rue in peculiar esteem; that the plant has a great liking for the fig-tree and for that tree only, and that it thrives better under it than anywhere else. He says it is one of the most active of all medicinal plants, and one of the principal ingredients used in antidotes. "Every species of rue, employed by itself, has the effect of an antidote if the leaves are bruised and taken in wine." It is good for the stings of serpents--"so much so, in fact, that weasels when about to attack them, take the precaution first of protecting themselves by eating rue." It is good too for "stings by scorpions, spiders, bees, hornets and wasps, the noxious effects produced by cantharides and salamanders, and the bites of mad dogs." He quotes Pythagoras, Harpocrates, and Diocles, as to the value of rue in a great number of diseases, and in his last paragraph says that "of all the plants that are grown, rue is the one most employed for the maladies of cattle"; altogether he cites it as being a remedy for eighty-four diseases or ailments. [*569]

[p. 347]

Gerard speaks much of the virtues of rue, but all herbalists call it "herb of grace." [*570]

Culpepper says: "It is an herb of the Sun, and under Leo."

It is suggested that inasmuch as rue was hung about the neck as an amulet in primaeval times [*571] against fascination, and we know of no other herb that was so used, it may on that account have acquired its name in the Middle Ages. It was, moreover, believed to be of all herbs the most potent restorative medicine, and as a beneficent remedy this was, par excellence, the plant bestowing grace or favour upon such as used it.

No doubt our amulet from Bologna was one of those hung about the neck over three thousand years ago; and it may fairly be contended that it represented the same herb whose reputation has lasted through the ages; which in these latter days has by some means acquired for itself alone among plants the name "herb of grace." With rue as the

[p. 348]

basis of our amulet, we have to account for the conventional shape which the spray assumed even in Etruscan days.

In all the complete specimens here produced (Figs. 81, 162), it will be seen that the Cimaruta has three main branches; and considering the material of which these charms are always made, in connection with the other symbols on this complex object, we can come to no other conclusion than that the three branches are typical of Diana Triformis [*572] or of her prototypes. Epithets are given to her denoting that she is the giver of light and life, benefits also attributed to Proserpine, and these "make it seem that she (Proserpine) was also thought to be concerned for women in labour, which cannot appear strange if we consider her as the same goddess with Diana, who being in three different capacities, as conversant in heaven, earth, and hell, has three distinct names: in heaven she is Selene, the Moon; upon the earth Artemis, Diana, in hell Persefone, Proserpine; whence are those epithets whereby the poets denote her threefold character as trimorfos, triformis, tergemina, with several others." [*573]

[p. 349]

Considering her in another threefold character, she is Hecate, Diana, Proserpine. [*574]

Montfaucon pictures a statue of this goddess, whom he calls Hecate, in three positions, so as to bring each form alternately to the front.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 163.

1. On her head is a crescent; above that a flower (the lotus), "the usual mark of Isis." She holds two torches in her hands, and thus represents Diana Lucifera.

2. She wears a Phrygian cap with rays of light proceeding from it, and holds a sword in one hand with a serpent in the other. "Servius says she

[p. 350]

[paragraph continues] (Diana) presides over health, of which the serpent is the symbol." [*575]

3. She is crowned with laurel, holding a key in her right hand, and ropes in her left. "The key belongs properly to Hecate; she was guardian of Hell, where she reigned with Pluto. The ropes referred to her office of guardian of Hell for reasons evident to all the world."

One of the attributes of Diana was the especial protection of women in childbirth, and by Cicero she was maintained to be one and the same as Ilithyia or Lucina. Horace also invokes her:--

	 
		"Sive tu Lucina probas vocari
		           Seu Genitalis." [*576]
		
		 In this attribute we have Diana Lucina as the direct forerunner and counterpart, in Neapolitan belief, of Madonna del Parto. [*577]

This charm must always be of silver, and each one has to bear the hall-mark; without this the poorest will not have it.

Silver was Diana's own metal--in Greece, in Ephesus, and in Rome alike. Demetrius who made the shrines (housis, according to Wiclif) was a silversmith. [*578]

[p. 351]

We turn our silver in our pockets when we first see the new moon or Diana; and in fact the silver moon is something more than a mere figure of speech. [*579]

In all complete specimens two of the attributes are never wanting. These are the crescent and the hand, with which the tip of every spray is made to finish, reminding one 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 164.
 of the sun's rays on the sculpture in the tomb of Khuenaten (Fig. 103), except that here the hand, when alone, is bent into the gesture already described as a potent amulet [*580] in itself--the mano fica, and in the other cases is made to grasp some other object. The half-moon on Fig. 162 in itself combines two other symbols, namely horns, already dealt with, and a serpent enclosing the crescent. [*581]

[p. 352]

The key, which like the crescent takes a prominent position, appears in every perfect specimen. We may therefore conclude that it is an important amulet; this key also is compounded. On the Cimaruta the bow of the key is always shaped like a heart as on Fig. 162. In Fig. 112 the key appears singly, i.e. without the heart, in many shapes more or less ornamental, clearly proving the position it holds in Neapolitan estimation as a simple charm to be worn by adults, as well as in its compounded form by infants. As an amulet it has a distinct phallic significance. [*582]

There can be little doubt that the key is another of the symbols of Diana, and relates to her in the form of Luna, or in her proper name of Diana, the wife of Dianus; for Janus and Jana are but alternative forms of one and the same word. As keeper of the gates of heaven, Jana was entrusted with her husband's key to open the portals for the exit of Aurora and the life and light giving Phoebus, as well as to close the gates of night. The key might possibly be also regarded as an attribute of Hecate-Proserpine, who as mistress of the lower world might open the gates and free the imprisoned spirits. [*583] A medal represents her with a key in one hand and a serpent in the other. [*584] It is a remarkable fact, and not to be overlooked in connection with Diana and the Cimaruta, that the Neapolitan

[p. 353]

vernacular for a witch is not, as in ordinary Italian, strega, but Janara; evidently conserving the ancient belief In the Bologna Etruscan Museum are several finger-rings, having little keys attached to them, precisely like the horns attached to the modern rings in Rome (Fig. 81). They are far too small for use, and can only have been worn as amulets, thus proving the antiquity of the key as such.

The heart has already been shown as an ancient symbol in connection with the cross, and it is suggested that in the key with the heart-handle may be a conventionalised representation of the crux ansata. We may safely accept the heart as implying an allusion to the maiden goddess "whose affections were regulated by the key of prudence." [*585]

One of the writer's specimens (Fig. 81) contains two birds, and assuming that they are not meant for the same bird, we consider one to 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 165.
 be the cock and the other the eagle.

The cock on several gems, like Fig. 14, is either alone or combined with Apollo in a grillo, as in Fig. 165. [*585a] He is regarded as a "solar animal," [*586] and thus sacred to the sun-gods, Osiris, Serapis, Jupiter, Apollo. The cock is also the symbol of Mercury, denoting vigilance. He: is sometimes represented as holding an ear of corn in his bill, meaning that "only vigilance can produce plenty." [*587] As a watchful

[p. 354]

guardian, who will drive away the fiercest beast, even a lion, the cock is a singularly appropriate symbol for the protection of an infant, and hence possibly he is placed on both sides of the Cimaruta, and also upon the Mano Pantea to guard the woman and child. His crow is said to be the praise offered to the sun-god, when Chanticleer proclaims the approach of day. It is said that even the lion is afraid of a cock, and that his eye is all-powerful as an amulet (see Fig. 13); also that all demons with lions' heads vanish instantly when the cock (or his image) is presented to them. May not this be the reason why a weathercock is placed high on our church towers? See remarks on Gurgoyles in Appendix II. Pliny [*588] says "the lion is terrified--still more on seeing the crest, or hearing the crowing of the cock." The eagle is well known as Jove's own bird. It is shown alongside him on the gem (Fig. 18) as an amulet. In Montfaucon most of the prints of Jupiter have an eagle accompanying him.

The sword or dagger grasped in the hand appears not only as a separate charm on Fig. 112, but is in the hand of the gladiator on the Woburn marble (Fig. 24) and in several of the hands of Diana Triformis (Fig. 163). This may represent the knife shown on the Mano Pantea (Fig. 148), or it may be the dart of Diana Venatrix as on Fig. 112.

The fish grasped by the hand is among the separate coral charms shown also on Fig. 112. The fish appears also on the Cortona lamp (Fig. 30) and on various gems and medals (Figs. 14-18). In

[p. 355]

some it appears as a dolphin. The dolphin was the special attribute of Neptune, but Diana-Proserpine was a sea goddess, and it may as an amulet refer to her, inasmuch as it is on her statue (Fig. 175).

Lastly, the flower must be intended for the lotus, the symbol of Isis, i.e. of Diana. [*589]

To sum up: we have in this highly composite and therefore powerful amulet, no less than thirteen separate and distinct symbols, any one of which by itself may be taken as prophylactic against the dreaded evil eye. These are: 1, Rue.; 2, Diana Triformis; 3, Silver; 4, Hand; 5, horned Crescent; 6, Serpent; 7, Key; 8, Heart; 9, Cock; 10, Eagle; 11, Sword or Dart; 12, Fish; 13, Lotus. [*589a]

Of all the many charms combined in the Cimaruta we find on close study that there is scarcely one which may not directly or indirectly be considered as connected with Diana, the goddess of infants, worshipped to-day by Neapolitans as zealously as ever she was in old times by the men of Ephesus and Rome; the only change is in her name. Many a Demetrius, who still makes her silver shrines, flourishes near the Piazza Margherita, though nowadays he knows her only as La Madonna; she is, however, his goddess, his "regina del Cielo, della terra, del parto, ed anche del Inferno."

[p. 356]

Figs. 166-169 are all modern amulets in daily use, and all alike avowedly contra la jettatura. These are all for suspension, and are mostly provided

Click to enlarge
FIG. 166.--From the Author's Collection.

with chains by which to hang. Like all Diana charms, they are of silver. Unlike the Cimaruta, these are always made both sides alike, for the reason that they are worn by women outside the dress, or hung up in the house, specially

[p. 357]

in the window. Although all pass under the general term Corno, which is Neapolitan for amulet, these particular objects are known as Sirene, or Cavalli Marini respectively. In all the former the female figure is crowned. In one she is seated on a double sea-horse, though usually the horses are represented by their two tails rather than two heads. There are, though very scarce,

Click to enlarge
FIG. 167., 168.
 From the Collection of Mr. E. Neville Rolfe.

specimens of the figure on a single sea-horse. Readers who are familiar with Abraxas gems will notice the Gnostic influence so plainly visible in these double-tailed mermaids.

By far the most difficult problem connected with this subject has been to account for these strange objects as amulets at all; and next, for their being known in Neapolitan as sirene.

[p. 358]

First, then, we are in the very home of the Sirens: their islands are close at hand; the promontory of Ulysses is, next to Capri, the most 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 169.--From the Collection of Mr. E. Neville Rolfe.
 visible object from Naples. Parthenope, one of the Sirens, is a name of the city itself. "Hyginus writes that at the time of Proserpine's rape, the Sirens came into Apollo's country, which is Sicily, and that Ceres, to punish them for not assisting her daughter Proserpine, turned them into birds." [*590] We have plenty of representations of the Sirens, birds with women's faces, as they were believed to be by the ancients; and moreover we have some evidence of their being used in this form as amulets. In the famous Cortona lamp they are shown alternating round the Medusa's head in company with the capo di bove, fish and Priapus, all well-recognised amulets (see Fig. 50).

The arms of the Neapolitan family of Petronia are a siren, Parthenope, playing a flute. [*591] On a

[p. 359]

medal belonging to them she is represented as a female standing, having wings of the angel kind, but with a bird's tail and legs. There is thus everything about the locality of Naples to connect it with the Sirens, and we know their conventional shape, but whence did the notion come, and how are we to connect them with Proserpine? [*592]

The Etruscan lamp once more directs us to Egypt. There we find that Isis was represented

Click to enlarge
FIG. 170.--From Wilkinson, vol. iii. p. 107, FIG. 171.

with wings (Fig. 170) as a flying goddess. This is a step forward; but Wilkinson, vol. iii. p. 115, shows us precisely what we are looking for (Fig. 171). This is the goddess Hathor, holding precisely the same relation to Isis as the Ephesian Artemis held to the chaste Roman Diana; or rather we may say that Hathor was to Isis what Proserpine was to Diana. [*593]

[p. 360]

On Egyptian paintings and sculptures we have Hathor represented as a bird-woman; that is Isis, that is Proserpine, that is Diana. How do we know that the crowned figure sitting on sea-horses, called a Siren, is Proserpine, and therefore Hecate, and therefore Diana the protectress of women in childbirth, and therefore a suitable amulet for the use of

Click to enlarge
FIG. 172.--From Pignorius., FIG. 173

women as a guardian against the evil eye? No candid reader will refuse to admit that in the bird-woman Parthenope, on the Cortona lamp, we have the same person as the bird-woman Hathor in Fig. 171. Further, if any doubt remained, we have a representation of Isis herself (Fig. 172) holding her own siren attribute, just as we shall see the same

[p. 361]

goddess represented by the statues of the Ephesian Diana bearing the distinguishing symbols belonging to her under that title.

Fig. 173 is from a photograph purchased in Naples. It is part of the very large Greek vase of Pluto and Proserpine, No. 2959 in the Museum. The figure on the sea-horse is undoubtedly Proserpine. It is a colossal vase of the- transition period, about the third century B.C., with twenty-two figures, nearly all named. This one has been of great service in identifying figures found upon other vases.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 174.

The three-headed Cerberus sufficiently marks the locality. We invite attention next to Fig. 174, half-size of a drawing by the writer from another late Greek vase of about the same date, found at Capua about 1888, now belonging to Mr. Neville Rolfe. The latter has no other ornament than this solid block upon a gray ground. The vase is of course a small one, but there is no doubt as to its genuineness. It will hardly be disputed that these two Greek paintings represent the same idea and the same person. From these the reader is asked to turn to the five statues of Diana (Figs. 69, 175-178) taken from Bellori. Upon these seem to

[p. 362]

be crowded the various symbols of Diana, every one of which in some place or other is to be found as a separate amulet. Upon four of these statues, perhaps four or five centuries later in date than the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 175., 176.

[paragraph continues] Greek vases, is to be seen, nearly in the same position, the female on the sea-horse.

Will any person venture to deny that the several representations here brought together are anything else than the prototypes, the direct parents of the modern Neapolitan amulet shown on Fig. 168, and

[p. 363]

of all those shown on Figs. 166, 167? Inasmuch, too, as we know the ancient ones to represent Proserpine-Diana, so it is maintained that the modern amulet called a siren also represents the same deity.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 177., 178.

There are in Montfaucon, and n other books of classic art, plenty of female figures sitting on seahorses, but these are called Nereids. No one will venture to call those here produced by that name, and possibly some of the so-called Nereids may in reality be Proserpines.

[p. 364]

Such a chain of evidence, connecting in the most obvious manner the beliefs of to-day with the mythology of perhaps thirty centuries ago, is not often to be found; and again, judging from the known to the unknown, it is reasonable to maintain that most of the habits and customs now persistently upheld by the people would, if they could be thus traced, be found to have their beginnings in the same dim ages of obscure antiquity. Conversely, there is hardly a custom or occult practice of the ancients which may not be traced somewhere or somehow amongst their modern descendants. The statuette (Fig. 175), well known to the writer, is now in the Museum of the Collegio Romano. The others are in private collections. It is strange that not one of these four seems to have been known to Montfaucon, or to his authorities. He has, however, the more typical statue of the Ephesian goddess (Fig. 69), in which she appears as the patroness of maternity. Those which have the attribute of Proserpine so prominent, appeal more to the Roman ideal, although they are matronly in appearance.

It is difficult satisfactorily to interpret the various attributes upon the four statues from Bellori. In general type they are strikingly alike, though each one is different in detail. Every one has the corona turrita, by which the author of Symbolica says vertex inisgnitur. This is usually the attribute of the Phrygian Cybele as well as of Diana. The two Farnesian statues have wreaths or floral crowns; in the centre of each is no doubt her own flower--but which? The rose, chrysanthemum, heliochrysum, lotus, were all sacred to Diana. One has the sun upon her crown, while every one wears a half-moon

[p. 365]

on her breast with the horns downward, just as these amulets are now always worn by horses.

The object above the crescent on three statues is said to represent a crab, but the whole looks more like a scorpion, with the crescent to represent his claws. We are distinctly told [*594] that the crab was suspended to the neck of Diana of Ephesus because it was sacred to her. Hence we find the crab on the breast in Fig. 69, and also engraved on gem amulets (see Fig. 17).

All four statues have two busts upon them, which the present writer does not pretend to explain; a single bust, something like one of these, appears as an amulet on the Kertch necklace (Fig. 21).

Another feature common to three of the statuettes is that they have in each case, both above and below the sea-horses, a group of three nude Graces; and the upper group in each shows the outer figure holding a cornucopia. The lower groups have wings, and in one they are holding the wreaths in their hands, probably the same wreath that two of the other statues have on their heads. Moreover, it will be noted that on the breast of Fig. 69 are two draped females holding up a wreath, and also on this latter are shown two of the nude females in line with the three stags' heads.

The fourth statue (Fig. 178) has but one row of Graces, without anything in their hands. It is difficult to determine the meaning of these nude figures. They may possibly represent Diana Triformis. [*595]

[p. 366]

Every one of these five statues has both hands posed in distinct gesture-like attitudes, and every hand is open.

The cavalli marini (Figs. 166-169) of course represent the same sea-horses as those upon the Diana statues. The sea-horse is an amulet apart, worn equally by the cab horses and upon the breasts of Neapolitan women. On the statues these creatures seem to have heads more like goats than horses. The same may be said of the silver charms. Nevertheless they are all known as cavalli.

Each of the statues wears a veil, reaching to the ground upon four, but curtailed to a mere head-dress on the fifth (Fig. 69). These are like the veils often worn by brides, not to hide but to set off the face. Upon Diana the veil represents night--"Velo Dianae nox indicatur." Moreover, it is the symbol of modesty and chastity. [*596]

In the British Museum is an ancient terra-cotta flat bottle, having on both sides the same figure, brandishing in the right hand a sword and in the left a scabbard. All that is known of it is that it was purchased at the Durand sale, described in the "Cabinet Durand," by De Witte, Paris 1836, No. 1550. It is called a Scylla, but on what grounds we are not told. Fig. 179 is from a rough sketch by the writer, but it is sufficient to suggest the general resemblance of this figure to the Proserpines upon the Diana statues and upon the Neapolitan amulets. The two dogs are true Diana symbols, but there is no sign of a crown. One striking feature is in common: the dolphins on the water-bottle are matched by the dolphin alongside the

[p. 367]

[paragraph continues] Proserpine on Fig. 175. In any case the coincidence is strange, and does not appear to have been noticed before. [*597]

The same conception of the double sea-horse, combined with fish tails, is apparent in the Durand

Click to enlarge
FIG. 179.

bottle, though the twist is not in the same direction as that invariably seen in the Abraxas and in the Sirens (Figs. 166, 167).

Considering how much these charms vary, and the singular individuality there is in all of them, notwithstanding the very rough work of Neapolitan silversmiths, it is yet remarkable that they should all be so true to their respective types. It cannot therefore be surprising that after all these centuries the modern charm should not have developed

[p. 368]

a far greater divergence, and that it still keeps so near to its prototypes on the Greek vases of two thousand years ago. Such divergences as there are, doubtless arise from their having had to pass through the mill of the Gnostic influence, whereby they adopted new forms without, however, departing from their own types. The bells upon these various objects are all much alike, and of one conventional kind. So indeed are the bells upon our children's corals, and strangely ours are always of the same special pattern and size as these Neapolitan ones; but stranger still, on the walls of Medinet Habou are these same little bells upon the personified crux ansata, Fig. 127. Are these mere coincidences? Is it also a coincidence that the coral we use was also an ancient protective amulet for children, and that we have it always mounted with silver? Is it also mere coincidence that two of the sirens shown on Fig. 166 end in whistles like our baby's toy? [*598]

We cannot explain the exact likeness in the little bells between those on our baby's amulet and on that of the ancient Egyptians or modern Neapolitans; still the peculiar shape remains the same from the time of Ptolemy X. and during all the eighteen centuries since Pliny wrote. The little bells of brass seen upon horses are different: in shape they are mostly globular. "Le son de l'airain" was

[p. 369]

thought to have a prophylactic virtue. Little bells of this metal were employed in certain rites, but also worn as amulets. They are often suspended to the phallus. [*599]

We omitted to refer to one of the amulets upon the Naples cab horses on Fig. 83, the man in a boat. This is said to be Osiris, the Nile, or water, by which the sun fertilises and nourishes the earth. The old confusion between the several deities here appears again; for Horus is also depicted as sitting on a lotus (his usual representation), and also in a boat. He also is a sun-god, 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 180
 and as much confounded with his father Osiris as is Demeter with her daughter Persephone. Fig. 180 represents Horus [*600] on a lotus, holding the whip of sovereignty in his left hand, with his right as usual raised towards his lips in token of silence. Above are the regular Gnostic symbols, (the Turkish) sun and moon. His boat is the sacred baris, terminating at the prow in the head of an eagle or vulture, and at the stern in that of a bull-both symbols of the sun.

All these latter accessories do not appear on the Neapolitan horse charm, but the idea is the same. Of course the capo di bove is the old favourite, repeated all round the tomb of Cecilia Metella, the Cortona lamp, and in two rows of three each on the statue of Diana (Fig. 69), where they are flanked by dragons and griffins, which were sacred to

[p. 370]

her. [*601] Even these latter are compounded creatures, and so represent double attributes, all pointing to the sun: the dragon or flying serpent with a lion's head, and the griffin or lion with vulture's head and claws. The serpent is here supposed to represent the inner senses and the quickened understanding. [*602] The bee is specially sacred to Diana and Ceres. It is the symbol of virginity, as testified by many ancient authorities. [*603] Our custom of beating kettles, ringing bells, and making other noises to cause swarming bees to settle, is not a modern one. Varro (De re rust. iii.) says: "Who does not know that dispersed and wandering bees may be got to one place by cymbals and rattles (plausibus)?" [*604]

Among symbolic amulets are some very remarkable objects which have hitherto met with rather limited attention.

One of these Jahn (p. 52) calls a wonderful monument and, moreover, a distinct amulet. It is a terra-cotta plaque, circular in shape, with a sort of handle projection on one side. It is like a very shallow bowl with a flat rim round the edge, within which are huddled together a number of very remarkable objects. This one is now to be seen in the British Museum (Fig. 181). The drawing reduced from Jahn's book is by no means satisfactory, yet it is for our purpose much clearer than a photograph. The plaque came to the

[p. 371]

[paragraph continues] Museum by the bequest of Sir W. Temple, who described it as found at Pozzuoli. Jahn says his illustration is one-third of the original size, but the plate itself does not exceed six inches in diameter. The purpose of this terra cotta, besides serving for a very compound amulet, is not referred to by Jahn, although tablets of this character cannot have been

Click to enlarge
FIG. 181.

uncommon in classic times; for we read of another found in Amyklai, described by Aberdeen in Walpole's Memoirs, p. 452. Moreover, there is in the Ashmolean Museum a complete specimen with a portion of another, brought by Mr. A. Evans from Taranto.

All these seem to have a projection by way of handle. Fig. 182 represents the Oxford disc.

[p. 372]

[paragraph continues] Fig. 183 is in the Naples Museum, and there is another in Berlin. Comparison of these illustrations will convince the I reader that, whatever their purpose may have been, they generally convey the same idea, and are as much alike as any of the examples of the ancient Mano Pantea or of the modern Cimaruta. The material is the same, and

Click to enlarge
FIG. 182.--From Photogravure in Mr. A. Evans's Tarentine Terra Cottas.

the size, about 5 inches in diameter, is nearly alike in all: the various objects represented upon them all are not raised but rather deeply sunk.

A glance is sufficient to show that many of the objects represented are the same in each, though their position upon the respective plaques varies. In the London and Naples tablets they seem to be arranged in lines vertically, and more or less horizontally; in the

[p. 373]

[paragraph continues] Oxford one they seem to be divided into four segments, with a number of the articles ranged round the circumference, the rest being roughly radiated from the centre. Moreover, the latter tablet has a hole, apparently for suspension, which the British Museum one has not.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 183.--From Bull. Archeol. Napolet. No. 120, 1857.

On the top of Figs. 181 and 183 we see our old friends the sun and the moon very distinctly. In the other, both are also represented, but in different positions. The three upright objects between the sun and moon in Fig. 181 appear likewise in all the tablets. Jahn says he does not know what they are.

[p. 374]

[paragraph continues] Mr. Evans says they are distaffs, and that a fourth, a larger one, is also there. [*604a] We presume he means the horizontal object alongside--these distaffs, he says, are wound round with wool. There is a large upright object beneath the ladder in the British Museum tablet which Jahn does not refer to, but which Minervini says is an acorn. In the middle of the next row, above the ladder, is a head over an object like an ambos. Neither of these can be identified on the Oxford tablet, although Mr. Evans seems to see in it the "head of a nymph." In each tablet is seen a pair of Amphorae, or Canthari; and again we are reminded of the Cantharus upon both our examples of the Mano Pantea. These represent, we are told, the Dioscuri (Castor and Pollux). On either side of these is a sheep, but there is nothing to match them in the Oxford or Naples tablets. This animal, however, closely resembles that upon the modern bone amulet from Sienna (see Fig. 112). In front of one sheep at the top of the ladder is, according to Jahn, an oval thing which may be a mussel. On the Oxford tablet is something like it on the right of the distaffs. In the next row is a round object in the centre, which Jahn cannot explain. Then come the club and the trident-the latter very plain on all the plates. The ladder is plain on all, and Jahn says between the torch and ladder is a two-pronged fork (Zweizack), and that this is an attribute of Hades. The lyre and bow appear on all, and next the lyre (on the left) what he thinks is meant for a pair of cymbals. The open hand is plain on all; the right hand in two, and left

[p. 375]

in the other. To the right of the lyre is a leaf, the meaning of which, Jahn says, is not clear, but it is surely the phallic fig-leaf. The pincers are distinct on all, as they are upon the nail, Fig. 159. One other object, common to all the tablets, which neither Jahn nor Mr. Evans attempts to explain, is the oblong slab with twelve square holes in regular lines. Three flat discs, on all the plates, Mr. Evans thinks may be coins, but three similar discs are upon the table on the hand, Fig; 156, apparently as an offering to Serapis. There are, besides these, several objects upon the Oxford tablet not to be found upon those of the British Museum or Naples. First, the upright column above the crescent, which Mr. Evans calls the club of Herakles, we submit is much too important an object upon this combination of attributes to be the symbol of either of the lesser gods. It is suggested that this may be one of the pillars of Hermes on which that god engraved all knowledge. [*605]The objection to this is that the caduceus has already typified him. Still there may be two symbols like the sun and thunderbolt for the same god. Again, there is a bird, but hardly a dove; [*605a] it would rather be intended for a cock or an eagle. The object near the bird, called a lover's knot by Mr. Evans, is, we suggest, much more probably a scorpion. The "curved object" is manifestly the same as Jahn calls a Fullhorn, but it rather represents a scythe or sickle; which of them is the tunny or the grapes which Mr. Evans sees we cannot explain.

Jahn finishes his description of Fig. 181 with the

[p. 376]

remark that "surely are distinguishable over and above the stars, the symbols of Zeus, Poseidon, Hermes, Herakles, Apollo, Artemis, Hephaistos, perhaps of Pluto and of Demeter: the cymbals may typify Dionysos or other orgiastic deities; the cornucopia Tyche (Fortuna)." The well-known symbols of various deities here brought together make it pretty evident that the rest, which we cannot identify, all belong to the same category, and are grouped here for a like purpose. Upon the general aspect of these tablets Mr. Evans points out that their wheel-like character renders it highly probable that they were used for stamping cakes in use on various religious occasions. The segmental division certainly recalls the cakes still to be seen in the Pompeian room at Naples, and the same thing appears on the cakes set before the "three men" by Abraham (Fig. 116), from the early Ravenna mosaics. Loaves or cakes so marked are still sold in the streets and markets of Naples, while our own hot-cross buns perpetuate the same form, though now under a Christian guise.

It is much to be desired that the British Museum authorities would have a cast made from the plaque in their possession (Fig. 181), for it, like all the other similar tablets, is an unmistakable mould. Examination of the convex casts placed alongside the mould (Fig. 182) in the Ashmolean, and of a fragment of another in the same case with it, shows much more distinctly what the objects are intended to represent, than can be determined when one only looks at the concave mould. Another matter of interest is, that the fragment at Oxford is an exact duplicate of the plaque in the British Museum

[p. 377]

[paragraph continues] (Fig. 181), and is broken in a line from about the centre of the ladder, passing through the lyre to the centre of the three discs, and preserves the objects above that line. The cast makes clear several objects which Jahn evidently did not understand in the perfect plaque of Sir W. Temple. It is remarkable that duplicate moulds, identical in pattern and in shape, should have been found at Pozzuoli and Taranto. The Naples example is both clearer and sharper, as well as in much better preservation than the others. The engraving published in the Bullettino Archeologico Napoletano, No. 120, 1857, from which we take Fig. 183, has been badly copied in Daremberg (p. 256), but without acknowledgment.

We also give here a copy (Fig. 184) of a terra-cotta lamp from the collection of Signor Barone, also published in the Bullettino Archeologico Napoletano, vol. iii. p. 182, Tav. VII. Another plaque of the same kind is at Berlin, too indistinct and wanting in definiteness to be worth reproduction, yet a large number of the objects can be readily made out, and are common to all the others here shown. In the arrangement of objects it matches Fig. 182, particularly in the division into four segments; but in this Berlin plaque is one very noticeable and remarkable point--it has a border almost identical in pattern, if not actually the same, as that shown on the lamp, Fig. 184. Attention is particularly invited to this, inasmuch as we hope by these drawings to prove what was the object of these terra cottas. A mere glance at the three cuts, really representing five distinct moulds, is sufficient to prove that the purpose is the same in all, and that the majority of the objects represented upon them are identical, and therefore must

[p. 378]

all symbolise the same ideas or persons. Besides these, there is, another plate of the like kind in the Louvre, which however the writer has not seen. The greater plainness of the objects upon Fig. 184,

Click to enlarge
FIG. 184.

together with their proper convex forms in the casts at Oxford, and a general comparison of all together, enable us to correct Jahn, and to determine what certain obscure objects are in each of the moulds. Minervini (Editor of the Bullettino) writing on Fig. 183, remarks upon the great similarity between this and Jahn's plaque (Fig. 181). He insists that

[p. 379]

the whole is an amulet symbolising many divinities; that a horizontal line through the centre of each of these plates passes through a series of identical objects.

Minervini says that the open hand has not been sufficiently considered by Jahn; that it seems to point upward to the numerous symbols depicted above it; that he considers these hands to be of the same meaning as those Jahn calls votive hands, here dealt with in the chapter on the Mano Pantea.

Beginning on the left, he compares the two seriatim. The ladder, he remarks, is doubtful in its meaning to Jahn, but we see in both plaques the symbols of the twelve great gods. Ceres however is wanting, whereas on Barone's lamp she is represented by the ear of corn; and he maintains that what seems to be a ladder is arnese di tessere, i.e. a loom, and that it represents Ceres in all cases. In every one of the moulds seen by the writer there is the ladder unmistakable.

The next symbol, he says, is a lighted torch with the flame turned to the left. This, Jahn says, is a two-pronged fork; but he is surely wrong, for that would mean nothing.

On Fig. 181 is a nondescript object above the ladder, corresponding in position to what Minervini calls a flame. Now, as in the Ashmolean plaque there is an undoubted torch, we think that in both moulds a torch with flame turned to the left comes next the ladder, and that it represents Vesta; so asserts Minervini. On the lamp we see the torch most distinctly. Next comes a scabbard, which Jahn took for the torch. It is very plain, and shows the ring by which it is attached to the belt (balteo) on Fig. 183. This

[p. 380]

is for Mars. The scabbard is shown on the lamp, and is probably intended by one of the objects upon the Mano Pantea which we could not explain. Minervini in one of his articles calls this a quiver (turcasso), but corrects himself afterwards. The thunderbolt appears in all the plaques, and needs no explanation. On the lamp it is superseded by the eagle.

Next, according to Minervini, is the patera in the centre, representing Juno. In the cast of the fragment at Oxford this centre is marked distinctly with a cross, which seems to point to its being an offering cake.

Next comes the caduceus of Mercury, plain on all the plaques, and also on the Barone lamp. The trident of Neptune is on all the moulds, but on the lamp he is represented by a dolphin.

Next is the club of Hercules, followed by an object which is not easily explained. On Figs. 181, 183, between the caduceus and trident, there is in each what Minervini says unhesitatingly is a knife in the latter; and if this be so, it is doubtless a knife in the other. In the B.M. tablet (Fig. 181) is a large double object next the trident. We believe this to represent the two separated objects in Fig. 183, which are the club and possibly, as suggested by Minervini, a distaff simply, or a distaff filled with wool (conocchia o pennecchio). Against this, however, his own argument respecting another of the objects tells with some force. Speaking of the cymbals, he refutes Jahn's opinion, and says it is impossible to suppose two symbols of the same deity upon one monument. Now, as Mr. Evans says that the three upright objects found on all three

[p. 381]

of our plaques represent three distaffs, and also that another object on his (Fig. 182), near the ladder, is a large distaff, it is very difficult to reconcile authorities. [*605b] The three objects referred to have every appearance in Mr. Evans's cast of being rather three spools or bobbins, for the winding of the thread is distinct upon them, and therefore I should say they represent the three Fates. But I can offer no opinion as to the larger object, also said to be a distaff.

In all three moulds, and also on the lamp, are found the tongs or pincers of Pluto or rather Vulcan. Minervini says that he believes these to represent the shears of the Fates rather than the tongs of Pluto; but here again he is inconsistent with his own dictum. He says he cannot attempt to explain the obscure article near (i.e. below) the telajo (loom) of Ceres. Whatever this may be, there is the same nondescript at the foot of the ladder in all three plaques. Jahn calls this a shell, but in his mould (Fig. 181) it appears more like an acorn. I would suggest rather that in each case this object is meant for a pine-cone; the same symbol is found upon the lamp and on the hand, Figs. 156, 157. Minervini believes the object called a fig-leaf by Jahn, close to the lyre (Fig. 181), to be the same as that on Fig. 183, between the tongs and the moon. This he thinks to be a bunch of grapes for Dionysos--a bunch of grapes certainly

[p. 382]

appears on the lamp. He wildly asserts that the three objects between the vases, which are certainly more like reels of yarn, are three masses of incense, and that they recall the well-known verse of Ovid:--

	 
		"Et digitis Tria Tura tribus sub limine ponit."
		
		 He says this is proved by the adoption in some rites of three lumps (grani) of incense. This, to the present writer, seems far fetched.

The three discs near the trident are very evident in Figs. 181-183; and in Mr Evans's cast from Fig. 182, the object at the top of the caduceus is very unmistakably intended also for them though obscure on the mould. They represent the three sacrificial loaves doubtless the same as are on the hand, Fig. 156. It is a coincidence to be noted that upon the table spread by Abraham (Fig. 116) we see the same number of round cakes, each, too, marked with a cross. Near the lyre on Fig. 183 is a bird, which Minervini says is certainly the Iynx, or dove of Venus. A bird also appears plainly on the Oxford cast, and also on the lamp.

The undoubted owl upon the Naples plaque of course means Minerva. Upon this Minervini says that the same position in Jahn's drawing is occupied by a head over an anvil, but that this is a modern restoration! It is certainly very indistinct, and the head may be a creation of Jahn's draughtsman; but on the other hand there is a head upon the lamp, and also we find a head upon the Isiac tablet from Pignorius (Fig. 185). It has been suggested that one of the obscure objects on the Ashmolean mould may represent a head. Minervini believes that the head in Fig. 181 is really an owl, and the anvil its tail.

[p. 383]

Near the hand beneath the bird, is the strigil accompanied by the vase of oil, "or rather the xistrolecilo, a well-known symbol of bath and palestra." These are called strigil and guttus in Smith's Dictionary of Antiquities. The square tablet in all the plaques is, according to Minervini, a tabella representing athletic laws of the gymnasium and palestra. I prefer to follow the example of Jahn and Evans, by saying I do not know what it is. On comparing them together no candid reader

Click to enlarge
FIG. 185.

will deny that all these moulds were certainly intended for the same purpose, particularly as duplicates were found so far apart as Pozzuoli and Taranto.

Although very different in the general arrangement of the objects represented upon it, yet the lamp shows so much resemblance, and it has so many symbols belonging to the other combinations, that it is but reasonable to consider them upon the lamp as representing the same ideas or cult as upon the plaques. In the centre is a winged

[p. 384]

female seated, whom we may take to be a divinity, surrounded by so many symbols that she seems to be intended for Fortuna Pantea, who is called upon a Roman monument FORTVN : OMNIVM . GENT . ET . DEOR. In her left hand she holds a cornucopia, from which appear flowers and grapes. In her right she holds a patera, which she is presenting to a serpent twined round an altar of offerings. At the top is a beardless head, enclosed in an ornament like a crescent. Beneath the crescent is a wheel-like object mounted on something unknown, but the whole strikingly suggestive of the Ashantee crescents (Fig. 88); and we may fairly explain the whole as the sun and moon. We see also the eagle; the Dolphin; [*606] the scabbard, or, as Minervini calls it, the quiver; the club; the sistrum of Isis; the lyre; the tongs (these are no shears); the caduceus; the thyrsus of Bacchus, having the pine-cone at the top; the cymbals of Cybele, Bacchus, and Juno, suspended to the "pomegranates of Proserpine," and near them the ear of corn of Ceres. There is a second serpent, Agathodemon, often seen in connection with Fortuna, [*607] which is climbing up behind and looking over her shoulder, much in the same position as that on the hand (Fig. 157), whereon again two serpents are represented.

Presuming that the illustrations, here brought together for the first time, have been duly examined and compared, we must now try to ascertain the true object of the moulds represented by three of them.

[p. 385]

Heydemann, writing in the Gazette Archeologique, 1883, p. 7, quotes Lenormant as of opinion that they are intended for the making of mirrors in bronze. M. Albert Dumont and M. Robert de Lasteyrie support this opinion, while M. Henzey says they have served to mark the religious impression upon sacrificial cakes. Mr. Arthur Evans assumes this to be an unquestioned fact, as he simply calls them "moulds for sacred cakes." He says later (p. 49) that it seems "highly probable" that this was their purpose. Heydemann disagrees with both these opinions, and supports Jahn in the contention that they belong to the class apotropaia, that is of prophylactic amulets; and he goes on to compare the various specimens of moulds known to him, but not including those now at Oxford, and gives to some of the objects an explanation differing from any yet noted: for instance, he finds a thimble, a rosette, a key, a wing, a lizard, etc., but admits that the objects are often very indistinct. After disputing several contentions of Minervini, he points out that in every case there is an umbilicus, round which the symbols are placed. In this last belief the writer fully agrees with him; at the same time it is evident Heydemann is not a careful observer, for he asserts that the plaque of Sir W. Temple (Fig. 181) and that of Mongelli at Naples (Fig. 183) are certainly from the same model. It has been stated that the Berlin terra cotta (published in the Gazette Archeologique) in general arrangement resembles that at Oxford (Fig. 182), but in addition there is a border with a pattern like that on the Barone lamp. Moreover, this lamp is of almost the exact size of all the known terracotta moulds of this sort, while of course the figures

[p. 386]

upon the Barone and all other lamps are raised by having been shaped in a concave mould. Looking then at the great demand there must have been for lamps of all kinds, and at the peculiar and exactly similar shapes of these moulds found in various places to that of the lamp, Fig. 184; looking also to the fact that lamps so frequently bore objects upon them which were obviously intended as amulets; we have little hesitation in setting aside all the other theories advanced, and maintaining that these were the moulds with which the potter shaped the top of the peculiar flat-shaped lamp shown on Fig. 184. In the specimen we have, there is a round hole just below Fortuna's arm, to pour in the oil. In forming a lamp from the other moulds, the maker would cut a round hole in the soft clay just in the centre, at the spot where in each mould there is left a suitable umbilicus. There is no evidence whatever that the sacrificial cakes bore any such devices as are upon these plaques. , the symbols are so small that in a material like dough they would have simply appeared as shapeless, meaningless excrescences, whereas the plaster cast at Oxford shows that in a fine material like terra cotta each symbol comes out in convex form, distinct and fairly sharp, merely requiring the ordinary hand trimming to make it as clear and distinct as the representations upon the many lamps in our museums, and especially on that of Barone at Naples. The border pattern upon the Berlin mould completely destroys the sacred cake theory. The plain border round our Oxford, Naples, and British Museum specimens, would be pared off by the workman in fitting the soft top on to the body of the lamp.

[p. 387]

[paragraph continues] It is of course possible that bronze also may have been cast in these moulds, for the many specimens of the Mano Pantea are all cast in a mould of some sort, and the symbols upon them have been dressed and trimmed afterwards, just as the statuettes of bronze or of terra cotta have been finished up after being cast. These things could no more have been used for sacred cakes than the other moulds exhibited alongside them at Oxford-from which ornamental plaques, statuettes, and other artistic objects have been made.

The lamps they were intended to shape were of the commonest form, and lent themselves conveniently to the collocation of a number of symbols such as are found on these moulds, as well as upon many lamps. We submit they were intended, in the same way as the more costly bronze hands, to display constantly an assemblage of amulets in a cheap material analogous to the wax ex votos now seen in churches, as compared with the very same objects often alongside them in more costly silver.

Somewhat allied to the remarkable terra-cotta plates we have been discussing is the curious tablet illustrated in Pignorius, [*608] of which Fig. 185 is a copy. Many of the objects drawn upon it are very obscure, yet amongst them are some we recognise as old acquaintances; and there can be little doubt of the whole being a protective amulet against the evil eye, and that it is a veritable Mensa Isiaca. The head probably represents a skull, or possibly it may be the same person as the bust in Fig. 181. Over it is the mystic eye. The triangle, whether with base or apex downward, is a well-

[p. 388]

known phallic symbol. Both occur upon this plate. The typical hoe or plough shown upon Egyptian ushebtiu (Figs. 1, 2) and in the hands of Isis, Fig. 172, with more than one crux ansata, and two arms with hands palm tip, are all very plain.

Footnotes

^343:566 These remarks apply equally to the Mano Pantea, respecting which there is a hiatus of eighteen or twenty centuries between the hands herein described and the present day.

^343:566a See Fig. 81, p. 203.

^344:566b The Cimaruta, being always of silver, has probably when worn out been treated as bullion, and if so its absence is accounted for.

^345:567 Naples in 1888, p. 116.

^346:568 Pliny, Nat. Hist. xix. 45 (Bohn, vol. iv. pp. 192, 252, 256).

^346:569

	 
		  Molto men, che l' erba ruta
		   O l' ortic' acut' acuta
		   Facci' a voi venir le carte
		   Con guadagno d' ogni parte;
		   L' o' provat' e sono stato
		   Tutto quanto sbaragliato.
		 Marugi, Capricci sulla Jettatura, Napoli, 1815, p. 107.
		
		 On this the Editor remarks in a note: "This is the common belief about rue, but I have found no good in it. I have read in the Trino Magico that he who keeps the ortica along with the millefoil is secure against incantation, I know nothing of it."

^347:570 There are various opinions as to the reason for calling it the "herb of grace." One is apparently formed upon Shakespeare's use of the word in Hamlet (Act iv. Sc. 5): "We may call it herb-grace o' Sundays"; that "it was used on Sundays by the Romanists in their exorcisms" (Brand, vol. iii. p. 315); but there is no evidence of this, and Shakespeare uses the term several times without any reference to Sundays.

	 
		. . . Here in this place
		 I'll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace
		 Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen,
		 In the remembrance of a weeping queen,
		                                   (Richard II. Act iii. Sc. 4)
		
		 has hardly a Sunday flavour. The notion that rue was the "bitter herb" with which the Passover was to be eaten as a sign of repentance seems but little better.

The quotation from Bishop Taylor, in Webster, as to "trying the devil with holy water," or in Johnson, from Miller, "An herb of grace, because holy water was sprinkled with it," are equally unsatisfactory; and until something better is found by Dr. Murray for the N.E.D. we must leave the question amongst our insoluta.

^347:571 "Rutam fascini amuletum esse tradit Aristoteles."--Wierus, De Praestigiis Daemonum, lib. v. cap. xxi. col. 584.

^348:572

	 
		"Montium custos nemorumque, virgo,
		 Quae laborantes utero puellas
		 Ter vocata audis, adimisque letho,
		         Diva triformis."
		               Horace, Ode III. xxii. (not Ode xxiii. as quoted by Potter).
		
		 
		
		 

^348:573 Potter, ii. 317. Fig. 163 of Diana Triformis is from Jahn, p. 87. Apart from its illustrating the same idea that we see so constantly carried out in Indian statues--several heads and arms upon one body--it shows a quaint custom of ancient Rome, where, as the inscriptions show, they used to set up figures of the gods in places not to be desecrated or polluted: in fact to answer the same purpose as the modern police notices in London or Paris. Besides the inscription on the base of the panel here shown, Juvenal records another: "Ad cujus effigiem non tantum meiere fas est." The Romans appealed to religion to enforce sanitation.

^349:574 Montfaucon, vol. i. p. 92.

^350:575 Montfaucon, vol. i. p. 94.

^350:576 Horace, Carmen Saeculare, l. 15.

^350:577 In the confusion of the various deities, many of the most opposite qualities have been ascribed to one and the same personality, until all individuality may be said to have been completely lost. We read (Symbolica Dianae Ephesiae, p. 19): "Isidis, Cereris, Dianae, et Cybeles attributa Lunae etiam adscribi." And again: "Hecate porro Diana, Luna, et Proserpina a Festo et Diodoro Siculo pro uno eodemque numine accipiuntur. Exinde Diana triformis fingebatur." Virgil (Aen. iv, 5, 11) also writes:--

	 
		"Tergeminamque Hecaten, tria virginis ora Dianae."
		
		 [paragraph continues] "Diana had also the name of Trivia, by reason of the power she had over all ways" (Montfaucon, vol. i. p. 16). This view would give another explanation to the three diverging branches of the Cimaruta.

^350:578 Acts xix. 24. We may note en passant that the passage translated [p. 351] (ver. 35) "image which fell down from Jupiter," is in Wiclif's and the Rheims versions "child of Jupiter."

^351:579 Upon Diana in her Moon character, see Lobeck, Aglaophamus, pp. 72, 1062.

^351:580 The amulet (Fig. 164) here produced is a late example of the classic fascinum. It is from Pignorius (Vetustissimae Tabulae Aeneae, Venetiis, 1605, p. 16 in dorso).

"Hinc Neurospasta apud Lucianum, et remedium, praebiave in collo pueris res turpicula, Fascinus videlicet, quem infantium custodem appellas Plinius, hujus amuleti speciem ex aere, lapide lazuli, corallo, et chrystallo; hic damus in gratiam eruditi lectoris."

^351:581 Besides being associated with Diana, the serpent was an attribute of another goddess. Minerva or Athena is represented as accompanied by a serpent. "The Tower of Athens, which was guarded by a serpent . . . this serpent which guarded the house stood by the door" (Montfaucon, vol. i. p. 85). This completely accords with what we have remarked as to the serpent being placed at the entrances of tombs and temples; but on the Cimaruta as an infant's amulet the serpent has more probably to do with health than with the guardianship of doors, although, as we shall see immediately, even in that respect it typified Diana. Hygeia, the goddess of health, is represented as sitting on a rock with a serpent coiled in her lap, [p. 352] opening its mouth to seize a pot of ointment in her left hand (Montfaucon, Vol. i. p. 181).

^352:582 Payne Knight, Symb. Lang. p. 30.

^352:583 Montfaucon, vol. i. p. 94.

^352:584 Diana, in her alternative name Jana, presided over the doors and thresholds of all houses. "Nigidius assures us that Apollo is Janus, and Diana, Jana; and that the key is their proper attribute" (Montfaucon, Vol. i. p. 16). In one of her three forms she holds a key in her hand.

^353:585 Rolfe, Naples in 1888, p. 118.

^353:585a Handbook of Gems, p. 95.

^353:586 Wilkinson, Anc. Egypt. vol. iii. p. 320.

^353:587 It is the general opinion that the Sun, Serapis, Mithras, Dis, Typhon, [p. 354] Attis, Ammon, and Adonis were one and the same god (Montfaucon, Vol. i. p. 10). To these we must certainly add the Gnostic god Abraxas, and hence the cock may symbolise any one of them.

^354:588 Nat. Hist. viii. 20 (Vol. ii. p. 269, Bohn).See also Ib. p. 496.

^355:589 In addition to Isis and her descendants, the lotus is sacred to Lateshmi, who, as the partner of Vishnu, is the goddess of prosperity, or the Indian Abundantia. The flower in Egyptian mythology was also sacred to Horns, who is very commonly represented seated on a lotus. In King's Gems this is quite a favourite subject, also in Abraxas, etc.

The lotus was also the symbol of the Roman Ceres, the corn goddess, the type of plenty. Lotus-seeds were mixed along with wheat-ears in the cornucopia of Amalthea, the she-goat, the very emblem of abundance.

^355:589a Probably there are other charms to be found in specimens not seen by the writer. It is, however, curious that those recognised should be precisely thirteen in number--an undesigned coincidence, but naturally connecting itself with the number, on which we remark in Chap. XI.

^358:590 Montfaucon, vol. i. p. 245.

^358:591 Les Sirenes, ou Discours sur leurs forme et figure, Paris, 1691, p. 65. "Anciennes medailles, qui sont les monuments les plus surs et les moins suspects" (Ib. p. 60). "On y remarque, outre les ailes, les pieds et les jambes d'un Cocq attribuez aux Sirenes par la plupart des anciens auteurs, quoique d'autres disent que les Sirenes avoient la partie inferieure de Passereaux" (Ib. p. 66).

^359:592 As to the mere word Siren, the meaning is not of much consequence, for women's long, trailing skirts were formerly called Sirens. A horrible, discordant instrument giving a warning hoot from a lightship is called a Siren. The frog amulet in Naples is called a Siren: "Nos toiles de soie . . . si fines et si diaphanes, q'a peine les voyoit-on sur le nud, sont appellees Syrenes par Hesychius" (Les Sirenes, Paris, 1691, p. 48).

^359:593 In Tabula Bembina sive Mensa Isiaca, by Dr. W. Wynn Westcott, [p. 360] 1887, is the same bird with woman's face as the attribute of Isis herself--not of Hathor as in Fig. 171.

^365:594 Symbolica Dianae Ephesiae. Romae: Typis Mascardi, 1657, p. 25. Kindly lent by a friend.

^365:595 One would like to know if the little groups of similar figures in blue enamel in the British Museum from Sardinia, or the like in the Ashmolean, and elsewhere, from Egypt, can be in any way connected with those on the Diana statues.

^366:596 Symbolica Dianae, pp. 20, 21.

^367:597 A similar female figure, ending in two fishes' tails and with the forequarters of two dogs of precisely the same character as those on Fig. 179, is in Bull. Arch. Nap. An. VII. Tav. II.

^368:598 The god Fascinus "was identical with Mutinus or Tutinus, and was worshipped under the form of a phallus. . . . As the guardian of infants, his peculiar form is still unconsciously represented in the shape of the coral bauble with which infants are aided in cutting their teeth" (Bostock, note to Pliny, Nat. Hist. V. 290, Bohn).

Pliny says: "Branches of coral hung at the necks of infants are thought to act as a preservative against danger" (Nat. Hist. xxxii. ii. vol. vi. p. 12, Bohn).

^369:599 Daremberg et Saglio, p. 258.

^369:600 From King's Gnostics, p. 205, Many similar figures are given in Abraxas.

^370:601 Symbolica Diana, pp. 38, 39.

^370:602 King, Gnostics, p. 35.

^370:603 Symb. Dian. pp. 44, 45.

^370:604 Claudianus also sang (Symb. Dian. p. 47)--

	 
		                     "qualis Cybeleia quassans
		 Hyblaeus procul aera senex, revocare fugaces
		 Tinnitu conatur Apes."
		
		 The bee will be seen upon the Mano Pantea (Fig. 157), and upon the gems, Figs. 17, 28, as well as on Diana, Fig. 69.

^374:604a Recent Discoveries of Tarentine Terra Cottas, p. 45 (from Journ. of Hellenic Studies, 1886).

^375:605 King, Gnostics, p. 208.

^375:605a A. J. Evans, op. cit. p. 46.

^381:605b Minervini's opinion is not supported by evidence. We see on the Mano Pantea and on the Cimaruta the same deity typified by two different symbols. Moreover, on the gem, Fig. 17, the same symbol, the bee, is repeated twice over. Again, on the week-day gem (Fig. 19) every one of the symbols may be construed to represent one or other of two deities only. See also the sacred baris (Fig. 180), and Diana (Fig. 69).

^384:606 On the dolphin as a symbol of Neptune see Muller, Handbuch,  section 398, p. 645, Ed. Welcher.

^384:607 On this see Gerhard, Agathodaemon und Bona Dea, p. 18 sq.

^387:608 See also Inman, Anc. Faiths, vol. i. p. 108.

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 389]

 

CHAPTER XI

 

CABALISTIC WRITING--MAGICAL FORMULAe

FROM the protective amulets, specially intended to attract and baffle the evil eye by being worn on the person, or otherwise conspicuously displayed, we pass to another class of protectives, depending for their potency not upon symbolism so much as upon direct invocation of those powers or deities, typified by the various symbols, we have been considering. Of this class there are two distinct kinds: first, the written formulae of many sorts; and next, the spoken words or actions, all tending to the same end. Both kinds, moreover, may be either concealed from view and hearing, or openly displayed.

Of the former, of course, the well-known Jewish phylacteries are the most obvious examples. Their virtue was supposed to rest in the written words shut up in the little leather case; their Hebrew name was tephillim, but the name, by which we know them in the New Testament sufficiently proves that they were amulets. [*609]

On Turkish horses and Arab camels at this day are hung little bags wherein are passages from the Koran; on Neapolitan horses, too, besides all the

[p. 390]

hands, horns, and wolf skin, is very frequently a little canvas bag, containing a prayer to the Madonna, or a verse of Scripture, but always with the same end in view--the jettatore must be countercharmed, in case the ostensible amulets should fail.

Through the kindness of Mrs. Charles Elton we are able to present a facsimile of a true phylactery from Abyssinia, where such things are common at the present day. The language of this charm, though Amharic, "is not the vernacular, but wholly that of the sacred books, called by the people Geez." At the present time no Ethiopic scholar in Europe reads it, and I am fortunate in having at last found a translator. The full transcription and glossed translation here given are the work of the Rev. R. Weakley of Alexandria, in whose service is a native Ethiopic "debterah" or scribe. This man read it easily, and dictated to Mr. Weakley, who has thus rendered it into English. It appears that these charms are quite common, and there is a class of disreputable men in Abyssinia who get their living by concocting and writing them for their ignorant countrymen.

Mr. Weakley has added some very valuable notes, which reader the whole much more intelligible, and the present writer desires fully to admit the obligation, and to express his thanks for this unique rendering into English of a most curious document--a document proving up to the hilt all the statements put forward as to the world-wide prevalence, even in these latter days, of the firm belief in the power of the evil eye. [*610] The eyes themselves

[p. 391]

 

Click to enlarge

Click to enlarge

Click to enlarge

Click to enlarge

FIG 186. ETHIOPIC CHARM AND CASE

 

appear in two places, peeping out at the beginning and at the middle of the writing.

TRANSLATION

1. Be asma^ a_ve, wa weld, wa ma^nfars ke^doos,
 In the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost,

2. Ahade^ Amilack. Salot.
 One God. Prayer.

3. Benter hamamer ba^rya_ wa a_ye_net.
 For (against) the sickness of the slave (epilepsy) and the (evil) eye.

4. Awlo-mela-el: Metowe-mela-el: Corooking. [*611]

5. Be illoo asmat
 By these names

6. Adi hinna imhemamer barya wa a_ye_net,
 Deliver her from the sickness of the slave (epilepsy) and the (evil) eye,

7. A_ye_ne sella wa a_ye_ne Za_r,
 The shadow of the eye and the eye of the Za_r, [*612]

[p. 392]

8. Aye_ne sa_ve wa ganen,
 The eye of men and demons,

9. Coorsa^t wa felta^t,
 Colic and headache,

10. Wega^t wa serkseca^t was shentema^t.
 Rending, and sharp pain, and painful micturition.

11. Ikerba lamatka welata Tekla Haimanoot. [*613]
 Keep thy servant, the daughter of Tekla Haimanoot.

12. Ave_ isa^t, weld isa^t, wa manfar ke^doos isa^t,
 The Father is fire, the Son is fire, and the Holy Ghost is fire,

13. Maisaromoo le aganat.
 The chain of the demons.

14. Betaranyou: Bejune: Cashoon: wa Veaifa-satavias
 15. Mashfatanersh: Keeyakee: Borons: Carityanos. [*614]

16. Be illoo asmat iseromoo le aganant.
 By these names chain the demons (viz. the following),

17. Baria wa Legewon, Dabas wa Jinn, Salawogi wa Fagen,
 Baria and Legewon, Dabas and Jinn, Salawogi and Fagen,

Za_r wa Nagergar: Didk wa chunafa_r:
 Za_r and Nagergar: plague and sudden sickness

18. Mitch wa Mitat; Nahavi wa goosimt:
 Sharp pain and stroke; the hunter and the toucher; [*615]

19. Tavive wa Booda: [*616] Googooha wa tigrida:
 The clever-wicked and sorcerers; choking and wild paroxysm;

[p. 393]

20. Fira wa nedad: Magua wa mansho:
 Fever and ague; fever and periodic illness.

21. Cama iyikravoo imlaila amatea Welata Tekla Haimanoot. [*617]
 Lest they approach her, (and fall) on thy servant, the daughter of Tekla Haimanoot.

22. Sloter d'ngaze megraray aganent.
 The prayer of fear to Him who rules the demons.

23. Coltekolcol, Coltekolcol, Coltekolcol, Coltekolcol, Coltekolcol, Coltekolcol, Coltekolcol. (Repetition in Sevens.)

24. Hajirji, Hajirji, Hajirji, Hajirji, Hajirji, Hajirji, Hajirji.

25. Gohajir, Gohajir, Gohajir, Gohajir, Gohajir, Gohajir, Gohajir.

26. Gorgovajir, Gorgovajir, Gorgovajir, Gorgovajir, Gorgovajir, Gorgovajir, Gorgovajir. [*618]

27. Be illoo asmat, Ikaba imdingaza aganant,
 By these names keep her from the terror of the demons,

28. Baraya wa magana, Za_r wa kurana, Algoom wa Koomana. [*619]
 still birth, evil possession, dumbness and standing sickness.

29. Adihinna, lamatika, Welata Tekla Haimanoot. [*620]
 Deliver her, thy servant, daughter of Tekla Haimanoot.

30. Wa ga_zoo zalizoom le zilmat, firha wa dangaza Dia_volos (fikat)
 Then he whose face is covered with darkness, feared and trembled; the archdevil.

31. Rigo bihooterlidat besiga Amlacka be seaol.
 When he saw the mighty one who was born in the flesh (even) God, in hell.

32. El; M'el; Jan'el; Ililfarsangana-el; M'el; Telk-el; Walil-el; Z'el; B'el; M'el. [*621]

33. Fatare samayat wa midir, Adihinnani lamatika Eon Kalloo deere taviv wa booda goorgooha wa tigrida, Welata Tekla Haimanoot.

[p. 394]

The creator of heaven and earth, deliver me, thy servant, from every ill by the evil, wicked, and sorcerer choking and paroxysm daughter of Tekla Haimanoot.

 Back of Scroll

	 
		  Continuation: there being not sufficient space below the last line on the face.
		
		 34. Isma alvo negar Zeyesano le Egziawehair.
 Nothing is impossible with God

	 
		The figures and letters after the above form a talisman, signifying in words: "Bind him! Bind him! Bind him!"
		
		 Coming back from Abyssinia to England, we subjoin to the above the following genuine recipes. They are taken from a book which belonged to the "Conjurer" referred to in note , Chap. II. p. 55:--

 A Receipt for Ill Wishing

 Take a handful of white salt in your right hand and strewe it over the Backs of all your cattle: begin at the head of the near side and go to the Tail, and from the Tail to the head up the off side, and as you let it out of your hand say these words: "As Thy servant Elisha healed the waters of Jericho by casting salt therein, so I hope to heal this my Beast: in the Name of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. Amen."

 If any Cattle is bad, do thus

 Cut a bit of hair from between the Ears, a bit from behind each Shoulder, and a bit from the Stump of the Tail, a little Blood, a Teaspoonful of Gunpowder, and put the whole into a small Bladder, and tie the top of it; then get some Green Ashen wood, and make a fire, and set it on the brand irons, and take the Bladder into your right hand, and say those words: "I confine all Evil, and all Enemies of mine and my cattle into the fire for ever, never to hurt me or mine any more for ever: in the Name of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. Amen." Then drop it into the Fire, and let it burn out. Read the first

[p. 395]

thirteen verses of the 28th chapter of Duteronomy (sic) and no more every morning before you go to see your Cattle. [*621a]

The Ethiopic and the Somerset charms are exactly contemporary. The man who used the latter was well known to the writer.

The manufacture of mystical writings is a very ancient art; so also is the teaching how to ascertain propitious days. Dies fasti and ne fasti were household words in ancient Rome. Much light is thrown on this art by a very remarkable papyrus in the British Museum (No. XLVI. Greek) of about the second century A.D. It came from Egypt, and was discovered in one of the later tombs. The magic arts practised in the early years of the Christian era, which Irenaeus, Origen, Epiphanius, and other Fathers lay to the charge of the heretics of their day, are he-rein laid bare. [*622]

Several spells are given in this document for various purposes, amongst which is one for producing an immediate vision of the god evoked by the operator. Besides the words of incantation, we are told (p. 5) "in a brazen cup with oil, anoint your right eye with water taken from a boat that has been wrecked, and the left [mixing some] Coptic stibium with the water. And if you cannot find water from a boat that has been wrecked, take some from a wicker wherry that has been submerged."

Various charms are given for discovering a thief; for driving away evil spirits; for compelling a thief

[p. 396]

to confess; but the chief interest of the papyrus lies in the following translation:--

Take a sheet of hieratic paper, or a leaden plate, and an iron ring, and place the ring upon the paper, and mark both inside and out with a pen the form of a ring. Then having described the circular outline of the ring, write upon the said outline, inscribing upon the paper the name, and the characters on the outside, and inside the thing which you wish not to happen, or that such a man's mind may be bound so as not to do such and such a thing. Then placing the ring upon its outline which you have made, and taking up the parts outside the outline, sew up the ring with thread, so as to completely conceal it, piercing through the characters with the pen, and when you wish to bind, say: "I bind such an one not to speak to such an one; let him not resist, let him not contradict, let him not be able to look me in the face, or to answer me, but let him be subject to me as long as this ring is buried. And again I bind his mind, and his senses, his desires, his actions, that he may be sluggish towards all men . . . and let not such a woman marry such a man. Common words."

Then taking it to the grave of one untimely dead, dig four fingers deep and put it in and say "O! departed spirit whosoever thou art . . . I deliver to thee such an one, that he may not do such a thing." Then having covered it up depart.--And you will do it best in the waning of the moon.--The words written within the circle are these (several lines of Greek): let such a thing not be done, as long as this ring is buried. Bind it with knots, making strings for that purpose, and thus deposit it. The ring may also be cast into a disused well, or into the grave of one untimely dead. And after the characters write also these words below the ring as a base (five lines of Greek) and the . . . spell which you also place within.

We give a facsimile (Fig. 187) of the figure to which the above refers, taken from Mr. Goodwin's paper; to this for further particulars the reader is referred. So valuable a relic of the doings of past ages ought to be well known. [*623]

Written charms of this kind, intended to cast a spell as well as to be protectives, have been found

[p. 397]

of late in several places. They were first discovered at Athens in 1811 by M. Fauvel. These latter are on leaden tablets, and are called katadesma or dirae. They professed to bind persons by name precisely

Click to enlarge
FIG. 187.

in the same manner as is done in that just described, and in the Ethiopic charm. The whole household of the man named are placed under the same spell. [*624]

Among the gems at the British Museum is a very beautiful little golden scroll, which was found rolled up in a gold case of precisely the same shape as the Ethiopian charm. It is of course very minute, being

[p. 398]

no thicker than an ordinary lead pencil, and about two inches long. [*625] It is marked Petilia.S.Italy [C. .I.5772 M.].

There does not appear to be anything which may be termed Magical in the words, but neither is there in passages from Scripture or the Koran worn at the present day. It is very difficult in most cases to perceive any connection between the actual words or figures used, and the purpose for which they are inscribed. This one is based on the ancient Orphic mysticism. [*626] The shape of the case and general conditions, however, prove it incontestably to have been a charm for the protection of the wearer.

Frommannd's book is a perfect mine of written magic spells against fascination, which in many cases 
Click to enlarge
FIG. 188
 have to be prepared with such accompaniments as white of egg mixed with oak charcoal, to be wrapped in paper having Fig. 188 upon it. A prayer is to be uttered in German gibberish, of which he says: "Sed modus hic est absurdus, impius, magicus et Diabolicus." In the same chapter he discusses the meaning of cauculator, whence German Gauckler. He inquires whence Okos Bokos? He says: "Agyrtae vocant Okos Bokos, vocabulis a vero vel ficto nomine Itali cuiusdam." [*627] He gives several

[p. 399]

versions of the well-known Abracadabra, which was amuletum insigne not only against hemitritaeum, but also against fevers and other maladies. This famous cabalistic form is of very ancient date, for even in the third century it was a traditional prescription, set out at length by Qu. Serenus Ammoniacus, [*628] physician to Gordian Junior. [*629] He directs it to be written in the form of an inverted cone, i.e. each line of repetition drops the final letter until A alone remains as the apex. Frommannd (p. 309) says that this is like the amulet of the Talmudists, worn on their necks against blindness. [*630]

Very closely allied to these writings for the protection of the living, is the remarkable custom still surviving in Russia, of placing in the hands of the dead a sort of passport to the nether-world almost precisely analogous to the "Book of the Dead" of ancient Egypt, see ante, pp. <page 50>, <page 51>.

At the burial of the late Czar we read:-- [*630a]

A prayer was chanted, described as the Prayer of Absolution. It begins with the words: "Our Lord Jesus Christ, by virtue of His divine grace, gift, and power given to His holy Disciples and Apostles to bind and loose the sins of men," and, going on to cite the text in question, prays Christ to forgive all the sins, including excommunication and others of the gravest categories, by His love for man and by the prayers of the Virgin Mary, Mother of God, of the holy Apostles, and of all saints, This prayer is not merely read, it is likewise printed on a scroll of

[p. 400]

paper, which the officiating priest places in the hands of the corpse as a document enabling him, when wandering about in the spirit world during the first few days after death, to pass on his solitary way unmolested by evil spirits.

There is abundant evidence in all lands of the value attached to certain words, usually written, though they may be merely uttered, to keep off evil from, or to bring good to, the user. The well-worn "blessed word Mesopotamia" proves that the idea survives, though allied to crass ignorance. The many Scriptural or other inscriptions upon old houses here in England, and perhaps more commonly upon the Continent, or the passages from the Koran upon the houses of Mahomedans, are much less in reality the expressions of piety than protective charms against the origin of every misfortune--the evil eye.

The first words of the Gospel of St. John in any of the Aryan languages have always been held of great virtue when carried on the person. These should be written upon virgin parchment, enclosed in a goose quill, an hour before sunrise on the first Sunday in the year. [*631]

Brand (iii. 319) gives a number of similar inscriptions, which were called Characts, but the real collector of them must go to Frommannd or Delrio. The former quotes Voetius, who says that the beginning of the fourth Gospel was worn as an amulet from the times of the Apostles themselves.

For the bite of a mad dog the following words are to be written upon the crust of a loaf, which, transfixo pollice, is to be applied three several

[p. 401]

times. The performer is to repeat the Lord's Prayer five times for the five wounds of Christ, etc. [*632]

  S  A  T  O  R 
  A  R  E  P  O 
  T  E  N  E  T 
  O  P  E  R  A 
  R  O  T  A  S 
  

[paragraph continues] For the mad dog's bite, also: "Haec verba pani azymo inscripta, Affra, Gaffra, Gaffritan, etc., prodesse dicuntur."

A curious formula against the plague is--

+. Z. +. D. I. A. +.

These are the initials of a number of prayers and recitations. + = Crux Christi salva me." Z = "Zelus domus libera me." + = Crux Christi vincit et regnat," etc. D = "Deus! expelle pestem de loco isto," etc. + = "In manus tuas Domine commendo animam meam," etc. A = "Ante coelum et terram Deus erat," etc. + = "Crux Christi potens est ad expellendam pestem a loco isto."

Another charm against wounds by sword, cut and thrust (fur Hieb und Stich), is the following, written also on virgin parchment; to be worn on the person:

+ A 3 6 ma 9 + + + etc.

Diese Figur sey in Gott gesegnet, etc.

The following is to be used as an amulet engraved upon a sword: "Hoc qui dextre velit uti amuleto."

	 
		Ich beschwere dich Degen gut,
		 Dass du nicht von mir sollst bringen Blut.
		 Diss zehl ich dir Schwerd schneid zur Buss
		 In den Namen der 3, Gestern, Gafalon, Samalecti, etc. etc.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 402]

Other amulets to be worn against fascination [*633] are the following, engraved upon silver plates.

Besides seventeenth-century metal objects of this kind to be worn as charms, there are a great many written formulae in Latin and German, or rather in gibberish, intended both to be worn as amulets in suitable cases like the three on Fig. 112, and to be uttered in mumbo-jumbo incantation.

Combinations of figures, too, have long had high reputation as efficient protectors, particularly those called magic squares-in which certain numbers are arranged in rows, so that their sum, in whatsoever direction it may be taken, always produces the same result.

The following common example is perhaps the simplest:--

  4  3  8 
  9  5  1 
  2  7  6 
  

It will be seen that addition of any three figures in line will produce 15. Another square taken in the same way makes 72 in each line. This latter is

[p. 403]

  28  35  2  7 
  6  3  32  31 
  34  29  8  1 
  4  5  30  33 
  

said to be a veritable amulet, and if your enemy's name be written underneath it, and you wear this as a charm, his envy will be baffled and his eye will be powerless against you. [*634]

Not only do we find great store set upon the many combinations such as these, but very wonderful things are done with figures outside the sphere of magic, so that the ignorant may well have become impressed by the power of numbers whether expressed in writing or not. The curious results certain people delight in producing from numbers found in the Revelation and other sacred books are but proofs of the still surviving idea that mystery lies in the very numbers themselves. What wonderful prophecies have been obtained by manipulation of the figures recited in the Book of Daniel, whereby the end of the world has been so often foretold, and the "number of the beast" deciphered!

In an article called "In Calabria-Passeggiate," by Caterina Pignorini-Beri, [*635] is a description of what was seen in a peasant's house:--

In an angle just over the doorway was affixed a horseshoe; above this were two horns painted, and beneath were placed the two magic numbers (numeri fatali) 8 and 9 to avert the jettatura. "Why is this?" I asked. The old woman replied: "Against

[p. 404]

the evil eye, Miss" ("Pel fora fascino, signorina"). "And what is the evil eye?" "Ah!" said the old woman, pointing the fore and little fingers towards the ground:--

"Ah! eight nine, eight nine!" [*636]

But why eight nine?"

"Eccellenza, the witches (streghe) say six and seven."

No other explanation was obtainable--perhaps it is the only one that can be given, owing to the terror of witchcraft which inspires all southerners, gentle and simple alike. It was indeed a new thing to break the seven, the famous cabalistic seven, which has pursued humanity for six thousand years, by (the use of) the next number. In fact the poor woman had given me something more than others--she had given me a valid reason for the fora fascino, and I could not grumble.

The authoress does not further explain the numbers, but she calls at another ground-floor tenement (botteguccia), and remarks that the usual bed was not in the room, nor were the numbers 8 and 9, nor the horseshoe, nor the painted horns to be seen. The owner was a corporal of bersaglieri, and therefore arrived at a state of new civilisation which took no note of such things. She concludes her remarks with the regretful "Ahime! Non tutti sono piu calabresi in Calabria!"

In Calabria the words which we should translate by "amulet against the evil eye" are fora fascino. The authoress in another place (p. 66) speaks of the utterance of the numbers 8 and 9 as a charm per allontanare la malia. So far as the present writer knows, of all Italians the lottery-loving Calabresi alone furnish an example of the belief that the mere utterance of particular numbers is a protective charm.

We all know of the common belief in "the luck in odd numbers." We shall see it later in the many

[p. 405]

repetitions of "three times" as to spitting. The old saying "Third time lucky" is familiar to everybody.

Three has always been looked upon by both Jews and Gentiles as a specially complete and mystic number. In Scripture, three is given as an exact measure, while other numbers were used indefinitely, merely to convey the notion of several, or of a great many, precisely as we now speak of dozens, scores, or thousands, when we do not even imply any definite number. There were three great feasts; there were three cities of refuge, and the number three is several times repeated in connection with them; three alternatives were offered to David, and two of these had each the special element of three in it. So we have the three Christian virtues; three great witnesses; and endless other examples of the use of three as something more than a mere numeral. The three-sided triangle is said to be symbolic of deity, pagan as much as Christian. The Egyptians had triads of divinities, specially worshipped in particular cities, while the Romans had their Diana Triformis. In the Hebrides the accounts given in Chap. II. on sun-worship show that each act was performed three times. We are told [*637] that in Ireland a cure for whooping-cough, called there chin-cough, is to pass the child three times over and under a donkey, certain prayers being said during the operation. So spitting as a preventive act had to be done three times, and in the many recited acts to be performed it will be noted how often "three times" occurs.

It is not merely as an odd number that three

[p. 406]

of all others was held so specially sacred; yet the preference generally for odd numbers is not only old but still abiding. As a matter of course an odd number of eggs are put under a hen. Indeed this is so thoroughly recognised, that one sees constant advertisements of choice eggs for sale at so much "per sitting." A sitting of eggs is a number just as well known as a baker's dozen--thirteen. The notion is that a brood is certain to be odd in number, and that therefore to set an even number of eggs is certain waste. The fact, however, remains that as often as not an even number of chicks are hatched; still the custom is to set thirteen, and no luck is expected from an even number. Again, military salutes are always odd in number. A Royal salute is twenty-one guns. The valiant "Thirteen Club" is in itself an evidence of the belief that if odd numbers generally are lucky, thirteen sitting down together at a meal is held to be unlucky--indeed fatal to one of the party. This notion is said by some to be based upon the experience of past mortality: that out of thirteen adults, the chances are strong that one will die during the next year. Moreover, under the well-worn paradox that exceptions prove the rule, thirteen is a specially unlucky number, except for the setting of eggs.

Perhaps in these latter days, however, the magic number seven is the one most used. It is that of the strega in Calabria, and of the white-witch in England. A seventh son of a seventh son is a born doctor--he has miraculous powers of healing by touch. [*638] "The doctor" is the recognised name here in

[p. 407]

[paragraph continues] Somerset of a seventh son; and it is very Commonly held that he should be trained for one, as a matter of course. Seven has always been a mystical number. Balaam had seven altars built by the sun-worshipper Balak, three distinct times. Elisha ordered Naaman to wash in Jordan seven times. Elijah sent seven times to the top of Carmel. The days of Creation were seven; seven weeks divided the great feasts. There were seven Churches in Asia; the great dragon of the Revelation had seven heads; there were seven angels with seven vials; besides a host of sevens, where perhaps only an indefinite number was implied. [*639] Curiously, too, the common name for the dormouse is the "seven-sleeper," no doubt from the Seven Sleepers of Ephesus. [*640] We west-country folks talk of a person who sleeps soundly as a "proper zeb'm-slaiper." [*640a] Again, there is a very common belief that in seven years a man changes every atom in his body, and that each seventh year of his life is a climacteric in which he has to pass through dangers physical and moral. The sixty-third year, that is the ninth septennial period, is the "grand climacteric"--the year specially perilous to old men. The very common term of leases for seven, fourteen, or twenty-one years, is believed to originate in the idea that it is desirable to reconsider conditions and to renew agreements

[p. 408]

in accordance with the recognised stages of human life.

The numbers of certain days and months are considered fortunate or otherwise according to certain modes of reckoning, wherein the rationale or the logic is by no means obvious.

A curious little black-letter book called A Concordancie of Yeares, by Arthur Hopton, 1612, gives a chapter headed "Of the infortunate and fatall dayes of the yeare," etc., which throws some light upon the methods of "wise men." It sets out the infortunate days, beginning--

	 
		January the 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, [*641] 15, 17, 19.
		
		February the 8, 10, and the 17.
		
		March the 15, 16, and the 19.
		
		Aprill the 16 and 21. Not so euill the 7, 8, 10, 20;
		
		 and so on through the year. He says that "astrologers will have in every moone 2 infortunate daies, wherein they recount it most unhappy to begin or undertake any kind of worldly affaires." These he specifies, and says "it is therefore very ill to have a child borne in them, for feare of an euill death." The most unfortunate days of all the year are "January the 3 day, July the 1, October the 7, Aprill the 30, August the 1 and the 3l."

Those in the former table were only "infortunate," while these latter appear to be fatal.

There were also two days in every month called Aegri, mali and Aegyptiaci. On Aegri "if any fell sick they should hardly or never escape." On mali "evill affections of the Constellations" would frustrate any kind of work, and Aegyptiaci were unlucky

[p. 409]

because they were so thought by the Egyptians, and because "they do also note unto us the 10 plagues of Egypt in these verses":--

	 
		Sanguis, rana, culex, muscae parvae, pecus, ulcus,
		 Grando, locustae, nox, mors, prius orta necant.
		
		 We are told how to discover lucky or unlucky days, and that "these infortunate days were noted alwaies in the Romane Kalender, notwithstanding ye inhibition of Augustine, saying: 'Calendas mensium, et dies Aegyptiacos, non observetis.' But yet to satisfie all, take them in the ensuing verses":--

	 
		Armis Gunfe, Dei Kalatos, Adamare dabatur.
		 Lixa memor, Constans gelidos, Infancia quosdam.
		 Omne limen, Aaron bagis, Concordia laudat.
		 Chije linkat, Ei Coequata, Gearcha Lisardus.
		
		 [paragraph continues] Of the words in these four lines of gibberish he says that

every two serve for one moneth, the first standing for January. If therefore you desire to know the first of the two former fatall daies in any moneth, count so many daies from the beginning of the moneth, descending, as the: first letter in the first word is distant from A inclusively, according to the Alphabet, and where that number ends, there is a fatall day: as in Aprill, L (beginning Lixa) is the 10 letter in the Alphabet, therefore the 10 day is fatall, and according to the number of the first letter (in order of ye Alphabet) of the seco_d sillable, ye said houre of ye said day is vehemently to be suspected.

In similar fashion, but "ascending," he shows how to reckon the second fatal day; but we are not told how or by whom the magic verses were composed, whereby such discoveries can be made.

Footnotes

^389:609 The tephillah of the arm and of the forehead have been already explained (<page 124>), and the Scripture texts recited.

^390:610 In Mr. Theodore Bent's Sacred City of the Ethiopians, pp. 165, 166, are facsimiles of charms of just this character, and also drawings of several [p. 391] leather cases like the one here produced (Fig. 186). There is also a learned chapter on "Inscriptions," by Dr. David Heinrich Muller of Vienna, but none of the charms are described or translated. In fact it is confidently believed that at present there is no European now in Europe who can read them, or the one here lithographed.

^391:611 Mr. Weakley's Notes. Secret names of God.

^391:612 Za_r. The following paragraph is copied from Isenberg's Amharic Dictionary, C.M.S. London, 1841--a very scarce book--under the word "Za_r," p. 156: "Name of a sort of demons or genii, to whose influence the people of Shoa and the Gallas ascribe many changes in man's bodily constitution and general welfare; such as health and disease, pregnancy, birth, death, change of weather, success or disappointment in several undertakings, etc. They believe that these invisible beings are eighty-eight in number, and divided into two equal parties; forty-four of them being united under one chief, called Warrar, and the other forty-four under another chief whose name is Ma_ma. In Shoa these Za_rs are worshipped, we were told, by those who are in the habit of smoking tobacco, except foreigners; and we persuaded ourselves that that very custom is, by those Shoa people who followed it, observed in honour of those imaginary beings. After having witnessed an extraordinary instance of Za_rolatry in our own house, where we saw an otherwise intelligent and respectable woman alternately smoking and praying to the Za_rs with great vehemence until she was mad, and then killing a hen whose brain she ate and became quiet again; after this, I say, we inquired into several instances where we met with smokers, and found that they all were worshippers of the Za_rs. In the state of phrensy, into which they work themselves by vehemently smoking, praying, and shaking of the head, their language alters so as to call everything by names which are known only to the Za_r worshippers."

^392:613 Tecla Halmanoot, "one of the most celebrated Abyssinian saints, a native of Shoa, who flourished in the thirteenth century" (Isenberg's Amharic Dictionary).

^392:614 Secret names of God.

^392:615 i.e. the demon who hunts to death, and the demon who touches gently to death.

^392:616 Cf. "Taviv wa Booda." The latter word in Isenberg's Dictionary is explained "as an adjective: 'Mad,' Esp. 'sorcerer,' generally sorceress.' The Abyssinian's belief in witchcraft goes so far as to ascribe to its influence not only every kind and degree of mania, epilepsy, Chorus Sti. Viti, but also several other nervous and febrile complaints, such as hysteria and delirium, as well as every obstinate disease for which they know no remedy. Their idea in those cases is, that either some demon or a Booda must have taken possession of the patient. The Falashas of Semen and the neighbourhood of Gondar, skilful artisans in general, and a number of other people possessed with more than common skill or genius, are looked upon as Boodas. The hyaena is generally believed to be a transformation of a Booda."

These people have been so called ever since the days of Herodotus, see ante, Chap. 1. <page 28>.

^393:617 See note [*613], p. 392.

^393:618 Secret names.

^393:619 Koomana, "standing sickness." A disease which works imperceptibly and fatally while the person affected is "on his feet," i.e. going about as if in health.

^393:620 See note [*613], p. 392.

^393:621 Names of God.

^395:621a These recipes are inserted here by way of comparison of language with the Abyssinian; naturally their place would be in the next chapter.

^395:622 The part preserved is apparently imperfect; but an account of it with a translation alongside the text is given by Mr. Charles Wycliffe Goodwin for the Cambridge Antiquarian Society, 1852, in a paper called Fragment of a Graeco-Egyptian Work upon Magic.

^396:623 See also R. Stuart Poole in Smith's Dict. Bible, s, v. "Magic," p. 197.

^397:624 Miss L. Macdonald, Proc. Soc. Bib. Archaeol. Feb. 1891, p. 162 sq. In the article quoted from, much information is given about tablets and injurious inscriptions. The author refers to the papyrus we have mentioned known as the "Goodwin Cambridge Fragment." There is also a similar "binding" Latin inscription quoted by Jahn, Aberglauben, p. 55

^398:625 The case is described in Bullettino dell' Istit. di Corr. Archeol. 1836, p. 149.

^398:626 On this see Lobeck, Aglaophamus, p. 643. A facsimile of the original inscription with a translation into literary Greek by Mr. Cecil Smith will be found in an article by G. Comparetti, in Journal of Hellenic Studies, vol. iii. p. 112.

^398:627 Here is a new etymology of hocus pocus for Dr. Murray! For this he [p. 399] quotes Voetius, lib. iii. Dispp. p. 542. Ady (Candle in the Dark) says that in King James's time a juggler went about who called himself "the King's Majesty's most excellent Hocus Pocus" (Hone, Year-Book, 1832, p. 1477). This seems to match Frommannd.

^399:628 Frommannd, pp. 45, 307.

^399:629 King, Gnostics, p. 105, gives a translation of the Abracadabra prescription.

^399:630 He gives the Hebrew formula, and several others written in the same cone shape.

^399:630a Daily Telegraph, Nov. 20, 1894; also Spectator, Nov. 24, 1894, p. 733.

^400:631 Thiers, Traite des Superstitions, i. 414. Freemasons again will recognise something here.

^401:632 Frommannd, p. 46. We are told (J. Lewes Andre, in Reliquary, October 1893, p. 195) that this is a Roman charm found at Cirencester on a piece of plaster; it evidently was well known elsewhere; also that it was written upon the binding cloth of a woman in the Middle Ages. The Cirencester charm had the same words differently arranged.

^402:633 Tract. de Fasc. p. 306. Many other cabalistic formulae will be found.

^403:634 Chambers's Cyclopaedia, s.v. "Magic."

^403:635 Nuova Antologia, Roma, Luglio, 1883, p. 71.

^404:636 It is to be noted as a curious coincidence that the magic square sums up in each line the same product as these two potent factors--8 x 9 = 72.

^405:637 Le Fanu, Seventy Years of Irish Life, 1894, p. 113

^406:638 Lupton, Notable Things, 1660, bk. ii. p. 25. See also Thiers, Traite des Superstitions, 1679, p. 436.

^407:639 In the Nineteenth Century for October 1894 is an article on "The Seven Lord Roseberys," discussed, however, in twelve divisions!

^407:640 For an account of the Seven Sleepers see Baring-Gould, Curious Myths of the Middle Ages, p. 93. At Ephesus the story is devoutly believed. The writer has been shown into the cave in which they slept.

^407:640a "For no sooner did Abraham pay the eighteenpence than he slept as sound as a sebem-sleeper, and began to get the good of his victuals."--W. Raymond, "Love and Quiet Life," Somerset Idylls, 1894, p. 206. See West Somerset Word-Book.

^408:641 The present writer has no practical reason to complain of this day, during the many "happy returns of it" for which he has given thanks.

     
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 410]

 

CHAPTER XII

 

SPITTING, INCANTATION, AND OTHER PROTECTIVE ACTS. PIXIES

IN the story told by Jorio of the Neapolitan woman (<page 261>), another side of the question, so far only hinted at, is opened out. It is the effect believed to exist in certain actions, performed openly, secretly, or in the way of incantation. When, in talking with a stranger, a Neapolitan keeps his hands behind his back in the position described as mano cornuta, he does precisely what is meant: he performs an act unknown to the person against whom it is intended, but which the actor believes will shield him from the possible harm coming to him from the other party. Acts of this kind are performed with a twofold object: in the one case to keep off injury; in the other to bring about what is desired, such as secretly touching a hunchback at Monte Carlo. Among the latter are all such acts as are done or said "for luck." How common it is at cards when a player has had a run of ill fortune, to get up and turn his chair three times "to change the luck." On Christmas Eve 1889 the moon was two days old. Two keepers and two beaters were just about to go home after a day's shooting. "There's the new moon," said one. "Ees, and

[p. 411]

over the right shoulder, too," said another. "Turn your money vor luck," said number three. "I han't a-got nort but a penny," replied number one. "Oh! thick idn no good, must be zilver," said number three. This kind of dialogue is to be heard every day; and is only given here because it is specific, and was spoken in the writer's own hearing. Almost the same thing comes from South Africa.

Mr. G. S. Foot writes to the Spectator of October 29, 1892, respecting the doings of some native boys.

On looking out, I saw them one after another take lighted brands from the fire, and throw them towards some object in the sky. They then stood in a praying attitude, and loudly shouted, "Give plenty money!" They replied to inquiries: that all boys thus greeted the new moon; and it was found to be a universal custom among the Mashonas.

The marriage of the Czar Nicholas Il. furnishes a curious fact in this connection, and like the rite of the passport for the dead (see <page 399>) shows that in Russia practices are solemnised which in more western countries would be classed as magic.

By orthodox theologians the symbolical meaning of the golden and silver rings is, explained thus: The gold ring bestowed on the man signifies that he is to be as the sun to his future wife, irradiating her with his light. She is given the silver ring, inasmuch as, like the moon, she receives her brilliancy from her husband. The changing of rings, which ends by leaving to both their own, symbolises union and concord of husband and wife. [*641a]

Very nearly allied to this is the custom at fairs or markets for the seller, on being paid for cattle, to give back a silver coin "for luck." So much is this a recognised custom, that in close bargains a very frequent stipulation is made for so much "to luck." Luck money, too, should always be silver.

[p. 412]

[paragraph continues] Further, it is common among the regular market-dealers, when the "luck money" is handed back to the buyer, for the receiver to spit on it "for luck." The same habit of spitting on a coin is very common also by the receiver when won in a bet, or when it is the first money received for the day. [*642]

This custom of spitting opens up quite a wide subject, for not only is it practised in the hope of obtaining good fortune, but in all ages, and almost among all peoples, it has ever been considered as an act to safeguard the spitter, whether against fascination or other evils. Among the ancient Greeks and Romans "the most common remedy against an invidious look was spitting; it was hence called despuere malum." [*643] According to Theocritus "it is necessary to spit three times into the breast of the person who fears fascination."

Old women were accustomed to avert the evil eye from children by spitting into their bosoms: this was done three times--three being a sacred number. "Hence Damoetas . . . having praised himself, adds that by the advice of old Cotyttaris he had spit thrice into, his bosom to prevent fascination." [*644]

[p. 413]

It was usual to reprove arrogant persons by bidding them spit into their bosoms. [*645] Among the ancient Greeks it was customary to spit three times into their bosoms at the sight of a madman, or one troubled with epilepsy. [*646] This was done in defiance of the omen, spitting being a sign of contempt and aversion. [*647]

Another method of averting fascination from infants was this: they tied a thread of divers colours about the neck of the infant (compare the coloured ribbons on horses, and the coloured worsted on the fattura della morte), then spat on the ground, and taking up the spittle mixed with dirt upon their finger, put it upon the infant's forehead and lips. Moreover, this had to be done with the digitus infamis. As to the latter, there is no doubt as to which is the finger of disgrace. [*648]

[p. 414]

Pagan lustration was performed with the middle finger.

	 
		Th' obscure old grandam, or the next of kin,
		 The new-born infant from the cradle takes,
		 And first of spittle a lustration makes:
		 Then in the spawl her middle finger dips,
		 Anoints the temples, forehead, and the lips.
		
		 Thus Dryden translates that part of the second satire of Persius in which occurs the line--

	 
		"Infami digito, et lustralibus ante salivis."
		
		 The improper and indecorous placing of the hand and fingers is also to be classed among derisive grimaces. Formerly the middle finger expressed the utmost contempt and ignominy when thrust out, with the other fingers closed. On that account it is called infamis and imbudicus. [*649] Isidorus Hispalensis says: "When any one wished formerly to mock contumeliously, or to signify the utmost derision, he used to thrust out the middle finger." It is said [*650] that when certain visitors came to Demosthenes, who did not salute him with the

[p. 415]

index, he recognised them with his stretched-out middle finger.

There was much discussion among old writers upon this gesture. Suetonius calls it "the hand formed in an obscene manner"; others declare it impudicitiam ostendere.

Besides this thrusting out of the middle finger, there was another sign of contemptuous mocking grimace, made by the interposition or insertion of the thumb between the index and middle finger, so that the thumb projects beyond, while the rest of the fingers are contracted into a fist. This is the greatest indignity of all mocking gestures, "dicitur ab Italis Far le fiche." [*651] In the theatres they had three ways of expressing disapproval or derision of the actors by the hands, besides the well-known hissing, shouting, thrusting out the tongue, and other facial contortions. These were: First, by making with the hands what was called a crane's bill, "Pinsente etiam rostro ciconiam manibus quandoque exprimebant"; secondly, by imitating asses' ears, "Et imitabantur aliquando asini auriculas"; thirdly, by the thumb gesture (mano in fica), "Tertium, cum manus in obscoenum modum formata." The latter was evidently the most forcible: indeed it seems to have become so common as to be signified by the mere word favere, i.e. properly to applaud, but practically to recognise the actor in either way, by applauding or disapproval. This was precisely analogous to other cases where it was customary to say praefiscini or defigere. In fact these were slang words of the Empire. It was evidently considered an extremely vulgar sort of disapprobation,

[p. 416]

for we read, "Turpissime contra aliquem favere," i.e. "It is most disgraceful to express disapproval of any one by thrusting out the mano fica."

What was the nature of the crane's-bill gesture is not very clear. Persius says (Sat. i.):--

	 
		"O Iane, a tergo quem nulla ciconia pinsit."
		
		 We are told that jokers make the stork (crane) by joining all the fingers; they then place them to the lower part in the likeness of a crane's bill. [*652] There is much discussion of this performance, but in the absence of any drawing it is difficult to explain; the a tergo will perhaps suggest something. So also we are told with much detail how the asses' ears were imitated. The two hands were applied to the temples and the fingers moved backwards and forwards. This attitude survives in No. 7 (Stupido) of the Neapolitan gestures on Fig. 120.

Passing from manual gestures, already dealt with, we find spilling upon many occasions to be a widespread practice, nor need we turn to ancient times for plenty of examples of belief in its efficacy as a protective act, besides those performed for luck.

To spit on cut hair before throwing it away is thought in some parts of Europe sufficient to prevent its being used by witches. [*653] This is of course analogous to the various precautions taken to prevent hostile persons getting possession of any part of or belonging to another. [*654]

[p. 417]

It is quite commonly said here in Somerset: "Nif you do meet wi' anybody wi' a north eye, spat dree times." [*655] Why always three times? why three times by the nurses of old days, except that there is some virtue added by the number three?

Those afflicted with obliquity of vision have ever been accounted as dangerous by hard-headed as well as superstitious people. Even in London the enlightened, these beliefs are not extinct. The Morning, Herald of August 16, 1839, records that two women were fellow-lodgers, but unfortunately one of them squinted, and the other, to avert the supposed consequences from the defect in the first, considered she could only protect herself by spitting in her face three times a day. [*656]

In many parts of England, certainly here in the west, it is a common saying: "Always spat dree times 'nif ee do zee a piebald 'oss." Piebald horses are thought uncanny nearly everywhere.

Country people generally have well-known occasions when to spit; indeed the act is almost as naturally performed as to breathe.

Not long ago, in shooting, the writer with others came upon a dead dog which was most offensive. One keeper said "Here's a pretty breath"; the other said: "Mus' bring a showl an' bury un"; but both accompanied their words with deliberately spitting

[p. 418]

on the ground. This is almost invariable, and has been noted by the writer hundreds of times. Whenever an offensive smell is perceived there is often a coarse joke; but if ten or a dozen are working together all spit, though probably few of them have actually smelt it. Moreover, it has been noticed that the action is not the violent ejection of saliva, but the deliberate voidance of all the moisture in the mouth, often accompanied by the usual "hawking" to clear the windpipe. All this is done with evident unconsciousness; it seems an involuntary action, the result of pure animal instinct. No one is ever told to spit in such cases, but it is the most sanitary act which can be performed under the circumstances. Germs of disease present in foetid matter can only pass into the body through the breathed air, and hence to void the saliva which may have been impregnated by the foul odour is as natural an act, and as involuntary, as the closing of an eye at a threatened blow. This is surely one of Nature's own lessons. Those who are too polite to expectorate, will find upon careful scrutiny that a bad smell causes a flow of saliva to the mouth. Who knows whether "good manners" may not have had some bad effect, and that many a case of diphtheria might have been avoided if it had never been considered vulgar to spit?

Great virtue is and was always believed to belong to fasting spittle, both as curative and protective. [*657] To lick a wart first thing in the morning is one of the well-recognised cures; the same is held

[p. 419]

respecting disorders of the eyes, a slight wound, or any irritation of the skin. Pliny says [*658] fasting spittle is a sovereign preservative against the poison of serpents, and that "we are in the habit of spitting as a preservative against epilepsy, or, in other words, we repel contagion thereby; in a similar manner we repel fascinations, and the evil presages attendant upon meeting a person who is lame in the right leg." He also refers to spitting three times on the breast, and says it is the practice in all cases where medicine is employed to spit three times on the ground; also to mark a boil, when it first appears, three times with fasting spittle. His remark that pugilists and other persons, before making an effort, spit in the hand in order to make the blow more heavy, shows that familiar modern practices of the like kind are not quite of yesterday.

Pliny shows how lichens and leprous spots may be removed by constant application of fasting spittle; that crick in the neck may be cured by carrying fasting spittle to the right knee with the right hand, and to the left knee with the left.

As charms against the evil eye, he mentions spitting into the urine the moment it is voided, of spitting into the right shoe before putting it on, [*659] and of spitting while passing any place where danger has been incurred. Pliny continues: "When a person

[p. 420]

looks upon an infant asleep [*660] it is usual for the nurse to spit three times upon the ground; and this, although infants are under the especial guardianship of the god Fascinus, the protector not of infants only but of generals as well, and a divinity whose worship is entrusted to the Vestal Virgins. The image of this god is attached beneath the triumphal car, to protect the victorious general against the effects of envy. Hence the expression praefiscini." [*661]

Quite recently a friend of the writer was travelling in Greece in the neighbourhood of Sparta. A country woman had a baby on her back, carried in the usual skin employed for that purpose. The traveller being a lady naturally wished to look at the baby, and was in the act of uncovering its face, when the mother turned round in the greatest anger, and of course snatched away the child. The dragoman explained that the mother dreaded the evil eye, and that if the lady wished to see the child, she must first spit on it three times. This she did, and was at once permitted to look on the baby's face, having provided the recognised antidote against the stranger's glance. [*662]

The act of restoring sight to a blind man with fasting spittle is attributed to Vespasian by two authors. [*663] The man is said to have besought him "ut genas et orbes oculorum dignaretur respergere oris excremento." A singular and very remarkable comment

[p. 421]

upon the means which our Lord Himself took to open the eyes of the man born blind, is seen in the fact that He did not despise as "mere superstition" the acts which in His day were held to be effectual, but that "He spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and He anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay." He knew the medicinal value which was set upon saliva by the people, but instead of spurning such means, He thought right to make them the conductors of His miraculous power. [*664] We find the same course followed in the case of the deaf and dumb man (St. Mark vii. 33).

A modern traveller [*665] relates that in Corfu he unwittingly expressed his admiration for two children of his host. The grandmother on his repeating the praise became agonized, and nothing would suffice to appease the parents and others present but that he should spit in their faces. This he did, and the children submitted as if well accustomed to have their beauty first lauded and then protected. This, however, was not enough: the mother then made a paste of dust and oil from the lamp burning before the Virgin and anointed their foreheads. We are not told which finger the Corfiote woman used to apply her paste, but it was probably the middle finger--the same as was undoubtedly used for the purpose at the time of our Lord's miracles; for Petronius, who was an actual contemporary (died A.D. 66), mentions the putting of dust combined with saliva upon the forehead with the middle finger. [*666]

[p. 422]

Mungo Park relates that among the Mandingoes the ceremony of naming a child takes place at eight years old. First his head is shaved, then the priest utters a prayer, while all the company whisper in the child's ear, and spit three times in his face, after which they name the child, etc.

This is but the gross performance of a ritual which is still practised in civilised countries. In ordinary Roman baptism, before the water used "In nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti," the priest exorcises with spittle the ears and nostrils of the infant, [*667] besides anointing with the chrism or holy oil. [*668]

Dr. Gregory, in his lecture to the British Association at Oxford, 1894, said that after a quarrel with the chief of the Masai in East Africa, the renewal of friendship was signified thus--"we spat upon each other," the Masai equivalent for shaking hands.

The application of the lustrant spittle with the middle or infamis digitus may be the reason why the more important rite of anointing with the chrism or holy oil should be so specially and distinctly

[p. 423]

ordered in the several Rubrics [*669] to be performed with the thumb, the symbol of power. Such is however the fact, and the custom is retained in our own Church of using the thumb in that part of the baptismal service where the priest says "(We) do sign him with the sign of the cross."

Of all the arts practised by magicians, ancient and modern, but especially the latter, in cases of witchcraft, "ruling the planets" is one of the commonest. Astrology has ever held a leading place in all the occult sciences, and it will not be possible to overlook the evident connection between many of the objects which are well-known amulets and the names by which all men have agreed to call very many of the heavenly bodies. We have seen how the sun and moon are represented by many gods and goddesses in every mythology. The phases of the moon regulate the times for many operations, while each of the planets bears a name denoting to the most civilised people in the world one of the days of the week, and also a pagan divinity. Moreover, our Saxon-English Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, very strikingly illustrate that which has been so often dwelt on--the assimilation of ideas by which the personification of any idea by one race migrates and takes up its place in another with similar attributes or symbolic signs, but with names expressing the modified notions of the imbibing race.

[p. 424]

It is strange that animals should have become so connected in thought with the various constellations and Zodiacal signs; but so it is, and the connection is evidently of the utmost antiquity, because since history began, civilised races have all adopted the same ideas, and in their several languages denote the same animals. [*670] We are told [*671] that the star stories of Greeks and Egyptians (which we inherit) are in direct correspondence with the like legends among modern savages, yet many of them call stars and constellations by names representing animals different from those we call them. Nearly all savage

[p. 425]

nations, such as the Australian aborigines, even those without picture writing, call the stars by names of men and animals, and have all sorts of legends to match.

Reference has been made to the practices anciently employed at weddings: how songs of a lewd character called Fescennina were commonly a part of the performance; but even in the present day elaborate acts are common whose object is still the same--that of averting the evil eye from the newly married pair. At a marriage among the Jews of Tunis, after the religious ceremony, the bride is taken into an upper room, accompanied by all her friends, who remain with her. The bridegroom having retired with his friends, without taking the slightest notice of the bride or any one else, she is seated on a chair placed upon the usual divan. Her mother-in-law now comes forward, unveils her, and with a pair of scissors cuts off the tips of her hair. This last ceremony is supposed to be of great importance in driving away all evil influences that might do harm to or enter between the newly married pair. [*672] We are not told what is done to the hair cut off, nor of any ceremony in the cutting to countervail the touch of iron. Both matters are doubtless carefully looked to, though unnoted by a stranger. The birth of a daughter is a cause of grief, etc., while a son is so greatly prized that they not unfrequently compass his death by the very means taken to secure his life. Their one great anxiety is to keep him from the influence of the evil eye, and with this object in view they keep him carefully concealed within thick curtains for some time after his birth, while a

[p. 426]

smoking light is kept burning within those curtains day and night; in this way poisoning the air for the poor little victim. Not only this, but large squares of paper with flaming hands and outspread fingers, pieces of bone, and shells (of course cowries), are everywhere hung about and exposed both within and without to avert the evil eye. [*673]

In Africa, and also in the Eastern Archipelago, where the belief is universal, it is thought to be most dangerous to be looked at while eating. Possibly this arises from the notion among savage and therefore hungry people, that to see another eat excites envy, the mainspring of the malignant glance. The kings of Kacongo (West Africa), of the Battas (Sumatra) or of Loango may not be seen eating. It is a capital offence to see the King of Dahomey at his meals. "No Warua allows others to witness their eating or drinking, being doubly particular with regard to members of the opposite sex; and on pombe being offered, I have frequently seen them request that a cloth might be held up to hide them while drinking." [*674] When the King of Tonga eats, all turn their backs. Any who saw Muato Jamwo, a great potentate of the Congo country, eating, would certainly be put to death. In these cases it is thought that if the king is looked at while eating, he will shortly die. This dislike to be seen eating is

[p. 427]

by no means confined to savages. Turks of all classes object to be looked at while eating, and, stranger still, the Pope himself always takes his meals alone.

Hiding the face too, by way of protection, is a recognised mark of sovereignty in certain parts of Central Africa, where the king's face must be veiled. In Wadai the Sultan always speaks from behind a curtain; no one sees his face except his intimates and a few favoured persons. [*675] Here we see of course the dread of a stranger's eye. Among the Touaregs of the Sahara all the men keep the lower part of the face, especially the mouth, veiled constantly. In West Timor a speaker holds his right hand before his mouth in speaking, lest a demon should enter his body, and lest the person with whom he is conversing should harm his soul by magic. [*676]

A young New South Wales man must always cover his mouth with a rug in the presence of a woman, after his initiation into the mysteries of his tribe. So strongly is the danger felt, that many kings are not suffered to leave their houses, lest evil should befall them through being seen. The King of Loango is confined to his palace, and may not leave it after his coronation. [*677] The King of Ibo also may not leave his house even to go into his town unless a human sacrifice is made to propitiate the gods. Consequently he never goes beyond his own premises. [*678] In Mandalay a strong paling, six feet high,

[p. 428]

lined every street through which the king was likely at any time to pass, and the people had to remain behind this fence when the king or any of the queens went out. No one might attempt to look through or over this blind, [*679] of course from the fear lest his eye should work mischief.

To this day the kings of Corea are shut up in their palace; so also was the King of Tonquin, who was allowed out two or three times a year, for the performance of religious ceremonies. The day before his coming forth, notice was given to the inhabitants to keep out of the way the king had to go, for the people were not allowed to look upon him. The women were compelled to remain in their houses, and durst not show themselves under pain of death--a penalty which was carried out on the spot, even if disobedience occurred through ignorance. Thus the king was kept invisible to all but a chosen few. [*680]

Although in all these cases we are not told distinctly why these precautions were taken, yet, knowing what the belief was, there can be little hesitation in assigning them to it, and to their dread of permitting so precious a life as their king's to be subjected to the blighting influence.

Our own customs regarding children may be distinctly referred to the same primaeval belief in the liability of infants to the blighting effect of the stranger's eye. It cannot be pretended that it is necessary to its health that a baby's face should be always carefully covered up whenever it is taken out of the house, or even in the house, into the presence

[p. 429]

of strangers. Moreover some nurses would not think of exhibiting baby without fastening "the coral and bells" upon its neck. Both mamma and nurse would indignantly repel any suggestion of superstition, nevertheless the coral is in the material itself a powerful amulet. Its shape keeps the remembrance of the old classic fascinum, the Priapic symbol, while the silver and the bells recognise the power of Diana, the type of all the motherly protectresses of infants, which have already been dealt with at such length.

The practice of veiling a woman's face throughout the East cannot be wholly referred to male jealousy: such may be the declared reason, but the women's own reluctance to show their faces to a stranger eloquently proclaims the real one. Besides the various means taken by many people, and specially by Neapolitans of to-day, to keep out of the way of the jettatore known or unknown, there are very many precautions taken to baffle his maleficence besides those openly or secretly worn amulets, already sufficiently discussed. Even here among ourselves we have well-known rites, so to speak, which must be classed as preventive medicine. One such performance by a woman who believes herself to be overlooked is to take the shift off over her head, turn it three times withershins (i.e. from right to left--wiederschein--against the course of the sun), then hold it open, and drop a burning coal through it three times; then put it on again.

We cannot fail to see that several old ideas are here preserved. The going against the way of the sun is a sort of defiance, like repeating "the Lord's Prayer backwards." It is in the same category as

[p. 430]

the defiant act depicted in Fig. 24. The burning coal may be a relic of ancient fire-worship, and so on the other hand a propitiatory act of sun-worship; while the three times accords with the spitting three times, and with the value set upon the mystic three.

One of the most widespread customs connected with fire, certainly found in Yorkshire, in Devon, Somerset, and throughout East Anglia--and probably in every county between those limits--is that of standing up the poker against the bars of the grate to make the fire burn. Everybody knows it, everybody does it, and believes it to be effectual. Superior persons consider that it causes or divides the draught; but those who know, say that the making of a cross with the poker and the bars, drives the devil out of the chimney, and so enables the fire to burn-this at least is the firm belief in the west country. Further, it is held that the devil cannot endure that any fire shall be hotter than his own, and "so makes it his business to try and put others' out." Of course the iron with which the cross is formed adds power to the charm.

The importance of progressing in all matters from left to right, or in the path of the sun, is made evident by our having a word specially to denote the deviation from this course. Here in Somerset quite recently, and within the writer's own knowledge, a number of children were brought to be baptized, and of course were ranged in a group around the font. The officiating minister not being accustomed to such a number, or not knowing the custom, began with the child on his right hand, of course following on in order and going round to the child on his left. This action caused great indignation:

[p. 431]

some parents who had never before seen the importance of having their children baptized at all, were quite sure that now they had not been done properly, and must be taken to another church "to be done over again." Thus it was held of far greater moment that the parson should proceed from left to right, than it was that the children should be baptized or not. Some of these children were growing into adults. In the same direction is the belief that in Confirmation it is most unlucky to be on the left side of the bishop, and so to receive his left hand: people are constantly warned to be careful to avoid this when their children are about to be confirmed. This objection is now becoming obsolete, from the fact that Confirmation is performed less perfunctorily, and candidates are, at least in this diocese, confirmed singly and not in pairs.

Not long ago a farmer lost two cows, for whose illness he could only account by the certainty that they had been "overlooked." He rode a long way to consult a wise woman, who decided that be was right in his diagnosis. She told him to find a horse with three nails in the near hind shoe (three again); he was then to pull out the middle nail and scratch the witch with it, otherwise all the rest of his cows would die.

The witch was not scratched, because the farmer, after much search, was unable to find the right horse with the right nail, but for all that he does not appear to have lost any more cows. Perhaps his will to scratch the witch was as good as if the deed had been accomplished.

Through the kindness of the Editors of Somerset and Dorset Notes and Queries I am enabled to

[p. 432]

print the following interesting quotation from that Magazine previous to its publication in vol. iv. part xxviii. (December 1894).

WITCHCRAFT IN SOMERSET.--It is hardly credible, but there exists, even in our day, a belief in witchcraft in some parts of Somerset.

The following incidents happened during this year. A poor woman, the mother of a large family, had for a period of two years a series of misfortunes: her husband was ill, two children were injured accidentally, they were all laid up by a prevailing epidemic. The woman herself, no doubt tired and worn out, came to the conclusion that in this long and bitter trial, which she considered was undeserved, there must be an evil agency at work, and she pronounced herself "overlooked." Once the idea took possession of her, it seemed to spread through the family, her husband and children testifying that they saw strange-looking little black objects sitting on the boxes at night: these little things used to try to pull them by the feet out of bed.

She became so thoroughly convinced that she was bewitched that she went to interview a wise man who lives at Wells. He took the same view of the case, and said that he would have to pray for her, the point at interest being, who had bewitched her? She had to go through a list of names--names of women; after mentioning many, and not the right one amongst them, as she was turning away, remembering one more she mentioned her, and that one the wise man pronounced the woman who had bewitched her. He told her that he could break the charm and take away the power of the witch, but it would take a lot of prayer and work. He then gave certain directions which the woman and her husband were to follow, in order to break the spell. About the hour of midnight she and her husband were directed to sit in front of their fire and burn salt, and for the space of one hour no conversation had to pass between them, only they had to repeat the following words:--

	 
		This is not the thing I wish to burn
		 But Mrs. -------'s heart of ------ Somerset to turn,
		 Wishing thee neither to eat, drink, sleep nor rest
		 Until thou dost come to me and do my request
		 Or else the wrath of God may fall on thee
		 And cause thee to be consumed in a moment. Amen.
		
		 This accomplished, they were to retire backwards to the foot of the stairs, climb the stairs still backwards, repeating at the same

[p. 433]

time the Lord's Prayer also backwards, and then not speak a word to one another till they were in bed; in this way they would break the spell.

The man and his wife tried this, with implicit faith that the enchantment would be broken, or the evil eye averted.

[Our correspondent wishes to remain anonymous, but I can

vouch for the truth of the story; in fact, I know the locality and some of the characters quite well. EDITOR FOR SOMERSET.]  [*681]

Nearly akin to being overlooked, people are often said to be Pixy-led, when in the dark they lose their way. The writer has heard of many cases of this kind, for which probably the "jack-o'-lantern" is responsible. In one case well remembered, an old farmer was coming home from market across a well-known common in West Somerset. By some means his poor old mare was made to leave the track; probably her rider would not have seen very straight if it had been light; but finding his steed getting into a "soft place," his full wits returned, and at the same time an owl began to hoot. He at once began to cry out: "Man a-lost! man a-lost! Here's half a crown and a leg o' mutton! Man a-lost." It appears that after all he was not far from help; but he firmly believed he had been pixy-led, and the story clung to him till his death. Many such cases might be recounted, but the safeguard against such is to "turn your coat in an' out," when the evil sprites are confounded. [*682]

[p. 434]

In 1890 some men were ripping bark in a wood near Torrington. One of them declared that on stooping down to pick up a tool a strange feeling came over him, and while totally unable to raise himself he heard peals of discordant laughter all around. It flashed upon him that he was pixy-led, but his presence of mind forsook him, and he was unable to turn his coat inside out, a sure talisman (sic) against the spells of pixies. As the man did not return at the usual time, his wife, hearing from the others that he left work when they did, at ten o'clock went to look for him. Arriving at the place where they had been working, she met her husband dripping wet. "Where have you been?" she said. "I've a-bin pixy-led," says he, and then he told her how the pixies had held him fast for five hours, and that at last he crawled away, not knowing where he was going, and tumbling head over heels into the stream. As soon as he could get up he knew where he was and made his way homewards. "You girt fule, why didden 'ee turn your pockets inside out?" was all the comfort he got from his better half; "then you would have been able to come away tu wance." The man firmly believes in pixies, because a tailor named Short was pixy-led in the same wood some years ago. It is known that he was sober. No intoxicants had been tasted for the day by either of the party (abridged from Western Daily. Mercury, June 6, 1890).

May Eve seems the time when these sprites--

[p. 435]

called by way of propitiation the "Good People "are most to be feared. This name is, of course, a reflection of the same notion conveyed in the old saying about taking off your hat to the devil, i.e. be polite and deferential to your greatest enemy. It is on May Eve the pixies are supposed to be most inclined for mischief. In Ireland it is thought that then the evil eye has more than its usual vigilance and malignity. "The nurse who would then walk in the open with a child in her arms would be reprobated as a monster." [*683] Youth and loveliness are thought to be especially exposed to peril, therefore not one woman in a thousand will then show herself abroad. Nor must it be supposed that conscious ugliness is any protection; on the contrary, neither grizzled locks nor the brawny hand of the roughest ploughman exempt from the blast.

The blast is a large round tumour which is thought to rise suddenly on the part affected by the baneful breath cast on it by one of the "good people" at the time of their vindictive malice. Here in Somerset the belief in Pixies, Brownies, Little Folks, "good people," is still very prevalent.

Many a quaint practice is silently performed from mere habit, while the person so acting has no sort of knowledge why he does so and so, nor would he admit that he had any superstitious intention.

Many of the acts performed by country folk are so common that they escape the notice of all but close observers, and like many dialectal forms of speech entirely escape record, because they have not happened to come in the way of one looking out for such things. Any one who sits and gazes steadfastly

[p. 436]

into the fire is usually suspected of the evil eye. The countercharm against such is called "Turning the Coal," and is worked by the suspecter's quietly taking the tongs and then turning the largest coal in the fire right upside down, saying at the same time, either aloud or softly, "The Lord be wi' us." This is believed to throw the evil gazer into confusion, so that his vision is dispelled, and for the time his evil intentions are thwarted. It is said that in the case of a true possessor of the evil eye, if the coal be turned upon him, he feels as if the fire were upon his heart; that he has often been seen to put his hand to his breast with "Oh!" and that he is unable to move so long as the live coal is held with the tongs. After this performance he is considered to have no more power over that house. Many curious stories are to be found in Scott's Discovery of Witches, and in Ady's Candle in the Dark, by which we see that "eye-biting witches," who caused disease among cattle, and other evils, were in former days commonly executed. Indeed executions for witchcraft or working evil with the eye are recorded so late as the last century.

In Ireland fire is believed to be a great protection against fairies and witches. "Whenever churning is going on, a small bit of burning turf is put under the churn to prevent the abstraction of butter by the 'good people.'" Another custom is that any one coming into a house where churning is going on must take the churn-dash, and churn for a few seconds. His doing this prevents a person with the evil eye, should any such come in, charming away the butter, or otherwise spoiling the churning." [*684]

[p. 437]

Diseases of all kinds being the direct result of fascination, charms of various sorts have been thought effective against them. The carrying of the knuckle-bone of a sheep, called commonly a "cramp-bone," as a preventive against that ailment, is still a daily practice. I have known persons, well to do, and by no means generally ignorant, who always had one about them. It must never have touched the ground or its virtue is lost; consequently I have known it placed in a little bag and tied to the pocket or the dress, lest it should fall. This has been done within my own knowledge by both a lady and a gentleman.

The carrying of a lump of camphor in the pocket may scarcely fall into this class, still it seems a little like the pills good against an earthquake. Crooked sixpences, especially with holes in them, are becoming somewhat obsolete, but well within the writer's memory they were much prized as protective amulets.

At Westleigh, in this neighbourhood, it was up to a recent time the custom carefully to preserve all teeth extracted; women used to hide them in their back hair. This was done to prevent enemies or dogs getting hold of them, and betrays the same caution that is displayed in the more usual burning of teeth, lest injury to a part may affect the whole, dealt with in the chapter on Sympathetic Magic, <page 74>, regarding other rejections of the body. That which prevents injury may well be called protective. These persons were afraid both to burn their teeth and also to incur danger through their falling into malignant hands, so they hid them.

The personality of disease, or perhaps its direct

[p. 438]

cause by personal evil influence, is shown by some Jewish customs.

A few days ago in the Polish town of Dzialoszice, the population of which has lately been decimated by cholera, the Jewish inhabitants, of the Chassidim sect, put on curiously-formed helmets and cuirasses made of pasteboard, and armed themselves with wooden javelins. Thus equipped, they formed a procession, and with clashing cymbals and the chanting of some kind of dissonant dirge, proceeded to a given rendezvous. [*685]

Of course this was a defiant challenge to the demon of cholera.

The Chinese also exhibit much the same idea--that the spirit of the disease is the chief factor, and not the condition of their own bodies.

During a cholera outbreak two years ago in Chin Kung, on the Yangtsze-Kiang, placards were posted up, urging on the people the necessity of cleansing their hearts, saying nothing about cleansing their houses. The priests also sold charms against the disease, which, being put on board paper boats, were set adrift down the river, and were supposed to carry the disease away to sea. [*686]

In all these cases where devils, or diseases, or misfortunes had to be dealt with, the underlying belief was ever present that all were emanations from an evil eye.

Footnotes

^411:641a Daily Telegraph, Nov. 24, 1894.

^412:642 Jahn (p. 84, n. 234) says: "I have often as a boy seen the fishwives of Ellerbeck, when they had got handsel (first money, Handgeld) from my mother, how they spat upon it. They say that brings them specially good luck (besonderes Gluck). They will not tell the reason; certainly it is done to keep off witchcraft." Here in the west a very common way of begging a cup of cider is: "Maister, I be that dry, I could'n spat a zixpence." This surely means that the speaker is so dry that if a sixpence were given him he could not spit on it for luck, as well as the other and more obvious one as to the amount of his possible expectoration.

^412:643 Dodwell, vol. ii. p. 32, gives the following authors, who all mention the same thing. Theocritus, Idyl. vi. 39; Tibullus, Eleg. i. 2, 54 Petronius, Sat. 131; Persius, Sat. ii. 32; Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxviii. 3, 4 Seneca, Consol. ad Marc. 9; Plautus, Captivi, III. iv. 23.

^412:644 Potter, Archaeol. Graec., vol. i. 417. Potter also quotes the same authors as Dodwell.

	 
		And lest enchantment should my limbs infest,
		 I three times dropt my spittle on my breast;
		 This charm I learnt from an old sorceress' tongue,
		 Who harvest-home at Hypocoon's sung.
		
		 

^413:645 Spitting was in the Middle Ages not only a protective, but also an injurious act, for we read:--

	 
		I can worke wyles in battell,
		 If I but ones do spattle
		 I can make corne and cattle
		     That they shall never thryve.
		          Bale's Interlude--Idolatry, 1562, sig. C. 2.
		
		 

^413:646 Theocritus, Idyl. xx. i 1.

^413:647 Ibid. v. 66.

^413:648 In an old treatise on the hand we read that the names of the fingers are derived from their use, their position, and their size. The ancients had another name for the index, which they called salutaris "quod eo salutarent deos suos inter adorandum quippe non Romani solum, sed et aliae gentes solebant dextrae manus priore digito in erectum pollicem residente." The obvious pun in this well accords with the spirit of the older writers. The salutation of the god with the forefinger was followed by the kiss, hence we readily perceive how our word salute includes to kiss. Those who are familiar with St. Peter's statue in Rome will readily understand this, and thereby will not fail to perceive another practice of Christian times handed down from pagan ancestors. Praetorius writes: "Even nowadays we teach our boys that the right index is to be kissed (as a salutation) to persons worthy of honour, and to offer the index of honour and reverence" (Praetorius, De Pollice, Lipsiae, 1677, p. 14).

In the Greek Church kissing is still more practised than even in the [p. 414] Roman. There were several names for the middle finger, such as medius, longus, remus (oar), medius navis; also it was called impudicus, infamis, and medicus. It is still known as the medical finger. "Why it is called medicus I am unable to learn, unless it is because we are thereby most strongly bound to the wrist and vital arteries" (Ib. p. 15).

It is also called magnus from its size, as compared with parvus, denoting the two extremes in size. "The third finger is called medio proximus (next the middle) or anularis (ring finger) by the later Greeks."

On the thumb (pollex) we have another pun: "Nam pollex unus tantum pollet, quantum vix caeteri" ("For one thumb is worth all the rest"). With us moderns in the West, however, the thumb is the type of clumsiness: our vernacular for a person who is very awkward with his hands is, "He's all thumbs."

^414:649 De Pollice, p. 41. "Quo loco Cornutus, infami digito (i.e. of Persius Sat. ii.) ait, id est medio, qui obsccenitatis est et subjicit." Martial (ix. 70) also says:--

	 
		Impudicus etiam Priapi cantor eodem modo,
		 Derides quoque fur, et impudicum
		 Ostendis digitum mihi minanti."
		
		 

^414:650 Laertius, De vitis Philosophorum, lib. vi.

^415:651 De Pollice, p. 42; already sufficiently dealt with.

^416:652 De Pollice, p. 43.

^416:653 Zingerle, Sitten, Brauche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes, Nos, 176, 580; Melusine, 1878, c. 79. Frazer, Golden Bough, vol. i. p. 204.

^416:654 Spitting on the hair is of course regularly practised in Naples.

	 
		"Nell' uscir dal vostro tetto
		 La mattina su del petto
		 Ben tre volte vi sputate;
		 Quando poi vi pettinate
		 I capei, che son condutti
		 Li sputate tutti tutti."--Marugi, Capricci, p. 103.
		
		 The Editor remarks in a note to the above that Thiers says one spits three times on the hair pulled out by the comb before throwing it away; and further he says, Tibullus enjoins spitting on the breast, giving his precise words: "Despuit in molles et sibi quisque sinus." He adds I do not fail to do this always, and I have found the benefit of it."

^417:655 The same thing is recorded in Hone's Year-Book, 1831, p. 253.

^417:656 Brand, vol. iii. p. 50.

^418:657

	 
		Their beads of nits, bels, books and wax,
		 Candles, forsooth, and other knacks:
		 Their holy oyle, their fasting spittle;
		 Their sacred salt here, not a little,
		 Dry chips, old shooes, rags, grease, and bones.
		                         Herrick, Hesperides, "The Temple."
		
		 

^419:658 Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxviii, 7; Vol. V. p. 288, Bohn.

^419:659 This is still practised in Italy.

	 
		D' una cosa traggo al gioco
		 Io vantaggio poco poco,
		 Ed e questa, l' appaleso
		 Di sputar quand 'o del peso
		 Sulla scarpa del pie dritto,
		 E poi starmi zitto zitto.--Marugi, Capricci, p. 108.
		
		 The Editor remarks on this, that he has practised it with qualche sorta di profitto.

^420:660

	 
		Bring the holy crust of bread,
		 Lay it underneath the, head;
		 'Tis a certain charm to keep
		 Hags away, while children sleep.
		      Herrick, Hesperides, ed. Hazlitt, 1869, p. 304.
		
		 

^420:661 Ellis, Note to Pliny, Nat. Hist. v. p. 290, Bohn.

^420:662 Alexander Alexandrinus also wrote: "Fascinationes saliva jejuna repelli, veteri superstitioni creditum est" (Ellis, Note to Brand, vol. iii. p. 260).

^420:663 Suetonius, Vespas. 7; Tacitus, Hist. iv. 8.

^421:664 See Trench, Notes on the Miracles, p. 294.

^421:665 Dodwell, vol. ii. p. 36.

^421:666 "Mox turbatum sputo pulverem medio sustulit digito frontem repugnantis [p. 422] signat . . . hoc peracto carmine ter me jussit expuere, terque lapillos conjicere in sinum."--Petronius, Sat. 131.

This, too, confirms Persius (Sat. ii. 32):--

	 
		            "Frontemque atque uda labella
		 Infami digito, et lustralibus ante salivis
		 Expiat."
		
		 And the two quotations prove clearly not only which finger was to be used, but that the middle was the digitus infamis.

	 
		Sacred spittle bring ye hither;
		 Meale and it now mix together,
		 And a little oil with either.--Herrick, Hesperides.
		
		 

^422:667 F. Chance, Notes and Queries, 8th ser. v. 137.

^422:668 It has even been discussed as to whether, in the absence of water, spittle might be used for the baptism itself, but this latter is denied (G. Angus, Notes and Queries, 8th ser. v. 192). With further regard to spitting, we must not forget that salt is put into the child's mouth during the baptismal rite in order to make him despuere malum, or as it is called vernacularly "spit out the devil."

^423:669 Rituale Romanum, Romae, MDCCL. (Baptism of Infants). "Deinde intingit pollicem in sacro chrismate, et ungit infantem in summitate capitis in modum crucis, dicens Deus Omnipotens, etc. . . . Postea pollice faciat signum crucis in fronte et in pectore infantis," etc. . . .

The same direction as to the use of the thumb is given in the Rubrics for Extreme Unction, Confirmation, Ordination of Priests, Coronation, Consecration of an Altar, etc. . . .

^424:670 The Greeks had two names for the great northern constellation, which remain to this day--the Great Bear and the Wain. Our modern name of "King Charles's Wain" is but a very ancient one, revived with a prefix commemorating some modern event. No amount of imagination can see any real resemblance between the grouping of the points of light we call stars, and the animals or things whose names have been given to them, yet the idea took such root in primaeval minds that it has survived unchanged to this day; like the belief in the evil eye, it is quite unaccountable, and only to be set down among the facts that are. See Appendix III.

Very many are the beliefs here in England and all over the world relating to falling stars. The most widespread is probably that which connects them with death or birth. Among the shepherds of the Apennines, a falling star is a death portent ("Ecco un altro avviso di morte; chi sa mai a chi tocchera?" (Bellucci, Le Stelle Cadente e le loro leggende, Perugia, 1893, p. 10.) This author recounts various other fantastic fancies. The same is held in the Val Anzasca concerning events to happen to some one living in the house on which it appears to fall. In Russia a falling star signifies an actual death--in Lapland that of an infant. If so common a sight in some places presages death, we naturally should expect to find the complementary notion in others. In Somerset every falling star denotes a birth, while in Norfolk it proclaims a child begotten.

In New Zealand a falling star is a kick which one god gives to another weaker than himself. The universal belief in the living, animal character of heavenly bodies is shown in the belief of the people of Guiana, who say that falling stars are l' orina of the other stars, while the Loochoo Indians say that they are excrementi delle stelle (Bellucci, op. cit. p. 29).

After having written so much upon the existing belief in animal portents, it is amusing to read in the Spectator of Nov. 24, 1894, p. 725, that "the belief in animal portents . . . no longer survives in our century" (1) Two days after this (Nov. 26) a Somerset friend writes: "Does not the death of a lion still give anxiety to many a woman expecting childbirth?" This latter is a curious and unsought confirmation of the remarks on <page 76> ante.

^424:671 A. Lang, Myth and Custom, p. 124. See also Goguet, L'Origine des Lois, on this subject.

^425:672 Mrs. Reichardt, Good Words, Jan. 1893, p. 47.

^426:673 This making of smoke is aptly matched in the Apocryphal account following. "Then the angel said: 'Open the fish and take the heart and the liver and the gall and put them up safely.' So the young man did as the angel commanded him; and when they had roasted the fish, they did eat it. Then the young man said to the angel: 'Brother Azarias, to what use is the heart and the liver and the gall of the fish?' And he said to him: 'Touching the heart and the liver, if a devil or evil spirit trouble any, we must make a smoke thereof before the man or woman, and the party shall be no more vexed. As for the gall, it is good to anoint a man that hath whiteness in his eyes, and he shall be healed'" (Tobit, vi. 3-8).

^426:674 Cameron, Across Africa, vol. ii. p. 71.

^427:675 Mohammed Ibn-Omar el Tounsy, Voyage au Darfour, 1845, p. 203. Travels of an Arab Merchant, abridged by Bayle St. John, p. 91.

^427:676 Riedel, "Die Landschaft Dawan oder West-Timor," in Deutsche Geog. Blat. x. 230, quoted by Frazer.

^427:677 Bastian, Die Loango-Kuste, i. 263.

^427:678 Crowther and Taylor, Gospel on the Banks of the Niger, p. 433

^428:679 Shway Yoe, The Burman, i. 308.

^428:680 Richard, History of Tonquin, in Pinkerton, ix. p. 746.

^433:681

	 
		To house the hag you must doe this:
		 Commix with meale a little pisse
		 Of him bewitcht; then forthwith make
		 A little wafer or a cake;
		 And this rawly baked will bring
		 The old hag in.    No surer thing.
		          Herrick, Hesperides, ed. Hazlitt, 1869, p. 305
		
		 

^433:682

	 
		If ye feare to be affrighted
		 When ye are by chance benighted, [p. 433]
		 In your pocket for a trust
		 Carrie nothing but a crust.
		 For that holy piece of bread
		 Charmes the danger and the dread.
		      Herrick, Hesperides, ed. Hazlitt, 1869, p. 346.
		
		 

^435:683 Hone, Everyday Book, vol. i. p. 594

^436:684 Le Fanu, op. cit. p. 104.

^438:685 Daily News, Sept. 18, 1894.

^438:686 Public Health, Aug. 1894, p. 376.

    
The Evil Eye, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

 

APPENDIX III

THE Australian aborigines, who seem to have considerable notions of astronomy, have a name for the Pleiades, which signifies a flock of cockatoos--an object most familiar to them. Their tradition is [*687] that once upon a time they were a certain queen called Gneeanggar, and her six attendants, and that the star crow fell in love with the queen, but was so unsuccessful in gaining her affections that he determined to get possession of her by stratagem. He knew they

[p. 439]

were very fond of white grubs, and finding out when they were going in search of them, he determined to change himself into a grub. In this form he bored into the stem of a tree, where he was sure to be observed by the queen and her attendants. He was soon discovered, and one of the servants thrust in her bone-hook, which the women use for extracting grubs. Of this he broke the point, and did the same to the hooks of all the other five attendants. The queen then put her beautiful hook into the hole: he knew that it was hers, and allowed himself to be drawn out, when he immediately changed himself into a giant, and ran off with her from her maids. Ever since the loss of the queen there have been only six stars in the Pleiades representing her six servants. This story is well known in Western Australia, and with some variations in South Australia also.

These people have their own names for most of the heavenly bodies.

Like the German sun, theirs also is feminine and the moon masculine. The larger stars are sisters of the sun and moon. The Milky Way is the big river. The dark space of the Milky Way is bunyip, [*688] an animal something like a horse. When the natives first saw a horse they thought it was bunyip, and would not go near it.

Jupiter they call "Strike the Sun," a feminine name. Venus is the "Mother of the Sun."

Canopus they call crow, Sirius eagle, Antares big-stomach, and say the glow-worm took its light from this star.

The three stars in Orion's belt are the sisters of the eagle (Sirius), and always follow him.

These people believe in a good spirit as a gigantic man living above the clouds. "His voice, the thunder, [*689] is listened to with pleasure," as that of a friend. The bad spirit, who is evidently much more considered--for fear is ever stronger than love in the savage breast--is called "the

[p. 440]

maker of bad-smelling smoke"; he is the author of every ill. "At times he assumes the form of a large, ugly man, and though not provided with wings like the white man's devil, he flits and darts from place to place with the rapidity of lightning, is very mischievous, and hungers for the flesh of children." He is believed to live deep underground, and commands a number of inferior spirits. No human being has ever returned from the place called Ummekulleen, where he, Muuruup, lives. There is nothing but fire there, and the souls of bad people get neither meat nor drink, and are terribly knocked about by the evil spirits. Every adult has a wraith, or likeness of himself, which is visible only to himself, and to him only before his own premature death. Good people go off to a beautiful country above the clouds, where life will be enjoyed for ever. Friends will meet and recognise each other, but there will be no marrying, as the bodies will be left upon earth. The shades of the wicked wander miserably about the earth for one year after death, frightening people, and then descend to Ummekulleen, never to return. [*690]

These really very remarkable notions are so much like our own that one would have expected to find these savages had lived long in contact with Europeans; but we know that this cannot be so, and that their beliefs in a future state must be the relics of some unknown previous condition of civilisation, or they must be the innate ideas of primitive man. The Wuulon and the shadow referred to (P. 72) would seem to point to their descent from a higher Oriental stock-a contention further borne out by Dawson (p. 54), who describes a conveyance of land regularly signed and sealed. He says "the reader will be interested in these traces of civilisation among a people who have hitherto been considered the least civilised of all nations."

Closely connected with astrology is the poetical notion

[p. 441]

called the "Music of the Spheres," a term very often used without the slightest knowledge of its true meaning. It was an ancient belief that each of the vowels of the alphabet represented the sound uttered in its revolution by one particular planet; these all combined form one eternal harmony to the glory of the great Creator of the Universe. This is the meaning of the lines in Addison's well-known hymn:--

	 
		For ever singing, as they shine,
		 "The hand that made us is divine."
		
		 India, again, seems to have been the birthplace of this beautiful idea, which even in Plato's day was quite familiar, for he makes the seven notes proceed from a siren seated upon the several spheres, set in motion by the Fates. [*691]

Another interpretation of the seven vowels is that they represent the ineffable name of the Creator, the mystic Jehovah, the great "I Am." This explanation is supported by the fact that "these combinations of the vowels often appear purposely to include and veil from the profane sense the sacred triliteral IAU."

The same author tells us [*692] that "talisman is but the corruption in the Arabian mouth of Apotelesma, the influence of a planet upon the native; hence astrology is called e Apotelesmatike."

From astrology we are naturally led on to other practices, by which men in all ages have sought to solve the insoluble and to know the unknowable.

Magical arts, by which we mean all the various forms of divination and enchantment practised by the ancients, were said by the Greeks to have been invented in Persia, or, as we have it, Chaldea. The Magoi originally were wise men, philosophers, given to the study of nature and the contemplation of the stars and heavenly bodies. From these higher pursuits they gradually declined, and following the bent of their natural humanity, which makes fear the

[p. 442]

strongest of motives, they began to propitiate the spirits of the evils they dreaded, rather than to render thanks to the good spirits from whom they at least admitted all good things to proceed. Hence they took to the invocation of demons, leading on to what we now call black arts.

These practices are said to have been introduced among the Greeks by a certain Oethanes, who came over with the invading army of Xerxes, and who propagated the rudiments of magic. They were afterwards extended and developed by Democritus, through contact with the Phoenicians. It is clear however that the seed fell into suitable soil, which moreover had, long before Oethanes, been well prepared by the primaeval belief in the evil eye--a belief which had become so confident, that we find, as already related, the wise Pisistratus had caused a great amulet in the shape of a grillo, a locust or cricket, to be set up on a column in the Agora at Athens, as a protector against the dread influence.

The greater arts practised by the ancient Greeks were:-- [*693]

1. Necromancy (Nekromanteia) the commonest of all the magic arts, by which answers to matters relating to this life 'were obtained from the dead. Closely allied, and belonging to this, was Psychomancy (Psyxomanteia), by which the dead were called up or made to appear in airy forms like shades or ghosts. This was the art, however it may have been practised, of the Witch of Endor.

Among the old Greeks there were particular places set apart as specially appropriate to this art, called Nekromanteia. Of these, two were the most remarkable--first Threspotia, where Orpheus restored to life his wife Eurydice, and where Periander, tyrant of Corinth, was affrighted by the appearance of his wife Melissa, whom he had murdered; secondly, the next most noted spot

[p. 443]

was at the famous cave of the Sibyl, on the Lacus Avernus, between Pozzuoli and Baiae in Campania, about ten miles from Naples. This latter is celebrated by Horner and Virgil in their stories of Aeneas and Ulysses. The writer can testify that it can still be entered and explored, though somewhat flooded by water, consequent on recent volcanic disturbance.

2. Hydromancy (Edromanteia), divination by the images or other appearances caused to appear in water, as of a fountain. Often this was performed with a basin and then called Lekanomanteia.

Frequently the same art with a like result was practised with a mirror or looking-glass, and hence called Katoptromanteia. Sometimes it was performed in vessels of water, the centre of which was called Gaster, and hence this divination was called Gastromanteia. The latter was performed thus: Round vessels were filled with clear water, about which were placed lighted torches; they then invoked the demon, in a low, murmuring voice, and proposed the question to be solved. A chaste boy or a pregnant woman was appointed to observe with the greatest care and exactness all the alterations in the glasses, at the same time desiring, beseeching, and also commanding an answer, which at length the demon used to return by images in the glasses, which by reflection from the water represented what should come to pass. [*694]

There can be no doubt that Joseph had learnt this art of divination from the Egyptians. It was his divining cup or bowl which was found in Benjamin's sack. "Is not this it (the bowl) in which my lord drinketh, and whereby indeed he divineth?" (Gen. xliv. 5). Again, when brought back, Joseph himself said to his brethren: "What deed is this that ye have done? wot ye not that such a man as I

[p. 444]

can certainly divine?" (Gen. xliv. 15). He evidently took it for granted that his brethren would believe he could ascertain by magic who had stolen the money and the cup.

3. Crystalomancy (Krystallomanteia) was performed with polished and enchanted crystals, wherein future events were discerned by certain marks and figures which were caused to appear.

4. Dactylomancy (Daktylomanteia), or divination by enchanted rings.

5. Onychomancy (Onyxomanteia) was performed by the finger-nails of an unpolluted boy. These were covered with soot and oil, and when turned to the sun they reflected the desired image.

6. Aeromancy (Aeromanteia), divination by appearances in the air.

7. Lithomancy (Lithomanteia), divination with a precious stone called siderites. By a stone of this kind, Helenus is reported to have foretold the destruction of Troy. Precious stones were not only used for the purpose of divination, but were in themselves held in the highest esteem as amulets or charms against the evil eye chiefly, but also against diseases.

Of all relics of the occult arts perhaps the beliefs attaching to famous stones, from the Scone stone under the Coronation Chair, to the moonstones and toadstones of fable, are in these days as conspicuous as any. How many stories we find nowadays turning upon the safe keeping of some mystic stone, or precious gem, whose loss is fatal to its possessor or his family.

Another subsidiary divination was by the well-known crackling sound made by laurel leaves in burning. The word Daphne (dafne), the Greek for laurel, is said to be da-fune (from the sound), i.e. the noise made by the leaves in burning.

8. Coscinomancy (Koskinomanteia), divination by a sieve, which, according to Theocritus, was used by an old woman [*695] in telling silly people their fortunes.

[p. 445]

9. Axinomancy (Axinomanteia) from Axine an axe or hatchet, which was posted on a stake and was supposed to turn at the name of the guilty person. Perhaps here we have a clue to the origin of our vernacular "bury the hatchet," although Longfellow (Hiawatha xiii.) makes the custom North American.

10. Cephalonomancy (Kefalonomanteia), divination by broiling an ass's head on coals. The jaws were said to move at the name of the guilty person.

11. Alectromancy (Alektryomanteia), by a cock. Twenty-four letters were laid on the ground with a grain of corn on each; the cock magically prepared was then let loose, and the letters from which he picked the corns in order were joined and produced the required name.

12. Sideromancy (Sideromanteia), conjuring with a hot iron, on which they laid an odd number of straws. The result required was obtained by observing the contortions made by the straws in burning.

13. Molybdomancy (Molybdomanteia), by noting motions and figures in molten lead.

14. Tephromancy (Tefromanteia), divination by ashes after exposure to the wind.

15. Botanomancy (Botanomanteia), conjuring with herbs, especially Elelisfakos or salvia.

Sometimes fig-leaves were used, and then it was called Sycomancy (Sykomanteia). The diviners wrote names and questions on leaves, which were then exposed to the winds. Those remaining furnished the answers sought.

16. Ceromancy (Keromanteia), divination by the forms assumed by melted wax dropped into water.

17. Pharmacy (Farmakeia). This was perhaps the most commonly practised as well as the most powerful of all the black arts, and has doubtless left its mark upon the poisoner's craft of later ages. It consisted in divination by means of medicated drugs, both vegetable and mineral, called Farmaka. Some of these were believed to be of great efficacy, and capable of imparting their venom

[p. 446]

to persons at a considerable distance. So widespread was the belief in the potency of these poisons, that special charms or amulets, called Farmaka suteria, were provided to counteract them. These were: herb moly, which preserved Ulysses from the enchantments of Circe, laurel (daphne), sallow-tree, rhamn or Christ thorn, fleabane, the jasper stone, and many others mentioned by the mediaeval writer Albertus Magnus and by Orpheus in his book De Lapillis.

Certain rings also were used as countercharms, which were called by Aristophanes, in his Plutus, Daktylioys Farmakitas.

Both Democritus and Pythagoras were reputed to be skilful in pharmacy. The Thessalians, particularly the women, were most celebrated among the Greeks as practisers of it. Besides all these, a great many other forms and modes of enchantment were devoutly used by the ancients. The more powerful incantations were firmly believed to be capable of even drawing the moon from her path. [*696]

The moon, indeed, was thought to preside over the art of pharmacy, while Hecate, who, as we have seen, was but one of the persons or attributes of Artemis or Diana Triformis, was supposed to have been the inventor of it. Hence both these goddesses, really the same, were invoked by its adepts. Whenever the moon was eclipsed it was thought to be the effect of magicians; and at such times it was usual to beat drums and kettles, to sound hautboys, trumpets, or any instruments making a great noise, to drown the voices of the sorcerers or evil workers, so that their charms might be impotent.

To this great art of pharmacy, on the other hand, belong all the charms, amulets, and enchantments against poison, venom of serpents, with all diseases; and hence of course our modern use of the word.

[p. 447]

The faith in the power of magic arts was simply unbounded, as is testified by nearly all the classic writers. Tibullus (Eleg. II. i. 43) says that a certain famous enchantress could not only draw down the stars from the sky, but could change the course of a river. Further, she could make snow to fall in summer.

Horace, Lucan, Ovid, all bear similar witness: how that not only could they cause earthquakes and lightnings, but even could make the dead come out of their tombs. Hence we see that what was held to be a protector against the witch, or the witchcraft capable of producing such calamities, soon got to be considered a specific against the evil itself. Thus our joke about pills good against an earthquake was once a serious fact devoutly believed.

We find that certain of these incantations had to be performed during the increase of the moon; and similarly we read in the old herbals of Gerard, Turner, and Culpepper, how greatly the influence of the moon is to be considered in taking the remedies they prescribe.

Even Plato speaks of the Thessalian enchantresses as able to remove the moon from the sky, and he is followed by many other writers. This account is moreover confirmed by both Tibullus and Virgil. All stories are, however, capped by Pliny, who gravely states that an entire olive orchard, belonging to one Vectius Marcellus, was drawn by enchantment across the public road, while the land on which it was placed was made to go back and take the place previously occupied by the olive orchard. [*697]

Ovid, too, gives some very strange stories of how, by incantation, the stars distilled blood and the moon became of a bloody purple.

	 
		His mother was a witch, and one so strong
		 That could control the moon, make flows and ebbs,
		 And deal in her command without her power.
		                                    The Tempest, Act v. Sc. i.
		
		 Magicians were also believed to be able to raise the gods of the upper and lower world, and compel them to answer

[p. 448]

questions. Pliny, again, even gives the names of the herbs they used for this purpose. It appears, however, that the raising of the gods was not the same as the commoner necromancy, but must have belonged to the highest powers of the adepts in pharmacy, seeing that herbs were employed for the purpose.

It is, of course, futile to speculate as to the means, the extent to which these things were done, or, indeed, as to the truth of any of these wonderful stories. All we can say is, that in the Bible are abundant references to the wizards and magicians who "did so with their enchantments." We cannot believe them implicitly in the light of our present knowledge, neither can we explain them away, least of all can we venture to scoff at so many, so various, and in other respects so truthful witnesses.

A magical operation, almost precisely similar to the ancient Greek Gastromanteia, is recorded as witnessed by himself in Mr. Lane's Modern Egyptians (vol. ii. ch. xii.), except that the mirror was of ink instead of clear water. This performance is now called darb-el-mendel. The chaste boy was the medium as of old; and the magician informed him that formerly those who alone could see the images, were the boy and a pregnant woman, to whom, however, modern experience seems to have added a virgin and a black female slave. The whole business is minutely described, and the form of invocation, written, as translated by Mr. Lane, was readily given to him. The main influence is said to be achieved by the first two words. We give the invocation, and refer the inquirer for full information to Mr. Lane's book.

 Magic Invocation and Charm

	 
		  Tarshun! Taryoashun! come down!
		 Come down! be present! Whither are gone
		 The prince and his troops? Where are El Ahmar
		 The prince and his troops? Be present,
		 Ye servants of these names!
		 And this is the removal, and we have removed from thee
		 Thy veil; and thy sight to-day
		 Is piercing! Correct: correct.
		
		 
		
		 [p. 449]

Besides this invocation there was the very common magic square with Arabic numerals making 15, as shown on <page 402>. The only difference is in the position of the figures, which of course makes no change in the result so long as 5 is kept in the centre. The same applies to the squared words--tenet must be in the centre.

Footnotes

^438:687 James Dawson, Australian Aborigines, Melbourne, 1881, p. 100.

^439:688 Lumholtz, Among Cannibals, 1889, p. 202.

^439:689 Dawson, op. cit. p. 49.

^440:690 Dawson, op. cit. p. 51. See also on this subject Tylor, Prim. Cult. i. 274 et seq.

^441:691 King, Gnostics, p. 93.

^441:692 Ibid. p.115.

^442:693 Fuller accounts of all these, together with the details of a large number of subsidiary enchantments, will be found in Potter's Archaeologia Graeca, vol. i., and in Pliny's Letters and Natural History.

^443:694 Potter, Archaeol. Graeca, i. 408, Copied verbatim in Robinson's Grecian Antiquities, p. 271 from whom Mr. Goodwin repeats it in Fragment of a Graeco-Egyptian work upon Magic Cambridge, 1852, p. 22. The modern Persians apply the word Jain, signifying a cup, mirror, or even globe, to magical vessels of this kind. See R. S. Poole in Smith's Dict. of the Bible, S, v. "Magic," p. 197.

^444:695 Archbishop Potter makes Theocritus call the old woman a gypsy!

^446:696 See Ovid, Metamorph. vii. 207:--

	 
		"Te quoque, Luna, traho";
		
		 Virgil, Eclog. viii. 70:--

	 
		"Carmina vel caelo possunt deducere lunam.
		
		 

^447:697 Pliny, Nat. Hist. xvii. 38 (vol. iii. p. 527, Bohn).

We are then told minutely what the boy said he saw; but from "holding the boy's hand all the while" he was looking intently into the ink, it appears rather like a case of hypnotism, plus a good deal of apparatus in the way of a chafing dish, frankincense, and coriander seed, so that "the fumes became painful to the eyes." The boy, however, was evidently not an educated medium, as he was taken from a crowd, and was Mr. Lane's own selection. The description of the objects seen by the boy, as elicited by leading questions, shows that these questions are evidently ancient and traditional forms, while the general resemblance of the objects said to be seen in the ink, to the appearances mentioned in the papyrus, No. XLVI., described in Mr, Goodwin's paper (see <page 395>), is quite obvious. We are thus brought to perceive that this art as now practised in Egypt has changed but little in two thousand years.




===== BOOK: tfc.txt =====


     
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

  

TALES FROM CHAUCER
 TOLD FOR YOUNG PEOPLE
 BY CHARLES COWDEN CLARKE

  

Tales from Chaucer

  

The Canterbury Tales by Geoffrey Chaucer:

  

selected tales told for young people

  

by Charles Cowden Clarke

  

and illustrated with miniatures

  

by Arthur Szyk

  

The Heritage Illustrated Bookshelf

  

[New York: The Heritage Press]

  

[1947]

  

Text originally published London: Effington Wilson [1833]

Scanned, proofed, and formatted at sacred-texts.com, July 2009, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923. The 1947 edition artwork is in the US public domain because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion.

Click to enlarge
Frontispiece

      
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Contents

To My Young Readers, PAGE <page xi>

To An Adult Reader, PAGE <page xiii>

Introduction, PAGE <page xv>

The Prologue, PAGE <page 1>

The Knight's Tale, PAGE <page 21>

The Lawyer's Tale, PAGE <page 54>

The Student's Tale, PAGE <page 73>

The Wife of Bath's Tale, PAGE <page 97>

The Squire's Tale, PAGE <page 106>

The Pardoner's Tale, PAGE <page 125>

The Nun's Priest's Tale, PAGE <page 136>

The Cook's Tale of Gamelin, PAGE <page 148>

The Canon's Yeoman's Tale, PAGE <page 169>

      
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xi]

  

To My Young Readers

I HAVE endeavoured to put these Tales, written by one of the finest poets that ever lived, into modern language and into as easy prose as I could, without at the same time destroying the poetical descriptions and strong natural expressions of the author. My object in presenting them in this new form was, first, that you might become wise and good by the example of the sweet and kind creatures you will find described in them; secondly, that you might derive improvement by the beautiful writing (for I have been careful to use the language of Chaucer whenever I thought it not too antiquated for modern and young readers); and, lastly, I hoped to excite in you an ambition to read these same stories in their original poetical dress when you shall have become so far acquainted with your own language as to understand, without much difficulty, the old and now almost forgotten terms.

I can promise those among you who possess an ear for the harmony of verse that when you come to read the compositions of this great poet you will then feel how much they have lost by being reduced to my dull prose--although I have laboured to render my narratives as much like poetical prose as I was able; and, more particularly, to give them the air of ancient writing newly dressed up. And I believe I may say that I have in

[p. xii]

no instance omitted to introduce a beautiful or natural thought when I could do so with ease and propriety, and without interfering with the quick progress of the story.

In the original Tales are many long discussions which you would find uninteresting at any age; and there are, also, quaint or curious expressions which would not be pleasing to your differently educated ears: these I have omitted altogether, except when I felt that they would preserve the old character of the narration, and not to be too old-fashioned to be misunderstood by you.

The following sentence from Mr. Lamb's preface to his prose tales from the plays of Shakespeare--a book every one of you should read--will explain all I would say upon the present occasion.

"Faint and imperfect images," he says, "they must be called (of the original dramas), because the beauty of his (Shakespeare's) language is too frequently destroyed by the necessity of changing many of his excellent words into words far less expressive of his true sense to make it read something like prose; and even in some places where his verse is given unaltered, as, hoping from its simple plainness, to cheat the young readers into a belief that they are reading prose, yet still, his language being transplanted from its own natural soil and wild poetic garden, it must want much of its native beauty."

May you, in reading these pages, experience half the pleasure that the writing of them has afforded

THE AUTHOR.

      
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiii]

THE adult reader (should I be honoured with such) , who can scarcely fail to discern an abrupt stiffness in the construction of the sentences in the following Tales, will bear in mind the many complicated difficulties I have had to contend with in retaining, as much as possible, Chaucer's antique quaintness and distinctive character; in avoiding his repetitions, and yet in incorporating every nervous expression which constitutes the great charm of his graphic descriptions.

The task I proposed to myself was to render my translations literal with the original, to preserve their antique fashion, and withal to give them a sufficiently modern air to interest the young reader. I was to be at one and the same time "modernly antique," prosaically poetic, and comprehensively concise. He only will appreciate my frequent perplexities who shall attempt the same task--observing the same restrictions.

      
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiv] [p. xv]

  

Introduction

GEOFFREY CHAUCER, the father of English poetry, was born in the second year of the reign of Edward III, 1328, and almost certainly in London, notwithstanding the contradictory accounts of his biographers; since he himself, who must be the surest authority upon this point, when speaking of the troubles which were occurring in that city, says, "The city of London, that is to me so dear and sweet, in which I was forth-grown; and more kindly love have I to that place than to any other in earth (as every kindly creature hath full appetite to that place of his kindly ingendure)."

The earliest account we have of Chaucer is that he was entered a student of the University of Cambridge, of which college, however, no record exists--none, at least, has hitherto been discovered. Here at the age of eighteen he wrote his poem of the "Court of Love." From Cambridge he went to Oxford, but to which college is again as much a matter of conjecture as the former place of his abode. Here he completed his studies and became, says his biographer Leland, "a ready logician, a smooth rhetorician, a pleasant poet, a grave philosopher, an ingenious mathematician, and a holy divine."

Being thus accomplished, he travelled into France, Holland, and the Low Countries, and upon his return home entered himself of the Inner Temple, where he

[p. xvi]

studied the municipal laws of the land. Shortly after he had begun to turn his mind to this branch of learning, his lustrous talents made him known at the court of Edward III, a prince as eminent for his patronage of genius as for his romantic valour. In this gay region of chivalry, mirth, and gallantry, surrounded by wit and beauty, he started upon the full career of life: his age the prime of manhood (nearly thirty), and person of just proportion, with a fair and beautiful complexion, full and red lips, and a graceful and dignified carriage, to crown which attractions may be added his newly-fledged renown as a love-poet--all gave him the advantage over any competitors. A handsome and modest young poet moving about a gallant court is a beautiful picture for the mind to contemplate.

His first preferment was to that of king's page at a yearly salary of twenty marks--no mean stipend at that period; this act was followed by appointment to the office of gentleman of the king's privy chamber, with an additional gratuity of twenty marks; and shortly after we find him promoted to be shield-bearer to the king, a post of signal honour, since by the fulfilment of its duties he was brought in immediate vicinage to the royal person, and upon occasions of victory was rewarded with military honours.

About the period of his marriage he received another proof of royal favour in the grant of a pitcher of wine to be furnished to him daily; and this was quickly followed by his being appointed comptroller of the customs for wool, woolfels, and hides, with an especial clause subjoined to the patent that the duties of the office should be

[p. xvii]

performed in person, and even that the accounts should be written with his own hand. Chaucer was no drone in the common hive; he filled this situation with unimpeached honour and integrity, and at the time when places of the same description, in the old age and weakness of the king, were farmed out and the people compelled to pay for services not performed, no shade of imputation for such unworthiness attaches to this poet's memory. No one, as he says of himself, could "speak evil of his administration"; also that he "never defouled his conscience for any manner of deed." Other casual benefits, together with his permanent offices of emolument, contributed to render him a very wealthy man.

The next public employment in which we find Chaucer engaged is that of ambassador, having been sent out to France in conjunction with the Earl of Huntingdon and Sir Richard Sturry to negotiate a match between the daughter of the French king and the young Prince of Wales, afterwards Richard II. The mission, however, terminated only in obtaining a prolongation of a truce between the two countries.

In the fourth year of the reign of Richard II, that prince confirmed to Chaucer and his wife Philippa the annuity grants that had been made to them. About the same time too the poet's son Thomas married Maud, daughter of Sir John Burghershe; she was one of the wealthiest heiresses of that time.

But who in thinking of Chaucer connects him with the comptrollership of the customs or as a page? Yet these employments, with all their temporal benefits, brought with them much labour and anxiety; while the beneficent

[p. xviii]

spirit of nature rewarded him during life with untroubled calm and happiness for his devotion at her shrine, and after death with a crown of glory as fresh and vivid as the recurring flowers that she sprinkles over her green lap.

The short period in which he survived the dethroning of Richard II was mainly occupied in arranging his worldly affairs, which had been thrown into disorder; for all the public acts of that unhappy monarch were, after his deposition, annulled. Chaucer was, therefore, compelled to leave the quiet of Donnington and plunge into the turmoil of business, a change of habit that few aged men could encounter with impunity--to the poet, who was stooping under the weight of years, it proved fatal. In the full enjoyment of his clear faculties, but with an exhausted frame, he died on the 25th of October, 1400, in the seventy-second year of his age.

He descended to his grave in the fullness of a high reputation as an extraordinary genius and a generous and noble-minded man. He was buried in the great south aisle of Westminster Abbey--that quarter now so well known under the name of "Poets' Corner."

The career of Chaucer, from whichever point we may view it, assumes a character greatly elevated above that of ordinary men. He was a poet, a philosopher, an astronomer, a logician, a linguist, a politician, a theologian, a humanist, a gentleman in the modern acceptation of the term, and a virtuous man. His conduct as a man holding a public office stands unimpeached for integrity. He was a gentleman, for he was the universal theme of admiration in a refined court--particularly by

[p. xix]

the women, and they rarely err in making a correct estimate of a man's temper and habits. He was a humanist, for he has ever at hand an apology for the frailties of our nature; above all, when he would atone for the lapses of the most responsible and the least excused of our race--the women.

Many of the tales of Chaucer prove him to have been a linguist of no ordinary standard; and his prose essays stamp him a logician. It has been already shown that he was well versed in the science of astronomy--as much of it at least as was known in that age. That he was a philosopher in the most practical acceptation of the term--that of humanising his fellow-creatures and making them happier as well as wiser--we need only refer to the best and most carefully written of his poems.

As a poet, his chief power lay in description, and this was marvellous; whatever object it is his purpose to delineate, he inspects and probes, and twists, and turns it on every side, as a botanist pores into a flower; and then he presents it to you clothed in the minute perfection of a Dutch painting with the charms of ease, grace, and freedom superadded. So patiently did he study the characters of the people he described that he seems not to have more closely examined their costumes (accurately as he did this) than he did their habits of thought. Hence, the speeches he puts into their mouths are so truly in keeping that their great merit almost becomes neutralised in the mind; for we feel that he merely put down what he heard as well as what he saw when describing his characters. The late Mr. Hazlitt, in his lectures on the poets, has most happily in one pithy sentence (a remarkable

[p. xx]

feature in his critical analyses) struck out Chaucer's poetical faculty. He says, "His poetry reads like history. Everything has a downright reality, at least in the narrator's mind. A simile or a sentiment, is as if it were given in upon evidence." Again: "He speaks of what he wishes to describe with the accuracy, the discrimination, of one who relates what has happened to himself, or has had the best information from those who have been eyewitnesses of it. The strokes of his pencil always tell. He dwells only on the essential, on that which would be interesting to the persons really concerned: yet as he never omits any material circumstance, he is a prolix from the number of points on which he touches without being diffuse on any one, and is sometimes tedious from the fidelity with which he adheres to his subject, as other writers are from the frequency of their digressions from it. The chain of his history is composed of a number of fine links, closely connected together, and riveted by a single blow.

"He is contented to find grace and beauty in truth. He exhibits for the most part the naked object, with little drapery thrown over it. His metaphors, which are few, are not for ornament, but use, and as like as possible to the things themselves. He does not affect to show his power over the reader's mind, but the power which the subject has over his own."

      
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

The Prologue

IN that pleasant season of the year when the April showers and the soft west wind make the grass and the flowers to spring up in every mead and heath, and birds welcome the shining days, it is the custom with people from all parts of the country to set forth on pilgrimages to foreign lands, and more especially to pay their vows at the shrine raised in Canterbury to the holy martyr St. Thomas a Becket.

At this time of the year, I, Geoffrey Chaucer, the writer of these Tales, was remaining at the sign of the Tabard, in Southwark, ready to set forth on my pilgrimage to Canterbury. In the evening a company of about nine and twenty persons, bound on the same errand, had assembled in the inn, with all of whom I had made acquaintance before sunset and had agreed to journey in their company the following day. Before I enter upon my tale, the reader may desire to know what were the character, condition, and exterior accomplishments of my fellow-travellers. These, as they appeared to me, I supply as follows.

The first in order was a worthy Knight, a worshipper from his youth of chivalrous and all gallant deeds, a lover of truth and honour, frankness and courtesy. He had served with renown in his Lord's wars against the Heathen, the Russian, and the Turk, had fought in fifteen

[p. 2]

battles, and in three tilting matches had slain his foe. With all these rough and unchamber-like accomplishments, he was in his demeanour and address as meek as a young maiden. No villainous or injurious speech was ever heard to pass his lips--in short, he was a perfect knight of gentle blood. As regards his furniture and equipment, he rode a good and serviceable horse, which had become staid and somewhat the worse from hard campaigning. His dress was a short fustian cassock, or gaberdine, soiled and fretted with his armour, for he had newly arrived from foreign travel, and was proceeding straight to the shrine of our holy martyr at Canterbury.

He was accompanied by his son, a youth about twenty years of age, who acted as his Squire. The person of this young man was tall and well-proportioned, of great strength and activity. Being a bachelor and a lover, he was delicately attentive to his external appearance. His hair, which flowed in rich and natural curls upon his shoulders, was carefully disposed. Hoping to win his lady's favour, he had behaved with bravery in three several expeditions--in Flanders, in Artois, and in Picardy. His gown, which was short, with long open sleeves, was as fresh and gay as a spring meadow embroidered with flowers. Singing and piping all day long, he was as cheerful as the month of May. In addition to all these graces, he was a fine horseman, a tasteful writer of songs, excelled in the tournament and the dance, could write and draw with ease and elegance, and, what is esteemed a principal accomplishment in a squire of high degree, he was worthy to carve at table before his father. Courteous,

[p. 3]

humble, and dutiful was this fair young man, and withal so devoted to his lady-love that he would outwatch the doting nightingale.

One other attendant, and no more, had our Knight upon the present occasion, a Yeoman, dressed in a green coat and hood. He had a head like a nut, [**] and a face of the same colour. In his hand he carried a sturdy bow, and at his side under his belt a sheaf of bright sharp arrows, winged with peacock feathers. His arm was defended by a bracer; on one side hung a sword and buckler, and on the other a well-appointed dagger, keen as a spear. At his breast hung a silver ornament, also a horn, the girdle or baldrick of which was green. He was a thorough forester, and skilful in all manner of woodcraft.

There was also in our company a Nun, a Prioress, called Madam Eglantine, a demure and simply-smiling lady, whose sharpest speech was, "By Saint Eloi!" She could chaunt by heart the whole of the divine service, sweetly twanging it through her nose. She was mistress of the French language, as it is spoken at the school of Stratford-le-Bow, but the French of Paris was to her unknown. Her conduct at meals was precisely well-bred and delicate, all her anxiety being to display a courteous and stately deportment, and to be regarded in return with esteem and reverence. So charitable and piteous was her nature that a dead or bleeding mouse in a trap would wring her heart. She kept several little dogs, which were

[p. 4]

pampered with roast meat, milk, and the finest bread. Bitterly would she take on if one were ill-used or dead. In short, she was all conscience and tender heart.

To speak of her features: her nose was long but well-shaped; her eyes light and grey as glass; her mouth delicately small, soft, and red; and her forehead fair and broad. For dress she wore a neatly-made cloak and a carefully-crimped neckerchief; on her arm was a pair of beads of small coral, garnished with green, from which depended a handsome gold brooch with a great A engraved upon it, and underneath the motto, "Amor vincit omnia." (Love overcomes all things.)

In her train was another Nun, who acted as her chaplain, also three priests.

The next in succession was a Monk, one well calculated to rule his order. He was a bold rider and fond of hunting. A manly man, and worthy to have been an abbot. Many a capital horse had he in stall, and as he rode along one could hear his bridle jingling in the whistling wind like the distant chapel bells. [**]

Our Monk set but little store by the strict regulations of the good old saints, holding rather with modern opinions. For instance, he cared not the value of a straw for that one which denies that a monk can be a hunter and at the same time a holy man, or that out of his cloister he is like a fish out of water. And, indeed, there is some reason in his objection, for, as he would say, "Why

[p. 5]

should he pore all day over his books till his brain is turned, or apply himself to handicraft labour as St. Augustin ordains? Let St. Augustin stick to his day-labour!" For himself, he was a good hard rider outright, and kept his greyhounds, which were as swift as swallows before rain. Coursing was his sole pleasure, and to gratify it he spared no cost.

I noticed that his sleeves were embroidered with the finest grey fur, and his hood fastened under his chin with a curiously chased gold clasp, at one end of which was wrought a true lover's knot. His head was bald and shone like glass; his face too seemed as though it had been anointed. His eyes were deeply set, and kept rolling in his head, which glowed and steamed like a furnace. He had anything but the air of a mortified and ghostly father, indeed a roast swan was his favourite dish. A fine and stately horse, as brown as a berry, and boots supple and without a wrinkle, completed the equipment of this choice specimen of a prelate.

There was a Friar, a limiter, [**] who, though in appearance a solemn man, was a wanton and merry wag. No man in all the four orders of brotherhood was such an adept in dalliance and smooth speech. Many a young girl had he joined in wedlock free of expense. He was the very prop and stay of his order. He was a favourite with all the country round, and especially cherished by the good dames of the town, for being a licenciate, [*+] he was, by his own account, as great in hearing confession as a curate. Sweetly would he dispense the duties of shrift, [*++] and pleasant

[p. 6]

was his absolution. Whenever he expected a handsome pittance the penance he enjoined was always light, for it is a sign a man has been well shriven when he makes presents to a poor convent.

His tippet was constantly stored with articles of cutlery and knick-knacks, which he distributed among the good wives in his perambulations. To these pleasant qualities, which made him everywhere a welcome guest, he added the grace of being a performer on the lute and a merry singer. In figure he was as well made and strong as a champion of wrestlers, and the skin of his neck was as white as the lady-lily. He was better acquainted with all the taverns, tapsters, and hostlers in the town than with the strolling beggars, the sick, and the miserable: for a man of his worth and calling it was more convenient as well as befitting that he should cultivate the acquaintance of the rich, and dispensers of good things, than with the diseased and the mendicant. Wherever he spied a chance of profit or advantage there did he direct all his courtesy and humbly ply his services. He was the expertest beggar in the convent, and obtained a grant that none of the brethren should cross him in his haunts, for if a widow had barely a shoe to her foot, so sweet to her ear was his, "As it was in the beginning," etc., that he would extort a farthing from her before his departure. Of him it might be said that "the labourer was of more worth than his hire." On settling days he was a man of importance, not like a cloisterer, or poor scholar with his threadbare cloak, but rather as master of the order, or even like the pope himself.

He wore a short cloak of double-woven worsted, round

[p. 7]

as a lady's dress, uncrushed. He would lisp in his speech from wantonness, or to give effect to his English, and while he was singing his eyes would twinkle like the stars in a frosty night. The name of this worthy limiter was Hubert.

There was a Merchant with a forked beard, and dressed in a motley suit, with a Flemish beaver hat. His boots were of the best manufacture, neatly clasped. He sat high upon his horse, and delivered his opinions in a solemn tone, always sounding forth the increase of his winnings. He was for having the sea securely guarded, for the benefit of trade, between Middleburgh and Orwell. His skill and knowledge in the various exchanges of money were remarkable, and so prudently did he order his bargains and speculations that he was esteemed a man of credit and substance.

There was a Clerk, or student, of Oxford also, who was deeply skilled in logic. His horse was as lean as a rake, and he himself was not overfed, but looked hollow and staidly sober. His surtout cloak was of the threadbare class; for he had hitherto obtained no living, and not being a man of the world he was unfit for an office. He had rather have at his bed's head twenty books of Aristotle and his philosophy than the costliest wardrobe and furniture. Though a philosopher, however, he had not yet discovered the golden secret of science, but all that he could scrape from his friends was forthwith spent in books of learning. Fervently would he pray for the souls of those who would assist him to purchase instruction, for study was the sole care of his life. In conversation he never uttered a word more than was necessary,

[p. 8]

and that was said with a modest propriety, shortly and quickly, and full of meaning. His discourse was pregnant with morality, and he as gladly afforded as received instruction.

A Sergeant-at-Law, cautious and shrewd, who had been often at consultation, was there also. A prudent and deferential man. He had been frequently appointed justice of assize by patent and commission. Many were the fees and robes with which he had been presented on account of his great legal knowledge and renown. There was no purchaser like him, and his dealings were above suspicion. He was the busiest of men, and yet he seemed more busy than he was. He had at his fingers' ends all the terms, cases, and judgments from the time of the Conquest, and in his indictments the man was clever that could detect a flaw. He knew all the statutes by heart. He rode in a plain coat of mixed cloth, fastened with a narrow-striped silken girdle.

A country gentleman, commonly called a Franklin, was in our company. He had a fresh-coloured, rosy face, and a beard as white as a daisy. A sop in wine was his favourite morning beverage, for he was a true son of Epicurus, believing that the most perfect happiness consisted in perfect enjoyment. He possessed a noble mansion, and was the most hospitable of entertainers. He dined at quality hours--always after one o'clock--and so plenteously stored was his table that his house may be said to have snowed meat and drink--fish, flesh, and fowl, and of these the daintiest. His suppers were furnished according to the season. Many a fat partridge had he in his preserve, and stewed bream or pike was a common

[p. 9]

dish at his board. Ill befel his cook if the sauce were too pungent, or his dinner not punctually served. He kept open house, and the dining table in hall remained covered the whole day.

He had been at several times justice of the peace, sheriff, steward of the hundred court, and knight of the shire. Among all the country gentlemen round there was not his compeer. At his girdle, which was as white as morning milk, hung a dagger and a silken purse.

A Haberdasher and a Carpenter, a Weaver, a Dyer, and a worker of Tapestry, members of a solemn and large fraternity, were all clothed in the same costume. Their furniture was all spick and span new. Their knives were not of the common description, mounted with brass, but wrought with pure silver. Their girdles and pouches also were equally costly. Each seemed to be of the respectable class of burgesses who take the uppermost seats [**] in the Guildhall. Their grave and sensible demeanour befitted them for the office of aldermen. They were men of landed estate and wealthy in cattle, and this their wives had no objection to, for it is a fine thing to be styled "Madam," and to walk, with your train supported like a queen, in the first ranks to church.

The company had a Cook with them upon this occasion. He was the man of all others to tell you a draught of London ale out of a hundred. No one could match him in roasting and boiling; his made-dishes, potted beef, raised pies, and blanc-mangers were absolutely eminent.

There was a Shipman, or merchantman too, a west-countryman; I think he came from Dartmouth: he rode

[p. 10]

upon a hack--as well as he was able--and wore a gown of coarse stuff, which carne down as low as his knee, also a dagger suspended by a lace from his neck under his arm. The hot summer had made his face all brown--he was a fine, hearty-looking fellow. Many and many a cask of wine had he brought from Bourdeaux while the merchants were fast asleep in their beds. He was not remarkable for tenderness of conscience, seeing that if he were engaged at sea, and had got the upper-hand, he always sent his prisoners home by water. [**] But for skill in reckoning his tides, for knowing all the currents, shallows, and sandbanks, the exact place of the sun, the age of the moon, and for the complete art of piloting, there was not his equal between Hull and Carthage. He was a brave and prudent man, whose beard many a tempest had shaken. He was intimate with every harbour from Gothland to Cape Finisterre, and every creek in Spain and Brittany. His ship was called the Magdalen.

There was a Doctor of Physic with us. No one was like him for discoursing on medicine and surgery, for he was well grounded in astronomy. He kept his patients principally by his magic, and could render them fortunate by the ascendant of his images. He was a skilful practitioner, and knew the cause of every malady; whether it were cold, heat, moisture, or drouth; where it originated, and from what humour; the cause and root of his complaint being discovered, he would quickly set the

[p. 11]

patient on his legs again. His apothecaries were ever at his beck and call, to pour in their drugs and electuaries--for they played into each others' hands. Their friendship was of long standing. He was well read in the old authors--Esculapius, Dioscorides, and Rufus; Old Galen, Halius, and Hippocrates, and a host besides. He was very measured and exact in his diet, avoiding superfluity, and always selecting that which was most nourishing and digestible. His Bible he studied but little. His dress was a rose-coloured Persian, lined with thin silk, or taffeta, yet he was but easy in his circumstances. He carefully laid by all his gains during the pestilence, for gold is well known to be a cordial in medicine; gold therefore he held in especial reverence.

A good Wife of Bath made one of our company. She was unfortunately rather deaf, and had lost some of her teeth. She carried on a trade in clothmaking, which excelled the manufacturers of Ypres and Ghent. No wife in all the parish could take precedence of her at mass, and if one ever so presumed she was wrath out of all charity. The kerchiefs which adorned her head on Sundays were of the finest web, and I dare swear weighed a pound. Her hose were of a brilliant scarlet, gartered up without a wrinkle, and her shoes tight and new. She had been ever esteemed a worthy woman, and had accompanied to church five husbands in her time. Having thrice travelled to Jerusalem, crossing many a strange river, and having visited Rome, Saint James's, [**] Cologne, with its three kings, and passed through Galicia, she had a world of intelligence to communicate by the way. Her dress

[p. 12]

consisted of a spruce neckerchief, a hat as broad as a target, a mantle wrapping her fair large hips, and on her feet was a pair of sharp spurs. She rode upon an ambling pony. In company she took her share in the laugh, and would display her remedies for all complaints in love: she could play a good hand at that game.

There was also a religious man, who was a poor village Parson, yet was he rich in holy thought and works, as well as in learning--a faithful preacher of the gospel of Christ, full of gentleness and diligence, patient in adversity, and forbearing. So far was he from distressing for his tithes, that he disbursed his offerings and almost his whole substance among his poor parishioners. A pittance sufficed him. The houses in his parish were situate far asunder, yet neither wind and rain nor storm and tempest could keep him from his duty, but with staff in hand would he visit the remotest, great and small, rich and poor. This noble example he kept before his flock--that first he himself performed what he afterwards preached, joining this figure with his admonition, "If gold will rust, what will not iron do?" For if a priest in whom we confide become tarnished, a wonder if the frail layman keep himself unpolluted. The priest should set an example of purity to his flock, for how shameful a sight is a foul shepherd and cleanly sheep!

He did not let out his benefice to hire, and desert his flock to run up to London for the purpose of seeking promotion, but steadily kept home, and guarded well the fold. He was the true shepherd, and no hireling. Moreover, holy and virtuous as he was, he turned an eye of pity upon the sinful man, mingling his lecture with discretion

[p. 13]

and benignity. It was the business of his life, by good example, to lead his fellow-creatures gently to heaven. The obstinate and stiff-necked, however, whether in high or low estate, were sure to receive from him a severe rebuke. A better priest I know not, far or near. He craved neither pomp nor reverence, or betrayed any affected scrupulousness of conscience, but the doctrine of Christ and his apostles he taught with simplicity, first following it himself.

He had a brother with him, a Ploughman, who had ill his time scattered many a load of dung: a thorough hard labourer, living in peace and perfect charity with all men. Above all things, and at all times, he best loved his God and Creator, and then his neighbor as himself. When it lay in his power he would finish a job of threshing for a poor man without hire. He paid his tithes fairly and punctually, both of his produce and live stock. He was dressed in a tabard, [**] and rode upon a mare. There were also a Reeve, [*+] and a Miller, a Summoner, [*++] a Pardoner, [* section] a Manciple, [*] and myself.

The Miller was a hardy churl, brawny and large of bone. He always bore away the prize ram in wrestling matches. He was short shouldered, broad and stubby. Massive indeed was the door that he could not heave

[p. 14]

from its hinges or crack with the butting of his head. His beard was sandy, like a fox or a sow, and cut broad and square in the shape of spade. He had a wart on his nose, adorned with a tuft, red as the bristles of a hog's ear. His nostrils were wide and black, his mouth gaped like a furnace. He was a roaring, roystering madcap, who upon occasion would try the strength of his conscience by filching his customers' corn and giving them false tales. [**] Yet, withal, he had "a thumb of gold," as the old saying goes respecting honest millers, and I believe was no worse than his brethren. He wore a white coat with a blue hood, and a sword and buckler at his side. He was a performer on the bag-pipe, and with it marshalled us out of town.

There was a gentle Manciple, who was a pattern to all caterers and purchasers of provision, for whether he paid in ready money or went upon credit, he always so managed his accounts as to have a surplus of cash in hand. Now this appears to me like a special gift from heaven, that an ignorant man of this stamp should be able to outwit a whole bevy of learned clerks. He had more than thirty masters, acute in the law, a dozen of whom were fit to be stewards to any noblemen in the land, and keep his estate free from debt and encumbrance (if he had the brains to let them) or assist him to live frugally as he might desire, and even to order and arrange the public affairs of a county--yet was this manciple a match for them all.

[p. 15]

The Reeve was a slender choleric man; his beard was close shaven like stubble, and hair cropped round his ears, with a fore-lock like a priest. His legs were long and straight as a pike, without a hint of calf. He was an excellent manager of a granary, and no auditor could catch him tripping in his accounts. He could give a shrewd guess what would be the produce of the land after rain or drouth. He had been bailiff to his lord from the year of his coming of age, consequently had the care and accounting of his whole stock. He was alive to all the tricks and contrivances of the labourers and other bailiffs, so that they stood in awe of him as they would of death himself. He had a handsome house upon a heath "bosomed high" in green trees: and, in short, was better provided than his master, for he had secretly amassed considerable property, which he would upon occasion artfully lend to his lord in his necessities, and thus confer an easy obligation out of his own superfluity. In his youth he had learned a handicraft, and was a good carpenter and wheelwright. Our Reeve rode a well-conditioned dapple-grey stallion that he used to call Scot. He wore a long surtout of light blue, and a rusty sword at his side. I heard that the town of Baldswell in Norfolk was his birthplace. His dress was tucked up all round like a friar's, and he always kept in the rear of our company.

There was a Summoner with us whose face was like one of the fiery cherubim, for it was studded with red-hot carbuncles. He had small puckered eyes, scurfy brows, and a black, scanty beard. The children were frightened at the sight of him. No lotion or ointment

[p. 16]

could rid his cheeks of those filthy knobs and excrescences. His favourite food and beverage were garlic, leeks, and onions, and the strongest bodied red wine: then would he shout and rave like a madman, speaking nothing but Latin--he had caught up a few terms out of some law decree--and no wonder, for he heard nothing else all day, and every one knows that a jay can speak what he has been taught as well as the pope himself; but let any one try him a little farther and he would find his philosophy quite spent. "Questio quid juris?" would then be his answer. He was, however, a kind fellow in his way, and would, for a quart of wine or so, wink at his neighbors' delinquencies. But if he found one with a good warm purse, he would tell him he need not care for the archdeacon's malediction--just as if a man's soul were in his purse; for in purse he should be punished. "The purse," would he say, "is the archdeacon's hell": in all which I pronounce him to be an arch deceiver; since the guilty man should ever stand in awe of a curse, which will destroy the soul, as absolution will preserve it. Of the "significavit" [**] also let him beware.

He contrived to make himself acquainted with all the cabals and little arrangements of the young folks in the diocese, and kept them upon their good behaviour. He had surmounted that extraordinary head of his with a garland large enough for an alehouse sign at a fair; a spacious cake also seemed to serve the two purposes of buckler and provender.

A gentle Pardoner rode also with this wight--his friend and compeer. He was originally from Ronceveaux,

[p. 17]

Click to enlarge
The Host

and had now newly arrived from the court of Rome. The burthen of the song, "Come hither, love, to me," was constantly running in his head, which he shouted at the full stretch of his lungs, the Summoner all the while accompanying him with a stiff bass, as if it had been a double clarion. This Pardoner had smooth yellow hair, which hung by ounces about him, like a strike of flax, overspreading his shoulders. In the gaiety of his heart he wore no hood, but kept it packed up in his wallet; so he rode with his head bare, save and except a cap, in which was fastened a vernicle. [**] He prided himself upon his sitting on horseback, as being after the newest fashion. Before him lay his wallet stuffed with pardons, all hot from Rome. He had a full glaring eye like a hare's, a sneaking voice like a goat's, and a chin which never owned the inheritance of a beard.

And now to speak of his profession. If you were to search from Ware to Berwick-upon-Tweed you would not meet with such another pardoner. Among his relics he could produce a pillow-covering, which he pronounced to be the Virgin Mary's veil; a small piece of the seal which St. Peter had with him when he walked upon the sea; a brazen cross set with brilliants; and some pig's bones in a glass. With these relics he would make in one day more money among the poor country people than the parson would in two months. Thus with his flattery and his falsities he made fools of both priest and people.

Notwithstanding all this, however, I must acknowledge

[p. 18]

that he was a famous churchman. He read the service with dignity and emphasis, though he shone to greater advantage at the offertory, [**] for he knew that the sermon would then succeed, in which it behoved him to polish up his tongue for the purpose of procuring a handsome collection afterwards, wherein he was successful. Therefore, in the anticipation of it he would sing like a blackbird after rain.

Thus have I related to you briefly the list, the calling, the array, and the purport of that assembly's being collected at the above-mentioned inn in Southwark, called the Tabard, adjoining the Bell. And now it behoves me to inform you of certain arrangements we made that night; after which I shall proceed to describe our journey and the remainder of our pilgrimage.

In the first place, however, let me here apologise for any improprieties I may hereafter commit in relating each man's tale, since it is my design to rehearse them as nearly as I can recollect according to the style and manner in which they were delivered by the narrator.

Our host set before us at supper an excellent entertainment; the food and the wine were of the best quality. He was a comely man, large in person, with sunken eyes, and worthy to have been created marshal in a hall. The whole ward of Cheap cannot boast a fairer citizen. Bold and manly, plain and sensible in speech, at the same time merry withal, he thus addressed the company after we had all paid our reckonings. "Now, my masters, permit me to welcome you heartily to your inn, for, by my truth, I have not this year seen so honourable a company as is

[p. 19]

now assembled beneath this roof. Fain would I contribute to your amusement were it in my power. In proof of which a thought has just struck me, which will cost you nothing. You are all about to journey to Canterbury--God and the blessed martyr reward you!--well, as you travel along, you will be for whiling the way with gossip and glee, for truly there is little comfort in journeying as dumb as a stone. If, therefore, you will abide by my judgment, and proceed to-morrow as I shall direct, by the spirit of my father which is in heaven, whip off my head I do not make you a merry company. Without more ado, hold up your hands if you agree to my proposal." Our consent was not long to seek, seeing that there was no occasion for much deliberation; we therefore granted him his terms, and bade him speak on.

"To come to the point then, my masters: each of you on his way to and from Canterbury shall relate two adventures, and whoso shall acquit himself the best--that is, in tales of most mirth and judgment shall have a supper here at the general expense upon your return from Canterbury. And to contribute to your entertainment, I will myself ride with you at my own cost, and be your guide. Furthermore, let me make a condition that whoever shall call my judgment in question he shall bear the whole cost of the journey. If you grant me my conditions, say so at once, and I will early prepare for my undertaking."

We cheerfully bound ourselves to abide by his terms, at the same time engaging him to be our governor, to sit in judgment upon the merits of our stories, also to provide our supper at a stated price per head, and that we would

[p. 20]

[paragraph continues] --both high and low--be ruled by his decision. All this, and the wine at the same time having been discussed, without longer delay we all went to roost.

At day-spring up rose our host, and was chanticleer to the whole company, collecting us together in a flock, and forth we rode at a walking pace to the watering place of St. Thomas, when he drew up his horse and said, "My masters, you bear in mind your covenant. Now let us see who shall tell the first tale, and, so sure as I drink ale or wine, whoever shall rebel against my judgment shall pay all the costs of the journey. Before we proceed farther, draw lots, and let him who draws the shortest begin."

"Sir Knight," said he, "my lord and master, be pleased to draw: and come you near, my Lady Prioress: and you, Sir Clerk, oblige us by laying aside your bashfulness and your studying: so--every man lay hand."

After each had drawn, the lot fell upon the Knight, to the satisfaction of the whole company. *

When this worthy man found he must abide by the general convenant, he said, "Since I am fated to begin this sport, in Heaven's name welcome be the lot. Let us ride on, and listen to my tale."

With cheerful countenance he then began, and said as you shall hear.

HERE ENDS THE PROLOGUE OF THIS BOOK;

AND HERE BEGINS THE FIRST TALE,

WHICH IS

Footnotes

^3:* In the original, it is not-hed. This may mean either a "head like a nut," as Tyrwhitt has interpreted it, and which seems appropriate to the character of the man described; or knotte-hed, a name given to the knob at the end of a staff, and which term still survives in the north of England.

^4:* It was the fashion in those days to hang bells to the horses' bridles. In the Faery Queene the caparison of a lady's steed is thus described:

"Her wanton palfrey all was overspred
  With tinsell trappings, woven like a wave,
  Whose bridle rung with golden bels and bosses brave."
                                         B. i. canto ii. stanza xiii.

^5:* One licensed to beg alms for his convent, within a certain district.

^5:+ One licensed by the pope to hear confessions.

^5:++ Confession.

^9:* The raised floor at the end of the hall was called a dais.

^10:* This passage, which in the original appears to be rather obscure, I think is intended to convey a sly little irony, for the poet, after saying,

"Of nice conscience toke he no kepe,"

adds,

"If that he faught and hadde the higher hand,
  By water he sent hem home to every land."

In other words I conceive the meaning to be, that he drowned his prisoners.

^11:* St. James's of Compostella, in Spain.

^13:* A jacket without sleeves; worn in the first instance by noblemen in the wars: in later times, by heralds, and was their coat of arms in service. From Chaucer's having clad the ploughman in such a garment, he probably meant to convey the hint that it was a cast-off dress.

^13:+ A steward or bailiff.

^13:++ An officer employed to summon delinquents to appear in the ecclesiastical courts; now called an apparitor.

^13: section A seller of pardons or indulgences from the pope.

^13: An officer who has the care of purchasing victuals for an inn or court. The office still subsists in several colleges as well as inns of court.

^14:* The old term for reckoning is a "tale."

"And every shepherd tells his tale
  Under the hawthorn in the dale."
                                Allegro.

^16:* The beginning of the sentence of excommunication.

^17:* A picture of Jesus Christ in miniature. It was usual with persons returning from pilgrimages to bring with them certain tokens of the several places which they had visited. The Pardoner, therefore, had this vernicle in his cap in token of his visit to Rome, where in the church of St. Peter was preserved the miniature in question, miraculously imprinted upon a handkerchief.

^18:* That portion of the Roman Catholic service which immediately precedes the blessing of the bread and wine. It is always sung.

      
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 21]

  

The Knight's Tale

IN former days there lived a warrior named Theseus; he was the King of Athens, and in his time had been so famous in deeds of arms that he was the most renowned under the sun. He had conquered many a wealthy kingdom, and by his skill and knightly conduct had subdued the whole territory of the Amazons, which formerly was called Scythia. He married the young queen of that country (her name was Ippolita) , and brought her and her young sister, Emily, home with him to Athens in great pomp and solemnity. And thus accompanied by song and triumph I leave this valiant king riding into Athens surrounded by his host in arms.

And here, if it were not tedious to relate, I would describe to you fully the manner in which Theseus overcame the kingdom of the Amazons; also the great battle between the Amazons and the Athenians; how Ippolita, the fair and valiant Queen of Scythia, was besieged; of the feast that was held at her wedding; and of the temple that was raised upon her coming home to Athens: but I have other matter in hand, for my story will be found long enough; and as I would not willingly prevent every man in turn from telling his tale, I will continue mine, and let us see who shall win the supper.

This king of whom I made mention, riding along in his pride and prosperity, as he approached near to Athens

[p. 22]

perceived kneeling in the highway a company of ladies, by two and two, clad all in black, who made so doleful a weeping and lamentation as the like was never heard: neither would they cease till they had laid hands upon his horse's bridle and stopped his procession.

"What people are ye," said Theseus, "who at my return home thus interrupt my festival with your grievous weeping? Are you envious of my honour and success that you thus wail and lament? or hath any one offended you? Let me know if your wrong can be repaired: likewise the reason of your being clad in this woful black."

The eldest lady of the party, whom it was ruth and pity to see and hear, then spake: "We do not grieve, my lord, at the success of your victory, your glory, and your honour; but we beseech of your mercy help and succour: have compassion upon our woe and our distress! In thy gentle nature let fall one drop of pity upon us wretched women; for of a truth, my lord, there is not one of us all but she has been either a duchess or a queen: now thanks to the falsehood of fortune, with whom no lot is steadfast, we are both miserable and desolate. For fifteen days past have we waited your home-coming here in the temple of the Goddess Clemency: let not our errand fail, but aid us since you have the power.

"I, miserable creature, was formerly wife to King Cassaneus who perished at Thebes; and all we who thus lament lost our husbands during the siege of that place: and yet old Creon, who, alas! is now King of Thebes, in his wrath and wickedness has wreaked his spite and tyranny on the dead bodies of our lords, which he ordered to be drawn together in a heap, and with no entreaty will

[p. 23]

allow them to be burned or buried, but has left them a prey to the wild dogs." And with that speech they grovelled on the ground piteously weeping.

When this gentle conquerer heard them so speak his heart ached to think that those who were then before him in such a plight had been persons of high estate; so, leaping from his horse, he went and raised them from the ground, bidding them be comforted, for that upon the oath of a true knight he would so avenge them upon the tyrant Creon that all Greece should acknowledge the deserved death he would receive from the hand of Theseus.

Whereupon, without delay, or even entering Athens, he raised his banner, and with his host rode forth towards Thebes; the queen, Ippolita, and her young sister, the lovely Emily, he left in Athens awaiting his return. His broad white banner, embroidered in red with the figure of the God Mars, and his ensign, rich in gold tissue, embossed with that of the Minotaur, slain by him in Crete, went glittering through the distant plains. So rode this valiant chief, the flower of chivalry, till he arrived before the walls of Thebes. To shorten this part of my story, he fought with Creon hand to hand, slew him in fair battle, and routed his forces. Afterwards he carried the city by assault, rased its walls, and finally restored to the ladies the remains of their murdered husbands, that they might inter them with the customary rites and solemnity. I pass over the account of the dirge and lament made by those ladies at the funeral pyre, as well as the knightly conduct observed towards them by the noble Theseus when they took their departure.

After the fight Theseus remained all night upon the

[p. 24]

field of battle, and disposed of the conquered territory in vassalage according to his pleasure. At the same time the plunderers busied themselves in ransacking the bodies of the slain, stripping them of their armour and clothes. It so happened that in one heap they found, grievously wounded, two young knights lying side by side, both dressed in the same armour, which was richly wrought. Palamon was the name of one knight and Arcite that of the other. The heralds recognised them as members of the royal family of Thebes; they were sons of two sisters. The plunderers drew them forth from the heaps of the slain, and bore them tenderly to the tent of Theseus, who soon had them conveyed to Athens and strictly confined in prison, rejecting every offer that was proposed for their ransom. The campaign being over, the king returned home with his army, crowned with the conqueror's laurels, and in joy and honour passed the remainder of his days. But in sorrow and anguish poor Palamon and Arcite were kept close prisoners in a tower, without hope of redemption; the power of gold was unavailing.

Thus passed day after day--year after year; till one May morning it happened that Emily, who was more beautiful to behold than the lily upon its tall and slender stalk of green, and fresher than the young flowers in May (for her complexion rivalled the blushing wild-rose), had arisen according to her custom at break of day to do honour to that sweet season of the year, for the slothful and ungentle heart claims no kindred with the lovely May. Her dress was elegant and precise, and her golden hair, braided in tresses, flowed down her back. As

[p. 25]

the sun was climbing the heavens, she walked up and down the garden, gathering the many-coloured flowers to weave into a garland for her head, and like an angel she sang in the clear air of morning. The thick and strong walls of the tower which formed the dungeon-keep to the castle that confined these knights adjoined the garden in which Emily was taking her pleasure.

In that bright sun and clear morning, Palamon, the woful prisoner, had, as was his custom, with the permission of his gaoler, been taking his walk in an upper chamber of the castle, from whence he had a view of all the noble city, and could look immediately down upon the garden and all its fresh verdure.

The melancholy captive pacing his chamber to and fro, bitterly regretting his fate, by chance caught a sight of Emily through the massy bars of his chamber window, and suddenly started as though stung to the heart. This roused the attention of Arcite, who thinking that he was affected by some recollection of his former fortune, tenderly inquired why he had turned so pale. "My beloved cousin," said he, "for the love of heaven, take in patience our confinement--it cannot be helped; fortune has laid this adversity upon us, and we must endure it with constancy."

Palamon replied, "My dear cousin, you are mistaken in the cause of my grief: the bitter restraint of this prison has not wounded me upon the present occasion, but the beauty of a lady whom I see yonder walking in the garden has so stricken my heart that it will in all likelihood prove my bane. Whether she be woman or goddess, I know not; but if, O Venus," said he (and then he sunk

[p. 26]

passionately on his knees), "it hath been thy will to be thus transfigured before me, a wretched and sorrowful creature, assist our escape from this prison: but if the eternal word of fate has doomed us here to die, have compassion upon our kindred, brought so low by oppression and tyranny."

At this moment Arcite also perceived the lady, and was as much affected as Palamon, and even more, by her surpassing beauty. "If," said he, "I may not be granted the blessing of even looking upon her again, my doom is fixed."

When Palamon heard these words he turned upon him fiercely and answered, "Is this said in soberness or in jest?"

"Seriously by my truth," said Arcite, "or evil befall me."

"Then," replied Palamon, knitting his brows, "it were no great honour to you to be false, and a traitor to me, your cousin and brother, who have so deeply sworn to each other that nothing but death should separate us and dissolve the pledge: that neither in love nor in any event we should cross each other, but that upon all occasions you should as faithfully serve me as I should forward your good fortune. This was our oath, and which you dare not gainsay. You are of my counsel, and yet falsely would presume to love the lady whom I love, and ever shall so long as I live. Truly, therefore, Arcite, I first loved her, and made you, my sworn brother, my confidant: as a true knight, then, are you bound to assist me according to the extent of your power; or else I dare to pronounce you false to your honour."

[p. 27]

Arcite haughtily retorted upon him that he was the false one: "And false you are," said he; "I tell you utterly false. I first loved her. What! you, who even now could not say whether she were a woman or a goddess! Yours is a holy affection, mine for an earthly creature, and I therefore disclosed to you my mind, as to my cousin and sworn brother. Grant it even that you first loved her, have you forgotten that saying of the old writer, 'Who shall give laws to a lover? Love is itself a higher law than any framed by man!' All decrees, therefore, however stern, are daily broken in favour of the more positive commands of love. Whether maiden or widow, a man must needs love in spite of his head; he cannot help himself. There is no likelihood that you, any more than myself, shall ever stand in her favour, seeing that we are condemned to perpetual imprisonment without hope of ransom. We are but like the two hounds striving for a bone which, when they were spent with rage, a kite bore away from both. At the king's court, therefore, my brother, 'each man for himself,' say I. Love, if you are inclined, for I love, and ever shall. Here in this prison must we remain, and take what may befall us."

Great was the strife between them, which lasted longer than I have leisure to tell: but to my story. It happened one day that a worthy king named Perithous, who had been the companion of Theseus from their childhood, came to Athens upon a visit to his friend: for so great was the affection between them that, according to the old tradition, when one died, the other went down into Tartarus to seek him there. But this is beside my tale.

King Perithous entertained a strong regard for Arcite,

[p. 28]

and had known him some years in Thebes. At the earnest entreaty, therefore, of Perithous, Theseus granted the young prisoner his liberty without ransom, to go where-ever he pleased, with this express provision, that if he ever after were discovered for one moment by day or by night, within any district of the territory belonging to Theseus, that he should lose his head without redemption.

Now were the perplexity and sorrow of Arcite at their height. Release from affliction had now become his bane: "Had I never known Perithous," said he, "I might still have been dwelling with Theseus, though fettered in his prison: I had then been in bliss, for the simple sight of her whom I serve, although I might never have merited the favour of her regard, would have been sufficient recompense to me. Yours is the victory, my dear Palamon, in this adventure: for you will remain in this blessed prison--prison did I call it?--a paradise. And now, since fortune has been so adverse to me, that I am to endure the absence from her, while you enjoy her sight, the possibility is that, being an honourable and valiant knight, you may hereafter by some farther favour of fortune be placed in the full attainment of all you desire, while I am exiled, and barren of her sweet favour. Farewell, dear lady! my life, my comfort, my gladness!"

Palamon, on the other hand, when he found his companion in durance gone from him--his cousin, brother, counsellor, and friend--grievously lamented his own fate, and made the great tower resound with lamentation: the very fetters on his legs were wet with bitter tears. "Alas!" said he, "Arcite, heaven knows that you

[p. 29]

are now reaping the fruit of our contention. You are now wandering at large in your native Thebes, little heeding my distress. You may, in your wisdom and manhood, assemble all our kindred, and make so fierce an attack upon this country that, either by chance or treaty, you may be able to win my lady to wife. For, since you are now from bondage free, and a lord again, all the advantage is yours, while I am pining away in captivity."

With this the fire of jealousy burst forth, and so maddened his brain that his hue became pale as dead ashes: and he cried aloud, "O ye implacable gods! that govern this world by the bond of your eternal word, and whose will and ordinances are graven on tables of adamant, what more in your sight are the race of mankind than sheep huddled in the fold? For, like another beast, man is slain and pounded in prison, and tormented: he suffers sickness, and great adversity, and often with a guiltless and unupbraiding heart." Many such impatient complaints did he continue to pour forth, but I must leave him for a time, and give you some tidings of Arcite.

The summer had passed away, and the long nights increased the distresses both of the lover and the prisoner. It were hard to say whose condition was the more deplorable. Palamon condemned to perpetual imprisonment, loaded with chains and fetters: Arcite exiled evermore from the country where his lady dwelt, and never again to behold her face. I put the question to you, who are lovers, which of these two had the harder lot; the one who is able to see his lady day by day, yet must ever remain in prison; or the other, who can go whither he pleases, but must never again look upon her whom he loves?

[p. 30]

When Arcite returned to Thebes, his loss so pressed upon his heart that he became estranged from sleep and food: he grew lean and hollow-eyed, and his complexion was sallow and pale as ashes. Comfortless and desolate, he always remained alone, and if he happened to hear a song or instrument he would weep without avail, so feeble were his spirits, and he altogether so changed that his voice was strange to those who knew him.

After enduring for some time this distraction, he one night, in sleep, thought that the winged Mercury stood before him, and bid him be of good cheer. The god was arrayed as when he closed the eyes of Argus; his sleep-compelling wand he held upright before him, and upon his shining locks he wore a winged cap. "To Athens," said he, "shall you go; there will you see an end to all your grief."

With that word Arcite started and awoke. "Whatever ill befall me," said he, "to Athens will I go: no dread of death shall prevent my seeing the lady whom I love and serve: in her presence I care not to die." Then observing how much he was changed, both in appearance and colour, he thought that if he bore himself in lowly condition he might live unknown in Athens, and thus behold his lady almost every day. With this he changed his suit for that of a poor labourer, and all alone, except with one attendant who knew his secret and all his fortune, and was disguised as poorly as himself, to Athens he travelled straightway. One day he went to court, and at the gate proffered his services to do such menial work as might be required. To cut the matter short, he fell in with the chamberlain to the Lady Emily, who hired him

[p. 31]

to hew wood and draw water, being young and large of bone.

Having served a year or two as page of the chamber to the fair Emily, under the name of Philostrate, he so wrought upon all who knew him at the court by the gentleness of his condition that all said it would be advisable for Theseus to raise him in his degree and give him honourable service in which he might prove his quality. And thus so enhanced was the fame of his conduct and fair speech, that Theseus promoted him to be near his person, and appointed him squire of his chamber, at the same time giving him gold to maintain his dignity. He also secretly received his rent from his own country, but he used it honourably and with such discretion that no man wondered how he had it. Three years he passed in this manner, and so conducted himself both in peace and war that Theseus prized no one more dearly than him. Having brought Arcite to this state of happiness, I will now return awhile to Palamon.

In a strong prison, and in horrible gloom, Palamon had sat for seven long years, wasting with love and sorrow. In the seventh year, however, during a night of May, it happened (whether by chance or destiny) that, through the aid of a friend, he broke from prison soon after midnight. He had so plied his gaoler with wine, drugged with narcotics, that he slept like death, and thus he was enabled to escape.

The night being short, and the day near at hand, he was compelled to lie hidden; his purpose being to remain close all day, and in the night to journey on towards Thebes, where, having arrived, he would rouse his

[p. 32]

friends to help him war on Theseus, in which attempt he resolved either to die or win his Lady Emily. To a grove, then hard by, Palamon stalked with fearful foot.

The lark, the active messenger of day, had welcomed the grey dawn with its song, and the flaming sun had risen, rejoicing the whole heaven, and drying up with his fiery streams the silver drops that hung upon the leaves, when Arcite, who was then, as I have told you, principal squire in the royal court of Theseus, arose and looked upon the cheerful day. Ever pondering on the object of his love, he mounted his steed, restless and starting like flame, and rode forth from court a mile or two till he came to the grove already mentioned for the purpose of weaving a garland of woodbine and hawthorn in honour of the merry month, and all the way he sang a roundelay in the clear sunshine. Having dismounted, he wandered up and down near the spot where Palamon, alarmed lest he should be discovered, lay cowering in a bush. Little was he aware that Arcite was so nigh at hand, and the other was as unmindful as his companion of the close witness to all his words and actions that was there. Well may it be said that fields and woods have eyes and ears.

When Arcite had roamed about to his satisfaction, and finished his May-morning carol, he suddenly lapsed into a thoughtful study. These lovers, in their fantastic moods, are ever wavering. One minute they are swaying and dancing on the tip-top spray of ecstasy, the next grovelling among the thorns and briars: now up, now down, like a bucket in a well. They are like Friday, which seldom resembles the other days in the week--now rain, now shine. So the Goddess of Love overcasts the hearts

Click to enlarge
The Knight

[p. 33]

of her worshippers, and makes them as variable as the complexion of the day devoted to her worship. [**]

When Arcite had sung his song he began thoughtfully to sigh at the remembrance of his native Thebes, warred on by the revengeful Juno. "Alas!" said he, "the royal blood of Cadmus and Amphion is confounded and scattered abroad--Cadmus, the founder of Thebes, and its first crowned king! and here I, who am descended from him, and am of the royal stock, am now so thralled a wretch as to be the mere squire of my mortal enemy, and am moreover compelled to conceal my real name. All my lineage, alas! are gone, with the exception of poor Palamon, whom Theseus keeps a martyr in bondage. And, to crown all my griefs, love for the fair Emily has so possessed my heart that these would fade away could I but render myself acceptable in her eyes."

At these words up started Palamon, like one who had suddenly felt a cold sword glide through his heart. With a face pale from rage (as a maniac's) he rushed from the thick brake, and cried, "Now you are caught, false Arcite! wicked traitor! You, who are of my blood, and my sworn counsellor, still hold your affection for my Lady Emily, that has caused my greatest sorrow. You have deceived King Theseus and changed your name. Either I or thou shalt die; for no one but myself, while I live, shall love my lady. I, Palamon, your mortal foe, swear this; and though I have no weapon in this place, having newly made my escape from prison, either relinquish the Lady Emily or die. Choose at once, for there is no escape for you."

[p. 34]

When Arcite had recognized him, and listened to his speech, with a lion's rage he drew his sword and said, "By the great Jove, who sitteth above us, were it not that you are mad for love, and are weaponless, you should never quit this grove alive. I deny the pledge and bond which you pretend I made with you. Fool! again I tell you, love is free; and, in your despite, love her I will. But as you are a worthy knight, and of gentle [**] blood, and desire to win her by battle, I here give you my word of honour that to-morrow, without disclosing the affair to any other being, I will not fail to be found here equipped as a knight, and I will bring accoutrements for you, and you shall select according to your pleasure. Moreover, I will now bring you food and covering for the coming night. If, in this wood, you slay me and win my lady, the prize is your own." Palamon accepted his challenge, and so they separated until the morrow. Truly is it said that neither love nor royalty can endure fellowship in dominion: and so found Palamon and Arcite.

The younger knight had ridden back into the town, and on the morrow, before daybreak, having secretly provided two complete equipments of armour, ready for their contest, he rode forth alone, carrying the whole on his horse before him. In the grove, and at the time and place appointed, they met. The colour fled from their faces at the first exchange of looks--like a Thracian hunter, who stands in a gap with his spear, waiting for the roused bear or lion, and hears him coming through the underwood, crushing boughs and leaves in his passage,

[p. 35]

and thinks, "Here comes my mortal enemy, whom without fail I must kill, or he will take my life": so it was with these from the moment either caught sight of the other. No salutation, no compliment, passed at meeting, but each helped to arm his antagonist as friendly as he would his own brother; and then, with their sharp strong spears they long lashed and strove for victory. Palamon fared in the fight like a raging lion and Arcite a hungry tiger. They rushed together with the obstinate fury of wild boars, panting and foaming, while the blood flowed to their feet. And so I leave them fighting while I bring you the news of Theseus.

This famous king had so great a love for hunting that scarcely the day dawned which did not find him ready with hounds and horn to follow the stag of largest limb: it was his chief delight. Having fulfilled his duty to the god of battle, he joined the train of Diana.

On this same day then, Theseus, with his Queen Ippolita and the fair Emily, all clad in green, had ridden forth to the chase, and towards this very grove where he had heard of some game. He therefore made for an open plain through which the deer was wont to take flight, and over a brook, and so right on his way. When the king had arrived at this open space, he looked under the level beams of the morning sun and beheld the combatants, like two bulls, fighting furiously. Their bright swords glanced to and fro like lightning, and fell with hideous might. He, ignorant of their quality, put spurs to his horse, and at a start was between them both. "Ho!" cried he, drawing his sword, "no more, on pain of death. By mighty Mars, he that strikes another blow does it with

[p. 36]

penalty of his head. But say, who are ye who are thus boldly fighting here, as if in the actual lists, without judge or other officer?"

To whom Palamon answered hastily, "Sir, there need few words. We have both deserved death: we are two unfortunate wretches burthened with our lives; as, therefore, you are a just judge, grant us neither refuge nor mercy. Slay me first, but let him follow--or rather let him first die; for, though you little know it, this is Arcite, your mortal foe, whom you banished from Athens: this, his return, alone merits death. This same Arcite came to your gate and passed under the name of Philostrate. For years has he put this deceit upon you; he has been promoted to be your chief squire, and presumes to love the fair Lady Emily. And since the day is come that I myself shall die, I plainly confess that I am that woful Palamon who has just broken from bondage--your mortal enemy, and the devoted lover of the Lady Emily, in whose sight and service I could at this moment yield my breath. Give me therefore present judgment and death; yet let not my companion go free, for both merit this reward."

The king answered him, "This matter has been quickly concluded: the confession of your own mouth has condemned you, and it shall be so recorded. You shall not, however, die the felon's death, but, by the blood-red Mars, the sword shall fulfil your destiny."

Then did the queen, the Lady Emily, and their train, in their womanly hearts, begin to weep; for they thought it a grievous chance to befall two gentlemen of so high estate, whose only misfortune was that they had loved too well. And when they looked upon their gaping

[p. 37]

wounds, they implored his mercy upon their knees, till his mood began to soften (for pity soon finds its way to the noble heart); and though he at first trembled for wrath, yet when he shortly considered with himself the cause of their trespass, his reason excused them, however his anger had chafed at their offence. He thought that every man will, if possible, help himself in love, and that he will seize the chance of escape from prison. Moreover, he had compassion on the weeping women, and he concluded that it were a shame to a lord of gentle heart, who will have no mercy, but still maintains a lion-heart both in word and deed, as well towards him who repents as to the unrelenting man that stiffly maintains his first determination: he can have little discretion who would confound pride and humility. When therefore the clouds of his anger had passed away, he looked up with light and beaming eyes, and thus addressed the assembly.

"Hail to the mighty God of Love!--nothing can withstand his power. The wonders he achieves proclaim him a god, for he makes all hearts subservient to his will. This Palamon and Arcite, who had wholly escaped from my prison, have lived here, in Athens, knowing me to be their mortal enemy and that their lives were in my power; yet hath love, in spite of their heads, brought them both here to die. Who but a fool would be in love? Look at their wounds, see how they bleed: thus hath the god they worship rewarded them for their service: and yet they, in their wisdom, will obey his dictates, happen what may. But the greatest folly of all is, that she, for whom there has been all this hot fare, knew as little of it as myself. But, young or old, man will at one time be a

[p. 38]

fool. As I have myself, however, in times past, engaged in the same service, and know the sore straits to which one may be brought through love, I here, at the request of my kneeling queen, and dear sister Emily, wholly acquit you, knights, of your trespass; and in return you both shall swear to me that you will never more disturb my dominion by night or by day, but to your utmost be my friends and allies." They accepted his oath, and in granting their pardon he thus said to them:

"As regards my sister Emily, on whose account you maintain this jealousy and strife, though she were a queen or princess, either of you, by virtue of royal descent or wealth, is worthy to wed her. Since, however, she can marry but one, and that the other must be doomed to pipe his loss under an ivy leaf, each of 'you shall abide the fate destined for him, and after the following fashion. You shall go forth freely wherever you list, without ransom or danger from me; and by this day fifty weeks each shall have collected from far and near a hundred knights, armed 'all in proof' for the lists, ready to contend in battle for the hand of the lady: and this promise I hold you upon the truth of my knighthood, that whichever shall slay his opponent, or drive his hundred from the lists, on him will I bestow the hand of Emily to wife."

Who was now light of heart but Palamon? who bounded for joy but Arcite? and who can describe the rejoicings which were made when Theseus granted this fair favour? All, as well as the two Thebans, went on their knees and thanked him with grateful hearts. And so blithely the knights took leave, and rode home towards Thebes.

[p. 39]

I must not omit to recount the great expense at which Theseus erected the lists. A nobler theatre I may say the world never beheld. It was a full mile in circuit, walled with stone, and without the wall ran a moat. The shape was circular, with seats all round, sixty feet in height, raised one above another, so that no one could deprive his neighbor of beholding the spectacle. Eastward and westward in the circle was erected a gate of white marble. Every craftsman and artisan, even to the sculptor of images, was employed by Theseus to raise and adorn this structure, so that in the like space the earth did not contain so fair a theatre. Upon the east gate were raised an altar and an oratory to Venus, the Goddess of Love; and upon the western one another in honour of Mars: northward also, in a turret on the wall, was a rich oratory of alabaster and white and red coral, in worship of Diana the chaste.

Nor should I leave out the noble carving and the paintings in these three oratories. First, in the temple of Venus might be seen displayed upon the wall, personified in piteous array, the broken sleeps, cold sighs, the sacred tears and lamentings that love's servants endure in this life: pleasure, hope, desire, fool-hardiness, youth and beauty, riches, jealousy, and flattery; feasting and dancing, carols and instruments, and many more than I can enumerate. And there was painted her famed dwelling on Mount Citheron: nor were forgotten the histories of fair Narcissus, the folly of King Solomon, Hercules' might, the enchantment of Medea and Circe, the fierce courage of Turnus, or the base servitude of Croesus. The figure of the goddess, glorious to behold, was seen naked

[p. 40]

floating in the wide sea: half her form hidden by the bright green waves. In her hand she bore a harp, and on her head a fresh garland of roses: above it were her doves hovering. Before her stood her son Cupid, winged and hoodwinked. He carried a bow with bright and keen arrows.

The interior of the mighty Mars' temple was painted like the famous one in Thrace, that frosty region where the god holds his chief dwelling. First upon the wall was depictured a forest, that harboured neither man nor beast, full of old barren trees, gnarred and stubby; through which a storm was roaring as if it would crash every bough. At the bottom of a hill stood the temple of the god, wrought of tempered steel, the entrance to which was long, narrow, and dreary. The light shone in at the door, for there were no windows. The door was of adamant, clamped with iron, and the pillars were iron, massive and shining.

There was to be seen the dark imagining and completion of Felony; cruel Wrath, red as a conflagration; pale Fear; the Smiler with the knife under his cloak; buildings in flame; murderings treacherously in bed; open war; ghastly wounds; contention with its sharp menace and bloody knife. There was the suicide, his hair bathed in gore; and cold death, with the mouth upright, gaping. In the midst of the temple, and over all, sat Mischance, with sorry aspect. Madness was also there, laughing in his rage; injustice, complaint, and fierce outcries: the tyrant with his prey carried off by force: the town destroyed, and nothing left.

The statue of Mars, armed and of grim aspect, was

[p. 41]

standing upright in a chariot, and at his feet was a wolf, with fiery eyes, eating the body of a man.

And now to finish shortly with the temple of the chaste Diana. The walls were adorned with deeds of hunting and shamefaced chastity. There was the unfortunate Calistope, whom for wrath Diana changed into a bear, and afterwards she became the polar star. Dane, also, turned to a tree. Acteon, too, changed by Diana to a deer, in punishment for his having surprised the goddess. His own hounds were worrying him, not knowing that he was their master. Then followed the description of Atalanta hunting the wild boar, with Meleager, and many besides, for which Diana wrought them sore affliction.

The goddess was seated on high upon a hart, surrounded by a pack of hounds, and underneath her feet was the moon. Her statue was clad in bright green, and she had a bow in hand with a quiver of arrows. Her eyes were bent downwards towards the dark region of Pluto (of which dominion she was also queen). A woman in great need lay before her, imploring the aid of Lucina. [**]

The lists, with the temples and theatre, being finished at a great cost, I will leave speaking of Theseus for a time, and turn to Palamon and Arcite.

The day draws near for their returning, when each should bring his hundred knights to Athens to try the battle, as I have already said. Those who accompanied Palamon were variously appointed according to their several fancies. Some were clad in a light coat of mail, with a short cassock and breastplate; some in two simple plates of armour and a shield; others well defended their

[p. 42]

limbs, and were armed with an axe or mace of steel. In his train also was seen Lycurgus, the great King of Thrace, of manly aspect, with thick black beard and piercing eyes, that glowed in his head like stars. He was large of limb, broad-shouldered, and his arms were round, long, and firm. Aloft upon a golden chariot he stood, drawn by four white bulls, and as he passed along he-looked about him like an eagle. Instead of coat-armour he wore a bear-skin, coal-black. His long hair flowed behind his shoulders and shone against the sun like a raven's wing. A golden coronet of enormous weight, studded with diamonds and rubies, circled his brows. About his chariot went twenty or more mastiff-hounds that he employed in lion-hunting. They followed in leashes, muzzled, and collared with golden collars. A hundred lords were in his company, armed cap-a-pie and stout of heart.

The great Emetrius, King of India, accompanied Arcite. He came riding like the God Mars upon a bay steed clad in steel, covered with cloth of gold: the saddle was inlaid with finely-wrought gold. His coat armour was made of silk, trimmed with fair large pearls, and from his shoulders hung a short mantle thickly embroidered with rubies glowing like fire. His crisp yellow hair danced in ringlets around his neck like sunbeams. He had a high and arched nose, eyes of a bright hazel colour, full and round lips, and a sanguine complexion. Moreover, his face was sprinkled with a few freckles of a mingled dark and light yellow hue. His manner of looking round him was like that of a lion. His beard was young and vigorous (he appeared to be about five and twenty years of age),

[p. 43]

and the tone of his voice pierced the air like a trumpet. He was crowned with a fresh and lusty garland of laurel, and upon his fist sat a tame eagle, purely white as a lily. A hundred knights attended him, all richly caparisoned and, save their heads, in complete armour: for earls, dukes, and kings joined in this train through love, and for the increase of chivalry. Tame lions and leopards also gamboled around the royal car. After such fashion and order did all these nobles arrive at the city early in the morning, and alight within its walls.

Theseus entertained them, each according to his rank, with full honour and knightly courtesy. If I did not wish to bring you to the effect and point of my tale, I would describe to you all the service at the high feasting, the minstrelsy, the rich presents and the largess to both high and low, the appointment and rich array of the palace, the falcons disposed around on their perches, and the hounds lying here and there upon the floor, quietly expecting the feasters' casual superfluity: I would tell you of the fairest dames and the best dancers; the songs, the gallantry, and the more earnest love-making.

Before daybreak, and as soon as the lark had begun to sing, Palamon, with a devout and courageous heart, bent his steps towards the Temple of Venus that was erected in the lists: where he knelt down and besought her help to gain him possession of his Lady Emily, in whose service he fain would die. "And if, O goddess! mine," said he, "thou grant that I may have my love, I will evermore worship in thy temple, and offer daily sacrifice upon thine altar. But if thou turn thy face from me, lady sweet! I pray that on the morrow Arcite's spear may cleave my

[p. 44]

heart; for, my life being gone, I reck not his better fate in winning her to wife." When his prayer and sacrifice were concluded, the statue of the goddess shook, and made a sign which, although somewhat delayed, he accepted as a boon that his prayer had been heard favourably: so home he went, light of heart.

At sunrise Emily arose and, attended by her maidens, went forth to the Temple of Diana, taking with them the fire and the incense, the garments and the horns of mead, fit to perform sacrifice. The preparation for the holy ceremony, by the purifying of her body at a well-spring, being attended to, and the sacred place being fumed with odorous gums, the maiden princess (gentle and debonair of heart) , having her head crowned with a garland of oak and her bright hair untressed and flowing down her back, proceeded to kindle two fires on the altar. After, she addressed the goddess of the green woods, the protectress of maidenhood and queen of the deep dark realm of Pluto. "O chaste goddess!" said she, "thou knowest the desire of my heart, that I should all my days remain a maiden, taking delight in the wild woods and the cry of the hunters. Help me now, lady queen of night, since thou canst help; send peace between this Palamon and Arcite, who now strive for love of me. Quench the busy torment and fire of their hearts, and turn their love towards another. Behold, O goddess of bright maidenhood, and consider the tears upon my cheeks: I would still follow in thy train, and end my life a maiden in thy service. But if my destiny have so befallen that I am doomed to be the wife of one, then grant me him who most sincerely loveth me."

[p. 45]

While she was in her prayer the fires upon the altar were burning clearly: but, suddenly, a strange sight arose to her view; one of the fires sank and kindled again; the other became extinct, with a whistling noise like the burning of moist brands, and at their ends ran forth as it were drops of blood. Emily, aghast at the sight, shrieked like one distracted, not knowing how to divine the manifestation of the oracle. At this moment the goddess herself appeared, with her bow in hand and dressed like a huntress. "Daughter," said she, "stay thy sorrow. The eternal word of the great gods hath confirmed that thou shalt be wedded to one of those who for thy sake have undergone so much care and pain. To which of them I may not tell thee. The fires upon the altar have already signified the conclusion and manner of thine adventure."

Thus having spoken, at the quick clattering of her quivered arrows, she vanished from the view of the astonished Emily, who, placing herself under the protection of the goddess, returned home pondering the mystery of the oracle and of the vision.

Closely following upon Emily, Arcite went to the Temple of Mars to perform his sacrifice. Having finished all the rites, he intreated the god of arms, whom he constantly served, to grant him the victory on the ensuing day; in the event of which he vowed to offer at his shrine his flowing hair and beard, that had never felt the edge of shears or razor. "This will I dedicate to thee, O strong god of arms! together with my banner and the accoutrements of all my company, which I will hang up in thy temple, and until the day of my death will I burn before thee eternal fire upon thine altar."

[p. 46]

His petition being ended, the rings upon the temple doors clattered, the fire upon the altar burned with a strange brightness, and a sweet smell steamed forth from the ground: when in acknowledgment of the omen, having cast fresh incense upon the flame and performed other rites, the statue of the god rang upon his hauberk, after which a low dim sound murmured "Victory!"

Arcite gave glory and honour to Mars, and returned home as glad as a bird is of the bright sun.

This day was passed in Athens in great feasting, jousting, and dancing: but as the revellers were to rise early on the morrow to behold the fight, they were early at rest. And by day-spring in the morning the noise of horses and harness was heard in every quarter, and lords upon their palfreys were thronging to the palace.

There might be seen the arranging of armour, uncommon and rich, wrought with steel and gold-smithry; bright shields, head-pieces, trappings, golden helmets, hauberks, and coat-armoury; lords in gay furniture on their coursers; knights and squires in retinue; the fixing of spear-heads, and buckling of helmets, polishing of shields, and lacing of thongs: foaming steeds, gnawing their golden bits. The armourers, too, riding hither and thither with files and hammers "to accomplish the knights"; yeomen on foot and commoners in throngs with short staves; pipes, trumpets, and clarions, that blow the bloody sounds of war; the palace full of people driving to and fro, or standing in dozens, discussing the merits of the Theban knights; some favouring him with the black beard, others with the thick; the one they said had a fierce look and would fight bravely, and that the

[p. 47]

other wielded an axe with a weight of twenty pounds.

Thus was the hall full of surmises and conjectures long after sunrise. The great Theseus, who had been awakened by the music and the thronging, remained in private till the two Theban knights had been brought to the palace, and both received due and equal honours.

The king was seated at a window, and looked like a god enthroned. When the people had assembled round, a herald commanded silence, and thus signified the royal will.

"To prevent the needless destruction of gentle blood by fighting after the manner of mortal battles, the king decrees that no man, upon pain of death, shall take into the lists any halberd, short sword, or knife; that no one shall ride more than one course, with a sharp spear, against his antagonist; that if he choose, he may defend himself on foot; and any one who by mischance shall be taken alive, and brought to the stake, agreed upon by both sides, shall remain there till the strife be concluded: and lastly, if the chieftain on either side be taken or slain, the tournament shall straightway cease."

Up went the trumpets with their rousing tones, and the whole company rode forth to the lists, which were hung all round with cloth of gold. Theseus went first, and on either side the two Thebans; the queen and Emily followed, and after them the company according to their rank.

When these were all seated, the populace. crowded in and were ranged in order. Then from the west gate, under Mars, entered Arcite and his hundred partisans, bearing a red banner; at the same moment, on the east

[p. 48]

side, under Venus, and bearing a white banner, Palamon entered, with confident and courageous bearing. Never were two companies so matched, both in worthiness of deeds, estate, and age. After they had been arranged in order, and their names called over to prevent the taking of undue advantage, the gates were shut and the cry was made, "Now, young and proud knights, do your duty."

The heralds ceased riding up and down, and now the trumpets and clarions sound to the charge. In went the spears sadly to their rests, and the sharp spurs were dashed into the horses' sides. Now might be seen shaft handles shivered upon the bucklers, and spears whirled aloft into the air. Out flew the swords, gleaming like polished silver, and helmets were hewn or rolled upon the earth. Some force their passage through the thickest ranks with mighty maces, smashing skulls and limbs. Here lay one stark dead, pierced to the heart; another sobbing out his life with the stern tide of blood. The strongest chargers are overthrown, and men and horses are hurtling together upon the ground in mad confusion.

Frequently during the conflict the two Theban encountered, and like wild beasts bereft of their young, or mad with hunger, thirsted for each other's blood. But while they were engaged, the King Emetrius seized hold of Palamon, whose sword had made a bitter wound in Arcite's flesh, and with the strength of twenty men was dragging him to the stake. Lycurgus, in rushing to his rescue, was borne down; and Emetrius himself, notwithstanding all his might, was borne a sword's length from his saddle by a blow from Palamon before he could be taken. Yet all was in vain--his hardy heart could not

[p. 49]

bestead him, and he was brought by force to the stake.

When Theseus beheld this event, he arose and put an end to the conflict, declaring that Arcite of Thebes had won the fair Emily. At this, the shouting of the multitude burst forth, and seemed to rock the lists to their foundations. When the noise of these, the sounding of the trumpets, and the proclamation of the heralds had ceased, a wondrous event happened which changed the fortune of the victor.

As Arcite, with his helmet off to show his face, was pacing down the lists, and looking upward at his prize, the lovely Emily--who on her side, by a favouring glance, gave him to heed that she was all his own, both in heart as well as by the fortune of battle--suddenly a fury, sent from the infernal regions by Pluto, started out of the ground before his horse, which made him leap aside for fear; and foundering as he leaped, Arcite was thrown upon his head, and his breast was crushed with the saddle-bow. Being carried to the palace of Theseus, and his armour cut off, he was softly laid upon a bed, the name of Emily all the while hanging upon his lips.

Meantime the king, with all his company, returned to the city, and were feasted by him three days; during which time the wounded were dressed; and when the time for parting arrived, he accompanied them a long journey from his town, every one turning his own way home.

Arcite's injury continued to increase, for the inward bleeding could not be stopped on account of the bursting of the blood-vessels in his lungs. When he found that his death was near, he sent for Emily and his dear cousin,

[p. 50]

[paragraph continues] Palamon, and addressed to them the following tender and noble farewell.

"My woful heart cannot declare to you the sum of the sorrows it has endured in your behalf, my best beloved lady! but I bequeath to you, above all the world, my spirit's service, since my life here may no longer remain. Alas the woe! alas the sharp trials that I have so long suffered for you! alas the death! alas my Emily! alas the departing of our company! alas, queen of my heart! alas my wife! lady of my heart! closer of my days! What is this world? and what doth man desire?--now with his love, and now in his cold grave--alone--without any company. Farewell, my sweet! farewell my Emily! And now, for the love of heaven, take me softly in your arms, and hearken to what I say.

"For a long time I have been at strife and rancour with my cousin Palamon here, and all through love and jealousy on your account: now, Jove guide my mind to speak properly and truly of a rival, and with all circumstance: that is to say, with a feeling of all that belongs to truth, honour, and knighthood, wisdom, humility, estate, and lofty kindred; so Jove receive my spirit, as I know no man now in this world so worthy to be beloved as my cousin Palamon, who has served you, and will do till his death: if therefore you ever resolve to become a wife, do not forget Palamon the gentleman."

And with that word his speech began to fail; for the chill of death was rising from his feet up to his breast. His arms too were losing their vital power; the intellect alone remained, when his sighing heart began to fail with the sense of death: his breath shortened, his eyes

[p. 51]

became dim, yet still he kept them fixed on her, and his last words were, "Mercy! Emily!"

Theseus bore his fainting sister from the corpse. Palamon wept, and all the city lamented the untimely death of this unfortunate and brave young knight.

In due time the king gave orders for the funeral, and commanded that the ceremony should be performed at that same grove where he and Palamon had striven for love of Emily. A funeral pile was raised of many trees, felled for the purpose, and upon a bier, covered with cloth-of-gold, Arcite was laid (his face uncovered) clad in a suit of the same material. His head was crowned with green laurel, his white gloves were upon his hands, and one of them held his own good sword.

Then came the mourner Palamon, with dishevelled hair and beard, in a black suit, bedropped with his tears, and, excepting Emily, the ruefullest of the train.

After these came three steeds, caparisoned with glittering steel, adorned with the arms of Arcite. Their riders bore his shield, his spear, and his bow, the case and furniture of which were of burnished gold. They rode forth towards the grove at a solemn pace. The bier was supported upon the shoulders of the noblest Greeks, and the great street of the city through which they passed was hung with black. Theseus, accompanied by old Egeus, followed the train, bearing golden vessels containing money, milk, blood, and wine. Emily, in accordance with the custom of the time, carried the fire for the funeral service. I need not tell you all that was done at the ceremony. Of the felling of the trees, of the spicery and the garlands, the myrrh and the incense: how Arcite lay

[p. 52]

among all this; nor what store of costliness was heaped about his body; and how Emily set fire to the pile; nor what she said, nor how she swooned; nor of the jewels, the shields, the spears, and the vestments, the cups of wine, and milk, and blood which were cast into the fire; nor how the Greeks with loud shouts rode three times round the pile on the left hand; three times clashing their spears; or the three wails of the women; the burning of the body to ashes, and the funeral games of the Greeks when all was over. Therefore, to bring my long story to an end: after a decent process of time, when the mourning for Arcite had ceased, Theseus sent for Palamon who, unmindful of the cause, appeared in his sable dress. Emily also came at the same message. After fixing his eyes upon them for some time, and that all the company was hushed, he made a grave discourse, which he concluded in the following manner. "Why are we sad, that good Arcite, the flower of chivalry, has departed with high honour from the thraldom of life? Why do his wife and cousin here regret his welfare?--they who loved him so well. My purpose before we leave this place is to convert this double sorrow into a perfect and lasting joy: and therefore, dear sister, with the assent of my whole council here, it is my full wish that your own knight, the gentle Palamon, who, from the time he first saw your face, hath served you with good will and faithful heart, receive your favour and become your lord and husband. He is son to a king's brother, and therefore not unworthy of you; but if he were no more than a poor bachelor, since he hath served you for so many years through sharp adversity you should consider and recompense

[p. 53]

his deserts. Give me here your hand." Then turning to Palamon, he said, "Methinks there is little need to entreat your assenting to my purpose. Draw near and take your lady by the hand."

Then was the bond of marriage drawn up by the council, and Palamon wedded his Emily. Long did he live in bliss, health, and riches, Emily loving him tenderly, and he serving her with so much gentleness that no word of strife or jealousy was ever heard between them.

So ends the history of Palamon and Arcite, and God save all this fair company.

HERE ENDS THE KNIGHT'S TALE;

AND NEXT BEGINS

Footnotes

^33:* Friday was devoted to the worship of the Goddess Venus. The Romans entitled it "The day of Venus"--"Dies Veneris."

^34:* The ancient term gentle was used only to imply high breeding. A gentle knight was a knight of high family. In some parts of England, to this day, the best white bread is called "gentle bread," to distinguish it from the brown or common.

^41:* Diana, in the old mythology, passed also under the name of Lucina.

      
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 54]

  

The Lawyer's Tale

  

PROLOGUE

OUR worthy host perceived by the altitude of the sun that it had performed one quarter of its day's journey, so suddenly turning his good horse round, he said, "My masters! it is already ten o'clock; my advice therefore is that you lose no time, but get forward on your journey. Time is ever on the wane, and steals away from us, both while we sleep and during our waking hours of negligence--as the mountain stream never returns from the plain to its source. Sir Man of Law, since you have consented to submit to my judgment, now tell your tale, according to agreement: abide by the summons, and you will at least have acquitted yourself of your duty."

"Mine host," said he, "I have no intention to break my covenant: duty is a debt, and I cheerfully perform my best--I can say no more: for the law by which man restrains his fellow, he himself should abide by. Certain it is, however, that I can tell you no tale of merit that this rogue Chaucer has not been beforehand with me: for, in one book or another, he has told more love-stories than Ovid himself, the great master of the art. Nevertheless, I care not, though I do come limping with my prose after his rhymes." Having thus spoken, he in a sober style began the following tale.

[p. 55]

  

THE STORY OF THE LADY CONSTANCE

IN Syria, in former days, there dwelt a company of rich merchants, who exported far and near their cloth-of-gold, rich satins, and spicery: their merchandise was so very rare and excellent that all were eager to deal and barter with them. Now it happened that some of these traders turned their course towards Rome, and remained there as long as suited their pleasure and convenience. During their stay they heard of little but the great renown of the emperor's daughter, the Lady Constance. The common talk of every one was, "Our emperor--God preserve him--has a daughter, such as, for goodness and beauty, the world never saw surpassed. She possesses beauty without pride, youth without folly or inexperience; in all her actions virtue is her guide. In her, humility has overcome tyranny; she is the mirror of gentleness and courtesy; her heart is the very shrine of holiness; and her hand the minister of freedom in almsgiving."

After these merchants had freighted their ships and obtained a sight of this gifted maiden, they made their way back to their native country.

It happened that these merchants were in high favour with the Sultan of Syria, who, when they returned from foreign and strange places, would courteously entertain them, and eagerly gain from them intelligence respecting the various kingdoms they had traversed and the novelties they had observed. Among other matters, the travellers detailed so seriously the great beauty and virtue of the Lady Constance that the sultan was unable to

[p. 56]

dismiss her from his thoughts, but fell in love upon the bare report of her surpassing excellence. Whereupon he summoned his privy council, and commissioned them to ease his heart by devising a plan which should obtain for him in marriage the hand of the Lady Constance. Many were the arguments and the difficulties raised by the counsellors; among others, the great diversity in the religious institutions of the two countries; for they rationally concluded that no Christian prince would wed his child with a follower of Mahomet. This objection he overruled by declaring that, rather than be separated from her, he would himself become a Christian.

There is no occasion to detail all the account of the treaties and embassies which passed between the two courts: suffice to say, it was agreed that the sultan and his chief nobles should receive baptism and embrace Christianity, and that the Lady Constance should be bestowed in marriage upon the former, with I know not what portion of gold by way of dowry.

Bishops, and other holy men, with lords, ladies, and knights, were appointed to attend in her train. Moreover, public prayers were offered through the city that this marriage might be acceptable in the sight of heaven, as well as for the preservation of the travellers on their perilous voyage.

The day arrived for their departing, the woful day! and all were prepared. Constance, who was overcome with sorrow, arose with pale and anxious face and made ready to depart; for so the event was to be. Alas! no wonder she wept: a gentle and tender creature to be sent away from friends by whom she had been carefully

[p. 57]

nursed, to sojourn among strangers in a strange country, and become subject to the will of one she knew not.

"Father," said she, "your wretched child, Constance, your young daughter, so softly fostered, and you, my mother, my sovereign delight above all things in this world; Constance, your child, recommends herself to your frequent prayers. I shall go into Syria, and you will never more behold my face, since it is your will, alas! that I must go to this barbarous nation; but He, who suffered for our redemption, give me grace to fulfil all his commands. For me, wretched creature! no matter though I perish. Women are born to thraldom and penance, and to be subjected to the dominion of man."

When Pyrrhus rased the walls of Troy and burned the town; when Thebes was levelled with the ground; when Hannibal three times overcame the Romans, there was not heard more piteous weeping than in this chamber at the parting of Constance. This fair and woful maid was brought to the ship with every circumstance of solemnity. "Now, Jesus, our heavenly Saviour, be with you all," she said. There was no more but, "Farewell, fair Constance!" she all the while striving to put on a cheerful face. In this manner she sailed away, and now I will turn to another part of my story.

The mother of the sultan, who was a fountain of every vice and treachery, having discovered her son's intention to cast off his old religion, suddenly and privately summoned her privy council, whom she thus harangued. "My lords, you are all apprised that my son is on the point of deserting the holy laws of our Koran, dispensed to us by Mahomet the Prophet of God. As respects myself,

[p. 58]

however, I here vow to that great God, that life shall rather depart from this body than the laws of Mahomet from my heart. What are we to expect from this new faith but thraldom and penance to our bodies here; and for our backsliding from Mahomet, hell hereafter? Yet, my lords, if you will pledge me your assurance to abide by my counsel, I shall fully provide for our future safety."

Every man assented, and swore to live and die with her. Each one also promised to exert himself to strengthen her cause by every influence in his power. This compact being settled, she thus explained the enterprise she had taken in hand. "First, we will feign to embrace Christianity--a little cold water will not harm us. Then I will ordain such a feast and revelry as, if I mistake not, will prove an ample requital to the sultan. As for his wife, though she be christened pure and white as morning milk, she will need a whole font of water to wash away the red stains of that hour."

This sultaness--this root of inquity, this serpent under woman's form--privately dismissed her council, to fulfil the agreement made with her, while she rode to the sultan, and made confession to him of her repentance for having so long remained in the bonds of heathenism, with her resolution to renounce her faith and at the priest's hands to embrace Christianity; entreating him at the same time that the honour might be granted her to entertain all the Christian strangers. The sultan granted her request, thanking her at the same time on his knees for the mark of courtesy she had offered to his friends. He was so rejoiced he knew not what to say. She kissed her son, and returned home.

[p. 59]

These Christians, a large and solemn company, at length arrived in Syria. The sultan immediately dispatched a message to his mother and to his court all around informing them of his bride's arrival, requiring them, for the honour and dignity of his crown, to ride forth and meet the new queen.

Soon after the sultan arrived in such royal pomp that it was wonderful to behold, and with gladness of heart welcomed her to a second home, and so I leave them in the full enjoyment of mirth and bliss.

The time had now come when the old sultaness had prepared the feast I spoke of, and had invited to it all the Christians, both young and old. There were they regaled with dainties and luxuries more than I can describe--though all, alas! bought at a dreadful price. Too certainly does sudden woe succeed to worldly bliss: the end of the joy of our labour is sprinkled with bitterness, and grief follows in the train of mirth. For your security's sake, therefore, attend to this advice: in the day of gladness think upon and provide against the evil which comes up behind.

Shortly to describe this event: the sultan and every Christian were murdered at table, the Lady Constance alone being spared. The old sultaness, with her friends, compassed this cursed deed that she herself might rule the kingdom uncontrolled. Not even one Syrian of the sultan's council who had been converted escaped the frightful massacre: and Constance, who was wild with horror and dismay, they hurried into a vessel that had no rudder, bidding her find her way to Italy. A certain treasure she had brought to Syria, and store of provision, with

[p. 60]

clothing, they yielded to her; and forth she drifted on the salt sea. The ruler of all events be thy Pilot, gentlest and most forlorn of women! She blessed herself, and with a piteous voice prayed to the holy Cross. "O bright, O blissful altar! holy Cross! red with the blood of the Lamb that washeth away the sin of the world, keep me from the snares of the Evil One in the day that the deep sea shall swallow me."

Day after day, day after day, the rising sun found this tender creature floating hither and thither upon the billows, like an uprooted weed, throughout the Greek sea to the Straits of Morocco: small and miserable was her fare; great and unceasing, whether awake or asleep, was her fear of death. If you ask why she was not drowned? or who preserved her at the feast? I answer, who saved Daniel in the horrible den of lions? when all, save him alone, were torn limb from limb. In Constance, the great and good God displayed a wonderful miracle, that his mighty works should be made known. For often by certain means, which to us appear dark, he accomplishes certain ends that our ignorance and short sight cannot detect. She was preserved by a miracle, she was fed by a miracle, and so was she driven about the wide sea, till at last she was thrown ashore under a castle, far up on the coast of Northumberland, and her vessel remained so fixed in the sand that the flood-tide could not move it.

The constable of the castle came down to view the wreck, and having searched it over, found this solitary and woe-worn woman, together with the treasure she had brought away. In her language, which was a corrupted sort of Latin, she besought him to have pity upon

[p. 61]

her misery. The constable understood her speech and brought her to shore, when she knelt down upon the sand and thanked the Being who had preserved her through all her trials. By no means, however, could she be brought to tell who she was. Yet the constable and his wife took pity on her, and wept over the story of her sufferings. Moreover, so desirous was she to serve and please every one around her, that all loved her who had once looked in her face.

The constable and Dame Hermegild, his wife, with all the inhabitants of that country, were Pagans; but Hermegild had a deep affection for Constance; and Constance so long and so earnestly prayed, with tears and bitterness, that Dame Hermegild was converted through her grace. No Christian dared to dwell in that country; the believers were compelled to fly before their Pagan conquerors; and the Christianity of ancient Britain took refuge in the strongholds of the Welsh mountains. Yet were not the Christian Britons so exiled but that some few remained who secretly worshipped Jesus, and three of these were dwelling near the castle, one of whom was blind.

One bright summer's day the constable, with his wife and Constance, were walking towards the sea, that was a few furlongs distant, and in their way they met this blind man, who was also bowed down with age and infirmity. "In the name of Christ," cried this blind Briton, "Dame Hermegild, give me my sight again." The lady feared lest her husband should hear the sound of that name, till Constance made her bold by bidding her, as a daughter of the holy church, perform the will of Christ. The constable,

[p. 62]

astonished at the sight, inquired how all this might be. Constance answered him that it was done by the power of Jesus Christ, which can deliver those who believe from the snares of the Evil One. And then she laid before him all the doctrine of our holy law, so that before even-song the constable was converted and professed himself a true believer in Christ.

This worthy man was not lord of the place I have described, but he held it under Alla, King of Northumberland, who bore so strong a hand against the Scots. But this is not the matter of my story. Satan, who is ever on the watch to entrap erring mortals, had cast an evil eye on Constance and her perfections, and sought to requite her for all her godly works. To this end he moved a young knight, dwelling near the castle, to love her with a foul and dishonest affection, which when he found had no avail (for no temptation could bring her to sin and shame), the villainous heart of the youth, through spite and disappointment, compassed his thought to make her die a felon's death. Watching therefore his opportunity, while the constable was away, he crept privately by night to Hermegild's chamber, who, with Constance had both fallen asleep, weary with long waking and prayer. Softly he went to the bedside of Hermegild and, with the Devil's aid, at one plunge severed her throat, then laying the bloody knife by the Lady Constance's side he went his way. Shortly after the constable returned and saw his wife mercilessly murdered, and by the Lady Constance was found the bloody knife. Here was piteous weeping and wringing of hands! and what, alas! could she say, whose wits were wild with woe and horror.

[p. 63]

The whole circumstance of the disaster was laid before the king, together with all the detail of time and place, where Constance was discovered in the ship, which you have already heard. The heart of the king shuddered with compassion when he saw so benign a creature fall into trouble and misfortune; for, as a lamb brought to the slaughter, so stood this innocent before the king, the traitor knight at her side and acting the part of accuser. Notwithstanding all, however, there was great murmuring among the people, who would not believe that she had done this great wickedness, for they had known her to be ever virtuous and loving Hermegild as her own life. Of this, all save the murderer bore testimony. The king was strongly incited by this witness, and determined to inquire more deeply into the case to search the truth of the matter.

Ill-fated Constance! no champion have you to defend your right; and, alas the day! little can you defend yourself. If He who suffered for our redemption be not your strong champion on this day, guiltless must you die. Before the assembled court she fell upon her knees and cried aloud--"O immortal God! who preserved Susanna from false accusation; and O merciful Virgin, to whose Son the angels sing hosannas, if I be guiltless of this deed grant me succour in this sharp hour of my trial." Have you not sometimes, in the midst of a crowd, beheld the pale face of him who has been heading to his death, without even the hope of reprieve; a face so ghastly that it could at once be known from all the rest? So stood Constance, and looked around. You queens and ladies, all, living in prosperity, think with ruth upon her state--

[p. 64]

think how she was bested: an emperor's daughter, standing alone, with not a friend to whom she could pour out her complaint.

The king had such compassion upon her forlorn state (for the gentle heart ever leans to the piteous side) that the tears flowed from his eyes. "Quickly let a book be brought," said he, "and if this knight will swear that she slew this woman, we will yet consult who shall be our justice in this case." A British book containing the gospel was produced, and on this book he made oath that she was guilty. Immediately an unseen hand smote him on his neck, so that he fell like a stone and, in the sight of all, his eyes burst from his head. Then in the general audience a voice followed, saying, "Thou hast slandered the guiltless daughter of Holy Church in high presence--thus hast thou done." All, save Constance alone, stood aghast at this wonder, each in dread of the divine wrath. All who had wrongly suspected her made repentance; and, to conclude, the miracle, with the mediation of Constance, wrought upon the king and many more present, who were converted.

Alla instantly condemned the traitor knight to death, and Constance, notwithstanding all his untruth and perfidy, had pity on his fate. After this the king wedded Constance with great solemnity, and so this shining star of holiness became a queen. All rejoiced in the event but Donegild, the king's mother, a tyrannical and cruel woman: her wicked and proud heart was wrung at the thought of her son's marrying a creature whom no one knew, or whence she came, or what she was.

After the lapse of some months the king, being compelled

[p. 65]

Click to enlarge
The Lawyer

to march against his old enemies the Scots, committed his wife, who was in expectation of presenting him with a child, to the protection of a bishop and his friend the constable. The meek and humble Constance in due course of time, and while her lord was still away, brought into the world a son and heir, who was christened Maurice. And the constable despatched a messenger with a letter to the king, informing him of the event. The messenger, however, thinking to gain for himself some advantage, rode straight to the queen dowager, and under show of diligence, with fair speech informed her that Queen Constance had brought forth a son. "And this letter, madam, contains the intelligence which I am to convey to Scotland; if your highness have any commands to his Majesty your son, I am your slave both night and day." Donegild commanded him to remain all night, and that in the morning he should receive her despatches.

The messenger passed his time in eating and drinking till his wits were gone; so that, while he was snoring like a swine, his letters were secretly conveyed from his box, and another letter wickedly indited, to the following purport, was substituted for them, It described the queen to have been delivered of so horrible and fiend-like a creature that no one in the castle was hardy enough to remain with it: moreover, that the mother had by her magic and sorcery betrayed herself to be a witch, and that the whole court avoided her company. The receipt of this letter was a bitter stroke to the king, yet he made no one acquainted with his sorrows; but with his own hand returned for answer that he welcomed the will and ordinance of Heaven. "For all this, however," continued

[p. 66]

the letter, "keep the child, be it foul or fair, and my wife also till my return home. The Saviour whom I serve will send me an heir more agreeable than this at his own good will." This letter he sealed, secretly weeping, and sent it to the messenger, who set forth on his return home.

Having arrived at the court of the queen mother, that fiend-like woman received him with much courtesy and favour, ordering him the same entertainments as before; and during his drunken sleep his letters were again stolen, and others, to the following purport, were substituted for them, viz., that the king commanded his constable, upon pain of certain death, by hanging, not to suffer Constance to remain three days in his kingdom after receiving that order; but that she, with her infant son, and all the store she had brought with her, should be forthwith hurried into the same ship in which the constable had discovered her, and driven out from shore.

On the morrow the messenger made his way to the constable's castle and delivered to him the letter, who, when he had read its contents, grievously lamented the bitter wickedness of the sentence, crying, "Alas! alas! how can this world continue, so steeped in sin and cruelty is every creature! Gracious God! if it be thy will, how can it meet the righteousness of thy judgment thus to suffer innocence to be betrayed, and wicked men to reign on in prosperity? O blameless Constance! deep is the measure of my grief, that I must either be your tormentor and your bane, or myself endure a shameful death!"

Both young and old in the neighbourhood wept at the news of this cursed letter; and on the fourth day Constance,

[p. 67]

with a deadly pale face, went toward the vessel; and kneeling down upon the strand, she said, "Lord, ever welcome be thy decree"; and she added, "He that shielded me from blame while I was amongst you can preserve me from harm in the wide sea. He is now as strong as He ever was: in Him I put my trust; He will be my sail and my load-star on the perilous deep."

Her little child lay weeping on her arm. "Peace, peace, little son," said she, "I will not harm you": with that she took her kerchief from her head and laid it over its little eyes, lulling the babe in her arm against her bosom; and, casting her eyes up to heaven, "O Mother!" she continued, "blessed Virgin Mary! true it is that through a woman's tempting mankind was lost and doomed to perdition, for which error the flesh of thy Son was torn upon the cross; thy blessed eyes witnessed his torment; then is there no comparison between thine and any woe man may sustain. Thou sawest thy child slain before thine eyes--my little child yet liveth. O blessed Virgin! to whom in their griefs all woful creatures turn; glory of womanhood! haven of refuge! bright star of day! look down with ruth upon my babe; thou who in thy gentleness lookest with pity on the miserable.

"O little child! what, alas! has been thy guilt that, as yet, can have wrought no sin? Why will thy cruel father shed thy life?" and then she said, "In mercy, dear constable, let my child dwell here with you: yet, if you dare not preserve him from harm, in his father's name bestow upon him one kiss." With that she looked backward toward the land, and said, "Farewell, ruthless husband!" and then she arose and walked down the beach towards

[p. 68]

the vessel, the crowd following her, and she at intervals hushed her weeping babe. After blessing herself with devout intent, she took leave of all around and stepped into the ship. The constable had taken good care to provide it with abundant store and every necessary for a long voyage: and now may the Almighty God protect her, for she is driving away upon the sea.

Soon after this, King Alla returned home and went straight to the castle, inquiring for his wife and child. At the sound of these words a sudden cold about the heart seized the faithful constable, who plainly laid before him the whole event, showing him at the same time the letter he had received, with his own seal affixed. The messenger was put to the rack till he had confessed distinctly where he had passed each night between his departure from Scotland and arrival at the royal castle. The hand that wrote the letter was discovered, with all the venom of this most cursed deed; and the effect of it was that Alla, in the transport of fury, slew his own mother. Thus ended the ill-spent life of the traitress to her allegiance, old Donegild. But no tongue can describe the sorrow of Alla, who night and day bewailed the loss of his Constance and their child; while they for many a moon, through heat and cold, moist and dry, through many a windy storm and tempest, had been preserved, till her bark stranded, at last, under the walls of a heathen castle, the name of which I do not recall.

The people of the district came down, wondering at the appearance of the ship and at Constance; but during the night a steward of the castle came alone into the ship, with the intent of robbing the gentle voyager and carrying

[p. 69]

her off. This wretched woman cried for help, and the child wept piteously,. but her guardian, who was ever at hand, again brought her off unharmed, for in her struggle of despair the villain stumbled overboard and was drowned. The vessel afterwards was borne off by the tide, and drifted away again for many a weary day.

I must here change the thread of my story, and inform you of the Roman emperor, who, by letters out of Syria, had received intelligence of the massacre of the Christians, with the dishonour offered to his daughter by the treacherous and murdering sultaness, for which foul deed he sent forth a chosen senator, with other lords and picked troops, to take ample vengeance on those Syrians. They fulfilled their embassy with a loyal zeal, burning and destroying till wrath and justice were appeased. These fulfilled, the senator returned home crowned with victory, and in his voyage met the vessel driving in which Constance was sitting, piteous and desolate. So changed was she in look and array that he had not the slightest recollection of her, while she concealed her name and degree. He brought her home, however, with him to Rome, and placed her, with the little Maurice, under the care of his wife; who, though her aunt, was as ignorant of the quality of her guest as the senator himself.

After she had resided for some time in this manner, gladding the hearts of all around by her gentleness and good works, King Alla, her husband, came to Rome for the purpose of doing penance, and to obtain pardon for the unholy deed of having slain his mother. The fame of his pilgrimage having been noised about the city, our senator, with his heralds and attendants, went forth to

[p. 70]

receive him, according to his quality. Each received the other with so much courtesy and good will that the king invited the senator to a feast, who took the little Maurice with him to behold the company and grandeur of the entertainment; and, by the instruction of his mother, during the intervals of the feasting the child stood looking in the king's face. Alla fixed his eyes with wonder upon the boy, and said to the senator, "Whose child is that standing yonder?" "I know no more of him," was the nobleman's answer, "than that he has a mother, but, so far as I can hear, no father"; and with that he briefly rehearsed to the king how he found the child. "But, Heaven knows," added the senator, "that in all my life I never met or heard of a more virtuous woman, maiden, widow, or wife, and I dare well say that she would go to death rather than commit a wicked deed."

Now this child was as like to Constance as it was possible for one creature to resemble another. Alla remembered the face of Constance, and mused whether it might happen that the mother of the child was his own wife. With that thought he inwardly sighed, and hurried away from table. "It must," thought he, "be the phantom of my brain; for my sober judgment would say my wife lies dead at sea; and yet, why may not the good God have guided Constance hither, as safely as he led her to my own country?"

After the feast, Alla went home with the senator to see the end of all this wonder; who sent hastily for Constance to come into the presence of the king; but when she knew the cause of the message, she could scarcely stand upon her feet. When Alla saw his wife he embraced

[p. 71]

her eagerly and tenderly, weeping over her sweet and bitter tears, for at the first look he fixed upon her he knew it was she; while she stood dumb with sorrow, so closed was her heart in her distress when she remembered all his unkindness. Twice she swooned in his arms, and he, weeping, piteously excused himself. "As Heaven shall have mercy on my soul," said he, "I am as guiltless of your harm as is my son here, Maurice--so like your own face." Long was the sobbing and the bitter pain before their hearts could cease; but when it was finally known that Alla was guiltless of her persecution, they kissed a hundred times, and such bliss was between them that (unless it be the joy which will endure hereafter and for ever) no one has seen or ever will see the like.

She then meekly entreated her husband, in relief of her long sorrow, that he would especially beseech the emperor to dine with him on a certain day, but on no account to make mention of herself. Some have it, that the child Maurice bore the invitation; but it should rather seem that Alla himself would perform that honour to the flower of all Christendom: yet the child went with him, and when the emperor had accepted the invitation, he looked steadily upon the face of Maurice and thought upon his daughter.

The morrow came, and Alla with his wife prepared to meet the emperor, riding out in gladness of heart to receive him: and when he drew near, she alighted, and throwing herself at his feet, said, "Father, Constance, your young and only child, is gone out of your remembrance. I am your daughter, your Constance, whom long ago you sent into Syria. I am she who was put alone upon

[p. 72]

the sea; who was condemned to death. Dear father! in mercy send me no more among the heathen; but receive and thank this lord and king, my lord, for all his kindness to me." Who can describe the joy of those three, who had so strangely and happily met? And now to make a conclusion to my tale, this child, Maurice, was afterwards anointed emperor by the pope, and did high honour to the Christian church: but my story is especially of Constance.

King Alla after due time returned to England with his sweet and holy wife, where they lived together in peace and happiness, although, alas! but for a short though blissful season: happiness in this world is ever fleeting, and so it was with Alla and Constance; for, at the end of a year, death removed him from her; and she in grief and heaviness at his loss returned to the land of her birth. This divine creature travelled back to Rome, where she found her friends living and well. All her adventures had come to an end. And, weeping before her father's knees, with tender and sad thoughts, she returned thanks to God for her deliverance. Thus they lived in virtue and deeds of alms-giving, till they were separated for ever in this life. And now fare you well, my tale is over; and may He who protected Constance keep all here, and send them gladness after sorrow.

HERE ENDS THE TALE OF THE LAWYER;

AND NEXT BEGINS

      
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 73]

  

The Student's Tale

  

PROLOGUE

"GOOD Master Student of Oxford," said our host, "why, you ride there as still and coy as a young maid at her bridal feast! Not a word, I vow, has passed your lips during the whole of this day. I would wager, now, that your brain is weaving some sophism or other; but as Solomon says, 'There is a time for everything.' So cheer up, man! this is no time for studying. You have consented to take a part in our play, and, therefore, needs must be thinking of the character you have undertaken to perform. Come, then, tell us some merry tale; and for mercy's sake do not make it like a Lent sermon, bidding us bewail in sackcloth our sins and offences of the past year; or like many other sermons, drone us to sleep. Give us a lively history of adventures; and, as for your colouring and rhetorical flourishes, keep them by you snug and warm till you are called upon to indite some high style, as when men address the presence of royalty. Upon the present occasion I would beseech you to be plain and simple in your matter, that the homely part of your audience may understand the whole of your discourse."

Our worthy collegian courteously answered: "Good host, I acknowledge your power and supremacy, and am prepared to obey you according to my ability. I will tell you a tale, which I learned at Padua, of a renowned and

[p. 74]

noble scholar and poet--the laureate Petrarch (now, alas! in his grave), who, with his choice rhetoric and poetry, illumined all Italy, as the famous Linian [**] did with his philosophy. But Death, 'the common end of all, who will come when he will come,' has snatched them both away, as it were in the twinkling of an eye.

"To return, however, to this great man (Petrarch) who taught me the story I propose relating to you, he has prefaced it in a high strain of eloquence by a description of the territory of Piedmont, with the rich district of Saluzzo, together with the swelling Appenines, that form the boundary of West Lombardy; including, in his account, the Mount Viso, from whose region the river Po, in a feeble spring, first takes its course eastward, towards the Emilian way, Verara, and Venice, gaining strength and magnitude as it rolls along: all which, in the original work, however beautiful in itself, appears to me unconnected with the purpose in hand; except, indeed, that he skilfully contrives to make it lead to the matter of his history: and, therefore, it is that I have slightly alluded to his description, because it forms the scene of the tale you are now to hear."

  

THE STORY OF THE MARQUIS OF SALUZZO AND HIS WIFE GRISELDA

ON the west side of Italy at the foot of Mount Viso is situated a fertile plain, interspersed with thriving and populous towns, and many fair castles, built ages ago. The name of this district is Saluzzo. It was formerly governed by a marquis, who held his dominion by a long

[p. 75]

right of succession; and his subjects, both high and low, were bound in fealty to attend his summons, whether in war or peace. So discreet was he in his government (with one or two exceptions in his conduct) that he was beloved and feared by all, gentle and simple. He was a man of graceful person, vigorous constitution, in the prime of life, and full of honour and courtesy. His family was of so pure and noble a descent that not one in all Lombardy could compare with him in gentleness of blood. The name of this young nobleman was Walter.

The indiscretions in his conduct to which I have alluded were that he was too prone to gratify the desires of the present moment without regard to the future; and so great was his delight in hawking and hunting that the graver cares and duties of life were not sufficiently regarded. But what, in the minds of his subjects, gave cause for the greatest uneasiness was that he could by no persuasions be induced to take a wife; and, consequently, they feared that the noble line in which they took so great a pride should become extinct in case of his death, and that the government, under which they had ever lived in great felicity, might pass into the hands of a stranger: they, therefore, petitioned him to take the matter into his consideration, and that for the good of his people he would allow them to propose for him, or himself select for wife, a lady, the best and gentlest born in all the land.

The marquis listened to their petition with much kindness of manner, and answered that, although he had never thought to be restricted within the bonds of matrimony, yet, for the welfare and safe government of his

[p. 76]

people, that he would consent to choose for himself a wife upon the earliest occasion. "And now," he concluded, "I charge you on your lives to assure me that whoever I may think fit to wed you will, during her whole life, bear her all honour and worship both in word and work, as though she were the daughter of an emperor. And furthermore," said he, "this shall ye swear, that ye will never murmur at the choice I may make, from what condition soever of life she may be taken; for since at your requests I consent to forego my liberty, wherever I fix my heart there shall be my partner for life. Grant me this condition, or I dismiss the matter altogether." They heartily made oath to abide by his decree, and departed, beseeching him to appoint an early day for his nuptials, which request, to their great satisfaction, he granted, and fixed a certain day for the ceremony: at the same time he gave orders to the officers of his household to make full preparation in honour of the solemnity.

Not far from the palace of the marquis stood a village, pleasantly situated, which supplied ample provision both for the inhabitants and cattle in its neighbourhood. Among the poor folk of this village lived one, named Janicola, who was accounted the poorest of them all, and he had a fair daughter, called Griselda. Fair she was to behold, but if I were to speak of virtuous beauty, then was she the fairest under the sun. Poorly and humbly brought up, her wants were all of the simplest nature. Simple was her diet, and constantly laborious was her life. Yet, though this young creature was of a tender age, within her simple heart was enclosed a grave and mature spirit. Her poor old father she cherished with great love and

[p. 77]

reverence; she tended his sheep in the field, and her only hours of idleness were her hours of sleep.

The marquis, as he rode out hunting, had frequently fixed his eyes upon Griselda; not in an idle or careless humour, but with a grave and musing look; commending in his heart her womanly air and modest demeanour, her goodness and dutiful conduct as a daughter; and he thought that if ever he should wed at all he would marry her only.

The wedding day had arrived, and no one could guess who was destined to be the bride; which made his subjects conclude that their lord was still beguiling them. Notwithstanding their doubts and surmises, however, he had given orders, on Griselda's account, for various ornaments and jewels, set in gold and azure, such as rings and brooches meet for a bridal array. And for her clothing, measure was taken of a young maiden most resembling her in height and shape. Towards noon of the wedding-day, when the chambers of the palace and the bridal feast were all prepared, the marquis, in rich apparel, with all the lords and ladies in his company who were invited to the feast, and all his retinue of knights, attended by musicians playing sweet melodies, took his way to the village I have described.

Griselda, perfectly innocent, heaven knows, of the thought that all this display was prepared for her, had been to a well for water, and was returning home as quickly as she could, in order that she might have sight of the ceremony and of the expected and unknown marchioness. So while she was standing on the threshold of her own door, surrounded by her village companions,

[p. 78]

the marquis drew near and called her out by name. Immediately she set down her water-pot in an ox's stall close by the threshold, and on her knees before the lord, with a sober and steady look, waited his command.

The marquis, in a sedate and thoughtful tone, asked where her father was. "My lord," said she, "he is ready here to do your will"; and, without farther delay, she led him forth. Then, taking this poor man aside by the hand, he said, "Janicola! I can no longer conceal the pleasant wish of my heart: if you consent, I will, before I leave this place, take your daughter for my wife until my life's end. As my faithful liegeman, I know your attachment and love for me; say then, do you accept my proposal to become your son-in-law?"

The suddenness of this appeal so amazed poor Janicola that, blushing with confusion and abashment, he stood trembling in the presence of his liege lord, and all he could answer was, "My true and dear lord! I have no will in this matter--order according to your own will and pleasure." "Then," said the marquis in a low and mild voice, "I wish to have a conference with you both within doors; for I would know from her own mouth, and before you, her father, whether it be her free will to become my wife and subject to my dominion. All this shall be done in your presence, and no word will I say to her out of your hearing." While the three were arranging the conditions within, the neighbours flocked about the house, talking together of the dutiful and loving behaviour of Griselda towards her father, and of her honest and simple bearing to all, while she, unaccustomed to the presence of such a guest, and in such a place, stood pale and

[p. 79]

wondering at the event. To end the affair, however, as shortly as possible, the marquis turned to this gentle and very faithful creature, and said, "Griselda, it pleases your father and myself that I should take you to be my wife, and I think you will not reject our wishes. Yet, since our union must be concluded hastily, bethink yourself whether you can assent to the following questions which I would first ask of you. Are you prepared with a good heart to yield yourself to my will and pleasure, whether it bring you joy or sorrow? Will you, without grudge, either by word or look, gainsay the least or greatest of my commands? Pledge me this, and here I confirm our alliance."

Wondering at all this, and trembling with fear and anxiety, she said, "My lord! unworthy as I am of the high honour you intend me, I here declare--loth as I am to die--that I will endure that extremity rather than disobey you willingly either in thought or deed." "This is enough," said he, "then are you my own Griselda," and leading her forth to the people, he proclaimed her to them as his wife, desiring all who were attached to his own person and family to honour, love, and obey her. And as it was his wish that she should not appear at the palace in her mean attire, he ordered some of the women in his retinue to assist in spoiling her of those peasant's weeds, a task the ladies were not blithe to execute, as somewhat disdaining to handle her lowly gear; notwithstanding, however, this fresh and lovely maiden came forth from their hands from head to foot, both in mind and body, worthy of her strange advancement. With their courtly and delicate fingers they tressed up her

[p. 80]

rudely flowing hair, binding it with a richly-jewelled crown, and all her robes and dresses were studded and knit together with precious stones and ornaments of gold, so that the people scarcely knew their poor companion in her splendid transformation.

The marquis confirmed his pledge upon the spot by placing on her finger the bridal ring, and forward they paced to the palace; she being mounted upon a snow-white palfrey, the joyful populace following and welcoming; while some held her horse's bridle, others looked upon her face to see how she sustained her sudden honours: and so the day was passed in gladness, feasting, and revelry.

I would not willingly delay the current of my story; but it is to my purpose here to tell you that so bountifully had heaven showered its grace and favour upon this new marchioness, that so far from betraying the lowliness of her birth, her discreet deportment would have honoured the daughter of an emperor. They who had known her from her infancy could scarcely bring their minds to conceive that she was the homely child of old Janicola; and though she was in her former condition ever virtuous and kind, yet so had her excellent qualities increased, so full of bounty, so discreet and sweet of speech, so courteous and worthy of reverence, and so ready to embrace the hearts of all, that no one could look upon her face and not love her. The fame of her high bounty had spread so far and wide that all ranks, young and old, went to Saluzzo only to behold her.

Thus Walter, not lowly, but royally wedded, lived in peace and honour; and because he had the sense to discern

Click to enlarge
The Student

[p. 81]

honest virtue in a mean estate, he enjoyed the rare credit of being esteemed by all a prudent man. Not only, however, was the understanding of Griselda equal to every wifely accomplishment, but when the case required it she could dispose herself for the common benefit. During her husband's absence, every rancour and discord among the people she would with her sagacity and placid demeanour and persuasiveness smooth into peace and goodwill. So wise and ripe was her discourse and her judgment so equitable that the people would say she was sent from heaven to redress the wrongs of mankind.

To the great joy of all, in due time Griselda presented her husband with a daughter.

During the nurture of this babe, it entered the mind of the marquis to put his wife upon some severe trials that he might prove her steadfastness of heart--a needless course, however some may praise its subtleness of purpose, for he had already assayed, and found her ever good and true: evil, therefore, must be the thought that, without cause, could put a wife to the anguish of trial. Nevertheless, he acted as you shall hear. One night, as she lay in bed, he approached her with a stern and troubled face, and said: "I presume, Griselda, you have not forgotten the day on which I took you from your humble plight, and raised you to the highest rank of nobility--I say, you have not lost sight of your former humbleness of condition; take heed, then, of what I am now about to say to you. You are yourself aware how, not long ago, you entered this palace; and though to my heart you have been ever dear, yet are you not acceptable to my nobles, who chafe at and grudge their becoming subject to one

[p. 82]

of your low origin; and these heart-burnings have increased since the birth of your child. Since, therefore, it has ever been my care to live at peace with my people, I cannot in the present case be regardless of that duty, but must dispose of your child, not as I would, but as my nobles please. Greatly, heaven knows, as I abhor this course, yet I would do nothing without your knowledge; although, at the same time, I require the performance of your marriage vow--that on this occasion you show the patience of your spirit by yielding yourself to my will."

When she had heard this dreadful speech, with a steady voice and unshaken aspect she said, "My lord! my child and I, with full obedience on my part, are all your own--you may cherish or abandon your own property. And, as the good God shall protect me, I declare that no creature wearing your form can ever distress or change my heart. I desire nothing and I dread to lose nothing, yourself alone excepted; this thought is rooted in my heart, and it shall ever remain so: neither length of time nor death itself can deface or change the courage of my purpose."

The marquis secretly rejoiced at her answer, but he feigned otherwise; and leaving the chamber with a sorrowful air, he privately conferred with a dependant, whom he possessed of his intention and sent to the apartment of his wife. This commoner was a sort of sergeant, who had heretofore been found trustworthy in important matters--such agents, we know, can also at times be equally faithful in a cruel errand. The lord well knew that he both loved and feared him, so when the fellow had received his orders, he silently stalked into the room.

[p. 83]

"Madam," said he, "it is not for one like me to inform you of our hard necessity to obey in all things the will of our lords; and you must forgive me, who am constrained to do that which of my own free will I would refuse. I am commanded to take away the child." He said no more, but roughly seizing the babe, behaved as though he would have slain it before its mother's face. Griselda, who was doomed to endure all and to consent to all, sat still and meek as a lamb, and let the cruel sergeant pursue his course. At length, however, she gently entreated the man (as though he had been one of noble birth) that she might kiss her child before it died: and so, with woful face, she laid its little body in her lap; and lulling it, and kissing it, and with a mother's heart yearning for the blessing of its safety, she said with her soft and benign voice, "Farewell, my child! I shall behold you no more. To that Father, with whose cross I have marked you, do I commend your sinless soul." Then, turning to the sergeant she meekly said, "Now take your infant charge, and follow my lord's commands; but oh! if they be for death, one thing I entreat at your hands, that you would bury its little body beyond the violation of beasts and carrion fowl"--so constant was this mother in her adversity. The man returned no answer, to her petition, but, taking up the child, went back to his lord and told him all he had heard and seen; who, indeed, began to repent his sternness, but, with the wilful steadiness of one who had never known control, he persisted in his cruel purpose, and ordered the sergeant, upon pain of death, not to disclose the least circumstance of the affair, but carefully to take the infant to his sister, the Countess

[p. 84]

di Panico, at that time living in Bologna, beseeching her to foster it with every regard to the gentleness of its birth; bidding her also, whatever might happen, to conceal from every one the name of its parents. The sergeant departed to fulfil his errand, and now we will return to the marquis, who was busily curious to discover whether in word or demeanour any change were wrought in his wife; but he still found her the same kind and staid Griselda; as humble, as ready both in love and duty was she in all respects; nor did she even speak of her child. From that dreadful day no accident or sting of adversity could bring the name of her daughter to pass her lips.

Four years had now elapsed when Griselda gladdened the heart of her husband and fulfilled the wishes of his people by giving them an heir to the marquisate. All went on prosperously, the child increased in strength and beauty of form; it was the delight of its parents and the pride of its future subjects; all seemed satisfied--all happy. All seemed, but all were not happy; for at the age of two years, when the nurse's duty had ceased, and that this tender seedling had begun to shoot its little roots deeply, and more and more firmly every day to twine about the heart of its mother, the demon of temptation and mistrust again possessed the mind of that wilful and unrelenting husband. How hardly can men restrain the wantonness of power when a patient creature is subjected to its control!

"Griselda!" said he, "I have already made known to you that the people look with an evil eye upon our marriage, and since the birth of my son this discontent has increased. The constant talk now is, 'When the reigning

[p. 85]

marquis dies, we shall have the blood of the pauper Janicola to be our lord and to rule over us.' These murmurs, as you may suppose, cut me to the heart; I cannot but see their dissatisfaction, and though I do not hear I am made to know the cause of their offence. As, therefore, it is the desire of my heart to reign in peace, I have resolved to remove my son and dispose of him as I formerly did of his sister; of which determination I give you warning, in order that you may be prepared for the event, and not give way to any sudden grief, but endure all my decrees with your promised patience and steadfastness."

"I have said," she replied, "and I will never repeal my oath, that nothing which you may command will I gainsay. Though my children be both slain, you are my lord and their lord, and may do with your own as you list: their mother has had no part in their lot, but pain in the first instance, and unavailing sorrow ever after. As when I first left my home to come to you, I left my all, even to my clothing; so I then left my will and my liberty when I put on your array. Follow, therefore, the inclination of your heart. If I had the prescience to know that my death would give you ease, of a surety would I die forthwith. Death can bear no comparison with my love."

When he beheld the patience of his wife, he cast down his eyes, wondering at her constancy, yet glad at heart; with a show of sorrow, however, in his countenance he left the room. His place was supplied by the same ill-looking minion that had performed his master's former hateful errand; who seized her lovely child and bore it away amid the embraces of its mother; yet carrying it tenderly, as he did its sister, to the countess at Bologna.

[p. 86]

It is not to be supposed that these acts on the part of the marquis were executed in so secret a corner but that the vileness of their odour bewrayed itself. The slander against him had begun to spread far and wide that, wickedly, and with a cruel heart, he had first taken to wife a woman in poverty, and had afterwards privately murdered her children. He then, who had been the idol of his people now became the object of their abhorrence. Notwithstanding all which fearful rumour (and the stigma of murderer is the heaviest load that can be thrown upon a man's conscience), such was the cruelty of his purpose, and the determination of his obstinacy, that he would not relax a jot from pursuing to its utmost extent the plan he had formed for proving the faithfulness of this gentle and already too mild-conditioned woman.

When his daughter had reached the age of twelve years, he privately commissioned the same messenger to draw up papers, counterfeiting a bull from the pope at Rome sanctioning a dissolution of the bonds of marriage between himself and Griselda, upon the plea that it had been the cause of rancour and dissension between the people and him, their ruler. The rude commonalty, who are seldom slow to be deceived, gave ear to the proclamation, and (no wonder) thought it was all true. But when the tidings were brought to Griselda, she was smitten to the heart with the new and unlooked for cruelty of the blow; yet like a lamb she abided in dumb anguish the bitterness of this unpitying storm, nor ever once let a word of upbraiding fall from her lips.

To draw as shortly as possible to the conclusion of my

[p. 87]

tale, the marquis secretly sent a letter to his brother-in-law, the Count di Panico, requesting him to bring home again, openly, and with all the pomp due to their estate, both the children that had been placed under his protection; but on no account to disclose any other circumstance respecting them than that the maiden was destined to become the new bride of the Marquis di Saluzzo.

The count strictly fulfilled his brother's commission, and, upon a day appointed, set forth towards Saluzzo with his young charge and her brother, at that time only seven years of age; the former, gorgeously arrayed, and attended by a numerous and honourable retinue.

Notwithstanding all this wicked usage, the marquis determined still farther to prove utterly the courage and forbearance of his wife. I need not ask the women whether she had not given him sufficient proof of a virtuous love and steady devotion; but you will bear in mind that in the opening of my story I told you, when describing the faults in his character, "that he was too prone to gratify the desires of the present moment, without regard to the future"; add to which, that he was as firm in fulfilling the object of those desires as she was patient and constant in her oath of obedience. Consequently, upon a certain day, in the open audience of his whole court, he delivered to her, in a stern and boisterous tone, the following declaration.

"Although I acknowledge, Griselda, the great comfort I have experienced in your truth, goodness, and obedience, since we have been husband and wife (though not in the quality of your lineage, or in the wealth I took with you), yet now I find, of a sad truth, that loftiness of

[p. 88]

birth and dignity of station are burthened with a heavy and dreary servitude. I may not act like the meanest hind in my domains; but all my people, strengthened by this order from the pope, daily require of me to take another wife; to which constraint I have so far yielded that it has become necessary to inform you that my new bride, your successor, is now on her road to Saluzzo. Be, therefore, strong of heart, and void her place. All the dowry you brought me I give back again--prosperity never flows in an unbroken current; return, therefore, to your father's house, and strive to bear with an even heart this stroke of fortune."

She answered him in a tone of patience that was a marvel to the whole assembly: "My lord, I know, and have always felt, that no comparison can be drawn between my poverty and your magnificence. At no time did I ever esteem myself higher in degree of worth than to be your chamber-woman; and in this palace, of which you exalted me to be the lady, I take heaven to witness, and am now glad I did so, that I never considered myself the mistress of it, but the dutiful minister to your worthiness: and this, above every other earthly creature, I shall ever continue to be. That in your graciousness you so long retained me in a state of honour and nobility, of which I was unworthy, I thank both God and you, and hope he may bountifully repay it you. I willingly return to my father, and with him will end my days. In that cot was I fostered from my tenderest childhood; there will I pass the remainder of my life--a widow, clean in her conduct, and with an unupbraiding heart. And since I gave to you all I could give, and came a spotless maiden, and am your

[p. 89]

true wife, heaven forbid that the wife of such a lord should be united to another husband. As regards your new bride, I pray for your happiness and prosperity: I freely yield her that place where I was wont to be so blessed, for since it is your pleasure, my lord (who wert formerly the home in which my heart had nestled), that I should depart, I am ready to go when you command. But when you offer to restore such dowry as I first brought, too well do I bear in mind that it was my wretched clothes--Oh! good God! how gentle and kind you seemed by your speech and your countenance on the day of our marriage! True it is, and I find it so, for in myself I have proved the effect, that love when old is not the same as love when it is young. Yet, be sure, my lord, that for no adversity, even were it to die upon this occasion, shall it ever be, that either in word or deed, I repent of having given you my whole heart, freely, and without reserve.

"My lord, you know that in my father's hut you stripped me of my lowly weeds, and clad me in an array suitable to my altered fortune: to you I brought nothing but faith, and poverty, and a maidenly purity: here again I restore your clothing, and your wedding-ring--for ever. The remnant of your jewels are in your chamber. Poor I came from my father's house, and poor must I return. Yet I would hope that it is not your intention to send me forth utterly destitute: you could not do so dishonest a thing as to expose her who had borne your children to the stare of the ruthless multitude--let me not like a worm go by the way--remember, however unworthy, I was your wife. Therefore, in return for that unspotted

[p. 90]

chastity--the only dowry I could bring to you--vouchsafe to me the simple under garment I was wont to wear. And now, my lord, I take my leave."

"The under-coat," said he, "which is now upon your back, you may take away with you"; but, scarcely had he spoken the words, than he left the place for he could not look upon her for compassion. In the presence of the court she stripped herself of her noble robes, and in her under-dress, bare-headed and bare-footed, set forward towards her father's house: the people following, weeping, and cursing fortune as they went along, while she maintained her womanly courage, and with dry eyes never once uttered a word. Her father, who heard the tidings of her usage, bitterly lamented the day of his birth. For this poor old man had ever mistrusted their marriage; suspecting, from the first, that when the lord was weary of his fancy, he would begin to think it a disparagement to his estate to have stooped so low, and would dismiss her upon the first occasion. He went out hastily to meet her, for he knew by the coil of the populace that she was coming, and covered her with her peasant's dress, the tears all the while streaming down his old face.

Thus dwelt for some time with her father this flower of wifely patience, who neither by word nor look, before the people, gave notice of the offence she had received, or any token that she remembered her former high estate; and no wonder, for even then she was ever humble. She affected no delicacy or tenderness of person--no pomp--no show of royalty; but was full of patient kindness, discreet and honourable, and meek and constant to her husband. Our writers have praised Job above all men for his

[p. 91]

humility; but though they have said little in behalf of women for the steadiness of their truth, no man can acquit himself in humility like a woman or show half a woman's constancy.

The Earl of Panico, having set out from Bologna, the report was spread abroad that he was bringing with him a new marchioness in such pomp and splendour as had never been seen before in all West Lombardy. Before the arrival of the earl, the marquis sent for poor Griselda; who, with that neverfailing cheerfulness of countenance which sprang from the excess of her love, and because she should again see his face, and not from any swollen, selfish thought of a favourable change in her condition, instantly obeyed his summons, and on her knees greeted him with reverence and discretion.

"Griselda," said he, "it is my will and pleasure that the lady, whom I am about to marry, should be received tomorrow at my palace with every distinction of royalty; and therefore would I have each attendant, according to his office and' rank, perfect in the fulfilment of his duty. As I have no female so well acquainted as yourself with my taste and fancy in the arranging of my apartments (for you have been long accustomed to consult my pleasure in that respect), I have sent for you to superintend this part of the general preparation. And though the fashion and quality of your dress is unsuited to the sphere of a court, that may be excused, since it will not interfere with the performance of that duty which I know you will use for my satisfaction."

"Not only, my lord," said she, "am I free and willing to perform your commands, but it is the desire of my heart

[p. 92]

to serve and please you without fainting and without repinement. Neither in weal nor woe shall I ever cease to love you with the truest intention, above the whole world." And with that word she set about her task of ordering, superintending, and arranging the suites of rooms.

About noon the earl, with the two children, arrived before the palace gate, the populace crowding round to see the cavalcade and the rich quality of all the furniture, the greater part of them talking among themselves in praise of the marquis's wisdom in changing his wife. For not only," said they, "is this new one younger and more beautiful than Griselda, but she is of gentle birth, and her offspring will be more agreeable to us." Then the handsome face of her little brother delighted them; and, to crown all, they, who shortly before traduced him as a murderer, were now unanimous in applauding his government. Thus has it ever been with you, misjudging multitude; unstable as the veering fane! indiscreet, unfaithful! ever seeking something new. Your applause is purchased dearly enough at the price of a mite; your judgment is false and hollow and your constancy a rope of sand. Fool, indeed, is he who places confidence in you. So it was with the poor gazing creatures of Saluzzo; the novelty of having another marchioness--no matter the price of injustice at which she was purchased--changed at once their discontent to satisfaction. But I will turn to a pleasanter subject--the zeal and constancy of Griselda.

Active in everything that could tend to forward the entertainment, she was the wonder and astonishment of all the household, who shortly before had received her

[p. 93]

commands as a mistress, yet delivered in the same mild and even tone. And when the guests arrived, she was seen in her peasant's dress, receiving each, according to their station, with a simple dignity and discretion which surprised them all, when they considered her poor appointment, ignorant as they were of her former quality. Nor did she even refrain from praising the beauty of the young maiden and her brother. At length, when the company had sat down to the feast, the marquis sent for her, and in a sporting tone inquired how she approved of the beauty of his new wife. "My lord," said she, "I never beheld a fairer lady; happiness and prosperity attend you both to the end of your lives. One thing allow me, I beseech you; which is, to warn you against tormenting this tender maiden as it has been your will to distress me; for she has been softly fostered, and cannot undergo the trials of adversity like one who, in early life, had striven with poverty and rude labour."

At length, when Walter found that her patient and untroubled spirit triumphed over every offence that could be offered to her, and that she remained firm in her innocence, and unshaken as a wall, his sturdy heart began to melt in thinking of all her wifely steadfastness; and breaking forth into a passionate strain of admiration--"Enough! enough! my own Griselda," said he, "no longer shall you be terrified with violence and unkindness; I have tried your faith and benignity as never woman was tried, both in high estate and in poverty. Now do I, indeed, know that you are truth itself." And then he caught her in his arms and kissed her very affectionately; while the gentle creature herself appeared like one suddenly

[p. 94]

aroused from sleep; she regarded not his caresses; she heard nothing of his speech; and when her senses had somewhat recovered, he said to her, "Griselda, by the great and good God, who suffered for our transgressions, you are still my wife--I have no other--have had no other, and shall have no other. This maiden, whom you supposed to be my wife, is your daughter, and this, her brother, shall inherit my kingdom. Truly and lawfully did you bear them to me; and all this time have I kept them privately with my sister at Bologna. Take them again, and be assured you have not been unnaturally bereft of your offspring. And now let those who have deemed otherwise of my conduct be informed that with no malice or wilful cruelty have I acted as I did, but to make trial of your womanly virtue--not to murder your children--Heaven forbid! but to secrete them till I knew the temper of your heart."

When she had heard this speech, the great flood of joy that burst upon her amazed senses, together with the suddenness of the change, so wrought upon her tender frame that she swooned at his feet. And when she recovered, she called her children to her, and taking them in her arms, piteously weeping, she embraced them over and over again, tenderly kissing them with those motherly lips; and all the while the tears streamed over their hair and faces. Oh! it was an affecting thing to have seen her helpless insensibility, and then to hear again her meek and cordial voice!

"Gramercy, my good lord and husband! may God repay thee with thanks that thou hast spared to me our dear children. Seeing that I thus stand in thy gracious favour,

[p. 95]

[paragraph continues] I feel that I could joyfully give up my life; and if it be God's will, never at a more blissful season than when I know that they, for whom I sorrowed, have been saved from an early grave.

"Oh, my dear young children! your woful mother had no other thought than that you had been left a prey to some foul vermin"--and with those words her senses failed again; yet, all the while, she held them so closely in her embrace that they were separated only by force; while those who stood around wept many a tear for pity. At length the voice of her husband and the subsiding of her sorrow restored her, and she arose, abashed at having exposed the feebleness of her nature. All strove to divert her thoughts by little courtesies and speeches of kindness, till she regained her benign and cheerful countenance. Walter, too, let slip no occasion of redeeming all his sternness and deeds of cruelty by pleasant looks and cherishings; and as she was so sweet a creature to behold in her hours of adversity and trial, you may suppose how fair a sight was her face of content and happiness.

After a time the ladies in attendance conducted her to her former chamber, where they stripped off (and for ever) the peasant's garb, and having arrayed her in a robe of cloth-of-gold, and set upon her head a jewelled crown, she returned to the hall amid the honours and congratulations of the assembly. Such was the joyous termination of this painful day: and the revelry was kept up till the stars shone at their brightest; and the feast was more costly and magnificent than that given upon their marriage.

And so these two lived many years in prosperity and

[p. 96]

unbroken concord. The daughter was married to a lord of the greatest worth in all Italy; and poor Janicola was furnished with an asylum at court, where he lived near his daughter in peace and honour, till his spirit gently crept from his body and returned to Him who gave it. The son succeeded to a peaceful government after his father had left his place. He was fortunate in his marriage, although he did not prove his wife in imitation of his father. The people of this world are not so strong as they were in days of yore; and my author makes this apology for his tale. "This story," he says, "is not intended as a recommendation that wives should imitate Griselda in the plenitude of her humility (for that were utterly impossible) , but that every one should in his degree strive to be patient under reverses and sharp strokes of fortune: for as a woman was so patient to a mortal man, how much more stedfastly should we endure the trials that God may please to inflict upon us. He daily proves our constancy; and his government, however it may appear at the moment, ultimately tends to our advantage. Let us all, then, live in virtuous sufferance."

HERE THE STUDENT OF OXFORD

ENDS HIS TALE;

AND NEXT BEGINS

Footnotes

^74:* An eminent lawyer and philosopher, who lived in the fourteenth century.

      
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 97]

Click to enlarge
The Wife of Bath

  

The Wife of Bath

IN the days of the renowned King Arthur, whom Britons hold in high reverence, this land was peopled with fairies. The Elf Queen with all her merry company have danced their roundels in many a green mead. What I speak of happened many hundred years ago, but now the elves are seen no more; for the charity and godly prayings of the begging friars who go sniffing into every corner of the land, as thick as motes in the sun beams, bestowing their blessings on cities and towns, halls, chambers, and bowers, dairies and kitchens, are the cause that the fairies no longer remain; for where the elf was formerly is now the friar, steadfastly paying his visits at morning and noontide meals, not forgetting his matins and benedictions as he makes his rounds of alms-begging. Now the women can safely walk abroad, through brake and copse, and sit under every green tree; the friar is your only incubus, [**] and he will offer us no annoyance.

It happened that in the court of King Arthur dwelt a handsome and vigorous young bachelor knight, who, on his return one day from a hawking party of water-fowl, saw before him a young maiden, whom in a transport of wilfulness and brutality he ill-treated. The unmanliness and violence of the deed raised such a clamour, and so

[p. 98]

keen a pursuit of the offender, that he was seized, tried, and condemned to lose his head. The queen, however, and her ladies so earnestly entreated his pardon of the king that he granted him his life, and at the same time yielded him to his queen for her to order his penance: who, turning to the ravisher, said, "Such is your condition at this time, that you are in no surety of preserving your life; yet this will I grant, upon condition that you resolve me this question, 'What is that which women most desire?' Beware! and think of your penalty. I allow you to depart for one twelvemonth and a day to prepare your answer; and before you quit this presence you shall produce full security that at the given day you will yield yourself up to our decision upon your reply."

The knight was sorely perplexed with the condition of his sentence; so after much consideration he resolved to leave the court and travel till the year's end, hoping that in the course of his adventures he might receive the help he 'required. From town to town, and house to house he went, wherever he thought to learn "what women most desire": but with all his pains he could not find two people of one mind in the matter. Some said women love wealth better than anything else; some said honour; others, mirth; others again, splendour of dress; and some even thought their greatest pleasure lay in being often widowed and wedded. They came, perhaps, nearest to the truth who said that we are best pleased when we are flattered, for one and all of us (more or less) are soonest won by flattery. Attention and assiduity are the surest lime-twigs to our hearts. Some said we must love to be free to follow our own inclinations; moreover, to be esteemed

[p. 99]

wise and not to be reproved for our faults; for, in truth, there is not one of the sisterhood, who if she be fretted on a tender point, will not turn again, and the more sharply for feeling that she deserves the rebuke. He who may make the trial will prove the truth of what I say. Be we never so faulty within, we will be held wise and free from offence. Some folks held the opinion that we delight in being thought stedfast, firm of purpose, and close keepers of a secret; but that tale is not worth a straw; for we women can hide nothing--witness the folly of Midas' wife--will ye hear the story?

Ovid, among other traditions, has related that Midas had growing under his long shaggy hair two ass's ears, which he concealed so cleverly that no one but his wife knew of the fact, and her he earnestly entreated to keep the secret of his disfigurement. She made oath to him that for her own sake as well as his she would not bring so great a shame upon her husband, even were it to gain the whole world. Notwithstanding all this, she was ready to expire with the pain of keeping this secret; she had such a swelling of the heart that some unlucky word she feared must necessarily slip out. Since, therefore, she dared tell it to no one, she ran down to a marsh hard by, her heart all on fire till she arrived there, and then like a bittern booming in the reeds, she laid her mouth down, and said, "Betray me not, O water--to you I tell it, and no one beside--my husband has two long ass's ears. And now is my heart at ease--the secret is out, for I could keep it no longer." Thus you may perceive that however stedfast we may remain for a time, out it must come at last; we cannot hide a secret. The remainder

[p. 100]

of the tale, if you desire it, is to be found in Ovid.

When this knight, the hero of my story, found he was no nearer to the meaning of the riddle, he became very sorrowful, and the day having arrived when he must render up himself, he turned homeward. On his way, as he was riding by a forest-side, he perceived a company of more than twenty ladies dancing upon the grass; but as he eagerly drew near to them, hoping in his distress to gain some counsel from them, before he came up the whole bevy of dancers had vanished, and no living soul was left behind except a hideous old woman, bent double, and sitting on the green. This creature, more frightful than can be described, arose and went to meet the knight, and she said, "Sir Knight, this is no way to any place. Tell me, upon your faith, what it is you seek; it may, peradventure, be to your advantage: we old folk know, and can do much."

"Certain it is, dear mother," answered the knight, "that I shall be doomed to die unless I am able to expound, 'What it is that women most desire?' If you could instruct me I would amply repay you."

"Pledge me your truth," said she, "here in my hand, that, if it be in your power, you will perform the next act I require of you, and before night I will tell it you."

"I accept," said the knight, "and here is my truth."

"Then," said she, "I dare boast that you are safe, for upon my life the queen will say as I do. Let us see the proudest she that wears a kerchief who will dare say nay to what I shall tell you. So, without farther parley, let us go forth." She then whispered in his ear a short sentence, and bade him cheer up and cast off all fear.

[p. 101]

When they arrived at court, the knight said he had kept his word and the day for delivering up himself, and was ready with his answer. Many noble ladies had assembled to hear the sentence, the queen sitting as judge, when the knight was commanded to appear in court, and silence being obtained, the question, "What is it that women love best?" was put to him in due form and solemnity; when, in the audience of the whole court, and in a bold, manly voice, our knight answered, "My liege lady and most royal mistress, what women desire above all things in this life is to obtain dominion over their lovers and husbands, and in all matters to sway them to their will. This is the nearest and dearest thought of your hearts. Now, therefore, do with me as you list; I am in your power." Throughout the whole court there was not a woman, whether maid, wife, or widow, that contradicted him, and farthermore, they pronounced that he had fairly obtained his pardon.

At the moment the sentence was delivered, up started the old woman whom the knight had seen sitting on the green-sward. "Mercy! my sovereign lady queen," said she, "before this court break up I entreat to have justice rendered to me. I taught the knight this answer, for which he, at the time, plighted me his truth that he would grant me the first petition I might require at his hands, if it lay in his power to grant it. Before this court then, Sir Knight, I pray you to take me for your wife: I have preserved you from certain death; if I speak falsely, upon your faith of knighthood gainsay my word."

"Alas!" answered the knight, "such indeed was my promise: but for the love of heaven, I charge you to remodel

[p. 102]

your petition. Take all my wealth, but let me go free."

"Nay, then," said she, "may a curse alight upon both of us if I, though ugly, old, and poor, would not for all the gold above and beneath the earth rather become your wife--aye! and your love too."

"My love!" said he, "my perdition! Oh! that any of my community should be so foully brought into contempt!" All, however, was of no avail; he was compelled to wed this old woman, and take her to bed and board "for better for worse."

The joy, the display, and the feasting that was made upon the marriage of these two is soon told; for, in good sooth, there was neither joy nor feasting, but heaviness instead, and sullen sorrow. The knight was married privately the next morning, and all the day, like an owl, hid himself for vexation at the deformity of his wife. And at night he raged and grumbled at his ill-fortune, his bride, the old woman, all the while smiling by his side.

"My dear husband," said she, "does every gallant knight treat his newly-made wife in this kind and graceful manner? Is this the custom of King Arthur's court? Is every knight in his train so sparing of courtesy and tenderness? I am your own love and your wife; I saved you from destruction; and, of a truth, never wronged you: why then behave thus to me? Your conduct is like one insane. What is my crime--my offence? Tell me, and if I can I will amend it."

"Amend it!" said the knight, "no! no! you never can amend it. You are so old, so loathsome, and born of so low degree, that little should you wonder at my distress and

[p. 103]

horror. Would to heaven my heart would break at once!" "Is this then," said she, "the cause of your uneasiness?" "Certainly, and what wonder that it is."

"Now, sir," said she, "in three days, if I chose, I could mend all this, so that you would bear yourself towards me as you ought. But since you knights speak of such high birth as is descended from ancient wealth, and presume that therefore you are gentlemen, [**] I tell you that such arrogance is not worth a straw. He who secretly, and in the open face of day is most virtuous, who seeks to perform all the noble deeds in his power, is the most perfect gentleman. Jesus Christ commands that we claim our gentle birth from Him who was 'meek and lowly of heart'; not from our ancestors because of their riches. For, though they leave us the whole of their inheritance, and boast of our high kindred, yet can they not bequeath to us their virtuous lives which procured them the title of gentlemen. Integrity of character seldom springs of its own accord in a man's descendants. We derive our gentle birth from the goodness of God only; from our ancestors we claim nothing but temporal benefits, which man may destroy. If gentleness of demeanour were implanted in a certain lineage, then would no one of that descent commit an act of villainy. But we know that the sons of lords will often shame their parentage. And he who demands praise of his gentility because he comes of a high family, having noble and virtuous ancestors, yet himself performs no deeds of gentleness, is no gentleman, duke or earl though he be; for deeds of villainy constitute the base-born man. Gentility is but the renown of your ancestors

[p. 104]

on account of their signal goodness, and which is foreign to your individual self. Your gentility, like theirs, proceeds from God only. He is nobly born who performs noble deeds. Therefore, my beloved husband, I conclude that although my ancestors were rustic, yet, as I hope to live virtuously, then shall I become of gentle blood.

"And since you reprove me for my poverty, bear in mind that the Saviour of the world dwelt in wilful poverty; and the King of Heaven would not choose a vicious living. Cheerful poverty is doubtless an honest thing, and I hold him rich who considers himself repaid for his poverty in other gifts, although he have no shirt to his back; while the covetous man is really poor, for he would possess that which he cannot attain, but he who possesses nothing, yet covets nothing, is rich, although you esteem him but a knave. [**] The poor man may go on his way and have no dread of robbers. Poverty is a hateful good, though the redeemer from the cares of life: the improver of wisdom to him who bears it patiently. Poverty makes a man know himself and his Maker too. It is a glass in which he may discover his true friends. Reprove me, therefore, no more for my poverty.

"As for my great age--though we had no written authority for the command--you men of gentle blood have ever held that age, in man or woman, is entitled to honour.

"And, to conclude, since I am loathsome as well as old, you will be in no danger that any one will take away your wife. Now, therefore, choose one of these two things: to have me old and ugly till my death, to be to

[p. 105]

you a true and humble wife, and never to displease you during the whole course of my life; or to have me young and beautiful, and to take your chance of the temptation that will befall me from the great resort that will throng to your house on my account."

The knight bethought him, sighed, and then said, "My dear wife, I place myself under your wise direction: choose that which shall be most pleasant to yourself, at the same time befitting my honour as well as your own."

"Then have I gained the mastery," said she, "since I may choose and govern according to my inclination!"

"Even so," said he, "I hold it best."

"Now, then," she replied, "throw aside all your anger against me, and kiss me, for by my honour I will be to you both beautiful and true. Moreover, may I be utterly condemned if I prove not as good and faithful a wife as ever this world saw; and, on the morrow, as fair to see as any lady or empress betwixt east and west. When you draw the curtains, you shall behold how surely my promise has been fulfilled."

When the knight saw the fulfilment of this marvel, that she was both young and exceedingly handsome, for joy he took her in his arms and kissed her a thousand and a thousand times. His heart was bathed in bliss; and so they lived to their lives' end, she obeying him in all things and making his pleasure her happiness.

HERE ENDS THE WIFE OF BATH'S TALE;

AND HERE BEGINS

Footnotes

^97:* The Incubus was a fairy of a less innocent character than his brethren. He succeeded the Fauni of the heathen mythology, and, like them, was supposed to inflict that oppression which goes under the name of ephialtes, or nightmare.

^103:* The reader will recollect the note at page <page 34>, explaining the original meaning of the word gentle.

^104:* The original meaning of the word knave, is a hireling or servant.

      
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 106]

  

The Squire's Tale

OUR host now called upon the young squire for his ale, who with great goodwill began the following.

At Sarra, in the land of Tartary, there dwelt a king who had often waged war upon the country of Russia. He was called Cambuscan, and had gained so famous a name for all noble and knightly deeds that no one in those days could compare with him in renown. He seemed to lack no grace that makes royalty honourable. He was a strict observer of the laws he had sworn to protect; add to which, he was brave, wise, just, and compassionate; true to his word, courteous, young, fresh, and strong, and eager in arms as any bachelor of his court. To crown all, he was fair of person, fortunate in all his adventures, and maintained so sumptuous a display of regalities that there was not such another king in all the East. This imperial Tartar had by his wife Elfeta two sons; the one was named Camballo and the other Algarsife. He had also a daughter, the youngest of the three, who was called Canace. My sober English, and more sober fancy, are unequal to the description of her rare beauty.

It was the custom with Cambuscan to give a feast on the day of his nativity every year; and on the twentieth of his reign he made a proclamation through all his city

[p. 107]

of Sarra that it would be observed with unwonted solemnity and splendour. The sun was in the young and lusty spring of the year, when the weather is bright and shining; when the birds and every creature feel the coming forth of the tender green, and all pour out their love and gladness, as it were, both for the warm days, and their protection against the cold and keen sword of winter.

When the day arrived, Cambuscan, in his royal robes and diadem, and seated aloft in the banqueting hall of his palace, presented to the nobles of the land so rich and solemn an entertainment that the like was never seen before. It would occupy a summer's day to describe to you all the array of the various services--the number and appointment of the sewers and seneschals; the rare dainties of the meats, and sum of the dishes; the silver and the gold, the spices, the wine, and the odours steaming from lofty censers.

It happened that after the third course, while the king was hearkening to his minstrels playing delicious melodies before him at his board, suddenly there rode in at the hall door a knight upon a horse of brass, holding in his hand a fair and broad mirror. Upon his thumb he wore a golden ring, and at his side hung a naked sword. In this fashion he rode straight towards the upper table. Throughout the hall not a word was spoken for astonishment at this knight, and every eye was fixed upon him.

Op This sudden stranger, who was richly armed, save that his head was bare, saluted the king and queen with all their nobles according to their degrees with so high a reverence and dignity in speech and demeanour that had old Gawain returned from fairyland he could not have

[p. 108]

amended his courtesy by the alteration of a single word. Having fulfilled the ceremony of introduction with a sweet yet manly voice, he addressed himself to the high board after the manner following: "The King of Arabia and of India, my liege lord, offers to you his salutation upon the event of this solemn day; and in honour of your feast he hath sent you, by me (who am, at command, your dutiful servant), this horse of brass, which possesses the power of conveying you to whatever quarter of the earth you may please to ride, within the compass of a day. Or, if you desire to soar like an eagle, it will evermore bear you without danger through the region of birds to the place of your destination; and, by the turning of a little pin, will convey you home again. So staid and soft is it in progress that you may, without fear, sleep upon its back. The artist who accomplished this wondrous mechanism had wrought many an engine of miraculous power, and the finishing of this, his last work, engaged him during the revolving of many cycles of years.

"The mirror which I hold in my hand possesses the power to make known to you any approaching calamity, either to your own person or your kingdom; it will also discover who are your friends and who your foes; and, above all, if any fair lady have disposed of her heart to a knight, and he be secretly unfaithful, this mirror will lay open all his treason, however subtly he may wear it concealed. This, with the ring of gold, my royal master hath sent in honour of this occasion to your most excellent and worshipful daughter--the Lady Canace.

"The virtue of the ring is this: if my lady please to wear it on her thumb, or in her purse, she will immediately

[p. 109]

comprehend the language of every bird that flies, and have the power of answering it again in its native tongue. Also, it will give her the knowledge of all herbs, with their virtues, for the cure of wounds, be they ever so severe.

"The naked sword, hanging by my side, is of such a temper that whomsoever it may strike it will cleave his armour, although it were thick as the knotted oak. And he that is wounded with the blow will never be whole again, until, of your grace, you please to stroke the smitten part with its flat side; when it will straight close again and heal. This virtue will never fail so long as the sword shall remain in your grasp."

When the knight had fulfilled his commission, he rode out of the hall and alighted. His horse, which dazzled like the unclouded sun, stood as still as a stone in the centre of the court. The knight, being conducted to his chamber, was unarmed, and placed according to his degree at the feasting board. The presents--that is to say, the mirror and the sword--were given into the keeping of proper officers, who conveyed them to a high tower in the castle; and the ring was borne with great state to the Lady Canace as she sat at the table. The horse remained in the court fixed to the earth and immovable: no machinery, or any unskilful hand, could stir it from its place, till the knight showed the hidden manner of removing it, which will be explained hereafter.

The populace crowded into the court to see this wonderful horse, murmuring round it like a swarm of bees: and as they examined its figure, each praised its fair proportion--its height, and exact length, and great

[p. 110]

breadth of chest, all formed for swiftness and endurance--like that large breed of Lombardy; and, withal, it was as quick of eye as a high-blood courser of Apulia--in short, all agreed that, from hoof to head and from head to tail, neither nature nor art could supply an improvement. But what most raised their wonder was how it could move, being made of brass. Some said it came from fairy land; others referred to their favourite old poets, and said it was like the winged Pegasus; or that mayhap it was another Grecian horse which wrought the downfall of Troy. "My heart," said one, "misgives me--I doubt that there are armed men within, who at a given signal will steal out and surprise our city by stratagem. I consider it proper that the affair should be inquired into." Another whispered to his neighbour, "He's quite out there--'tis more like some magical contrivance that jugglers frequently display at these high festivities." And so they debated and questioned the affair, like all ignorant and common minds, that are ever blithe in imputing a bad motive to inventions which are too subtle for their gross perceptions.

Some were engaged in discourse upon the wonders of the mirror, and how such things could be perceived in it. One among the number made the secret of it appear to the satisfaction of every one, in stating that all might be naturally accomplished by the compositions of angles and acute reflections; and, to display his reading, he said there were many such in Rome; and then referred to Alhazen, Vitellion, and Aristotle, who have written upon curious mirrors and perspectives.

Others again wondered upon the sword, which was

[p. 111].

said to pierce through everything; and turned their conversation upon the renowned King Telephus, and the marvelous spear of Achilles, that could both wound and heal, as with the one of which you now have heard. They discoursed also of the tempering of metal, how it was best hardened, and of the medicines and ingredients used in the process; of all which I am ignorant.

After this they turned to speak of the Lady Canace's curious ring, saying that they had never heard of the like, unless it were the ring of Moses or of Solomon, which possessed a similar virtue. And so they continued wondering and jangling till the king arose from the feast. Before him walked the loud minstrelsy, marshalling his way to the presence chamber, and all the while, till he was seated upon his throne, sounding their instruments, that it was a heaven to hear. When this noble king was seated, he ordered the strange knight to be brought before him, and bids him lead the dance with the Princess Canace. Now came the revel and the jollity, such as no dull man can devise. Festive and fresh as May, and well practised in love's mysteries must he be who could worthily tell you of all the dances so quaint in their figures; of the blithe countenances, the subtle looks and dissemblings, for fear of the defection of jealous rivals: no one could do honour to such a description but the perfect hand of Sir Launcelot, and, therefore, I pass over all this mirth and leave them dancing till the supper was arrayed and proclaimed. I need not rehearse the variety of the spices and the wine, or the train of ushers and squires; suffice to say, all were entertained from the highest to the lowest with dainties more than I know of.

[p. 112]

After supper the king, surrounded by all his rout of lords and ladies, went down into the court to look at this horse of brass; and the king inquired of the knight as to the qualities of this wondrous courser, and how it was to be governed. When the knight laid his hand upon the rein, the horse began to trample and caper. "Sire," said he, "no other instruction is required as to the management of the steed than that when you desire to ride to any place you turn a pin that is fixed in his ear, and which I will privately explain to you, when you may command him to what place or country soever you choose to ride. And when you wish to stop, you bid him descend and turn another pin (in this lies all your art), when, at your will, he will stoop from his flight and remain quiet as a stone in that place, and the whole world will not be able to remove him. Or if you wish him to depart alone, turn the pin again, and he will vanish from the sight of every one, and return at command whether by night or by day."

When the king had learned from the knight all that was to be done he was glad at his heart and returned to finish the revelry as before. The bridle was carried to a tower in the palace and placed among the rarest jewellery. The horse vanished, I know not whither, from the sight of all. And so I leave this King Cambuscan with his lords feasting in their jollity till day began to spring.

THE second part of this story opens with an account of the young Princess Can ace rising early on the following morning, the appearance of which is described in Chaucer's own simple and agreeable manner: "The

Click to enlarge
The Squire

[p. 113]

vapour (says he) that glided up from the earth made the sun look broad and ruddy; nevertheless it was so fair a sight that it inspired her with cheerfulness of heart, as well as on account of the season of the year, the early hour of the morning, and the song of the birds, whose language, by means of her magic ring, she was enabled to understand." The narrative goes on to describe at great length a dialogue she held with a falcon, "as white as chalk," that, perched upon a withered tree, was bewailing with "a voice so piteous that all the wood resounded with her cry" the cruelty and falsehood of her mate, who had ill requited her love and fidelity by deserting her. If the whole of this portion of the story were transposed into prose it would, I fear, prove uninteresting to the young reader. The original is clothed in nervous and beautiful verse, and will, at some future period, amply reward the youthful, imaginative mind that has overcome the not arduous toil of comprehending freely the quaint and, unfortunately, obsolete dialect of this very great and beautiful poet.

After informing us that Canace, in pity of the sorrow of her new acquaintance, takes her home and keeps her in a beautiful mew (or cage) at her own bed's head. "Here," says the narrator, "I leave Canace tending her gentle falcon; and, for the present, shall say no more about the ring, till my purpose suit to inform you how the bird regained her repenting lover through the mediation of Camballo, the king's son. Henceforth my purpose is to speak of adventures and battles so marvellous as never before were heard.

"First, I will tell you of Cambuscan, who in his time

[p. 114]

had won many a fair city; and afterward of Algarsife, how he gained Theodora as his bride, for whose sake he was oft in sharp perils and was redeemed by the horse of brass: and then of Camballo, who fought in lists with the two brethren for Canace before he could obtain her as his prize. [**] So where I left off I will begin again the course of my tale." And this hopeful promise the poet never fulfilled. The tale of the young Squire remains to be told--and who will dare undertake the task, when even Milton himself would not venture, but says:

Call up him that left half told
 The story of Cambuscan bold;
 Of Cambal and of Algarsife,
 And who had Canace to wife
 That own'd the virtuous ring of glass;
 And of the wondrous horse of brass,
 On which the Tartar King did ride?

.     .     .     .     .     .

IN Book IV of The Faery Queene, Cantos ii. and iii., Spenser has endeavoured partially to fulfil the task incompleted by Chaucer. The young reader may feel interested in seeing how one renowned poet would follow in the track of a revered predecessor; I will therefore give a short account of Spenser's continuation of the story.

With that noble modesty that is ever inseparable from great minds, he begins by a fine compliment to the genius of his illustrious predecessor, whose poetry he calls "a well (or spring) of English undefiled,

[p. 115]

"On fame's eternal bead-roll worthy to be filed."

"But wicked time," says he, "that all good thoughts doth waste, and wears out the works of noblest wits, has quite defaced that noble monument; how then may these my rude rhymes hope to endure!" And then he concludes with the following beautiful apostrophe: "Pardon, therefore, O most sacred, happy spirit! that I thus strive to restore thy lost labours, and rob thee of the reward due to thy great merit--an act no one dared attempt whilst thou wert living, and, being dead, many strive to do in vain; and, but for the infusion of thy own sweet spirit in me, I should, with the like fruitless endeavour, hope to accomplish: and so I follow the footing of thy feet, hoping that I may at last reach thy fair design." And now to the conclusion (such as it is) of our story.

The beautiful Princess Canace was greatly beloved by many lords and knights, who, from her prudence and tardiness in selecting the hand that she deemed the most worthy to give to her all her worldly comfort, were oftentimes moved to envy and bickerings, great quarrels and bloody strifes; which her brother, Camballo, perceiving, who was a stout and wise knight, and fearing the peril which might arise from an increase of such contentions, determined, both for her honour and his own, to end the contest in the following manner.

One day, when the whole troop of warlike wooers were assembled, for the purpose of knowing who should be the chosen husband of the princess, he decreed that they should select from among the company those three who, by general consent, were esteemed the hardiest and most valiant knights; that these three should combat with

[p. 116]

him, and the victor be rewarded with the hand of his sister Canace.

The challenge was a bold one, and Camballo was a bold knight; but his sister's skill and forethought had given him confidence, for she sent him the wondrous ring which possessed the power to staunch the bleeding of all mortal wounds. The great virtue of that ring was known to all, so that the dread of its redoubted might so appalled that youthly rout that none of them dared undertake the fight. The delight of love they deemed a wiser course to take than to hazard life for a fair lady's look. Yet amongst the company were three brethren, all born of one mother and at one birth; her name was Agape, and their names were Priamond, Diamond, and Triamond. They were all three men of exceedingly great might, and well skilled in the knightly accomplishments of arms. Their mother was a fairy, and possessed the skill of secret things, and all the powers of nature, which by her art she could ply to her own purpose. A beautiful woman, too, she was, and of goodly stature when she chose to discover her native form and face; but, as is the custom with fairies, she passed her days in privacy and in the wildest and most spacious forests. In this savage chamber, and on this rough couch, she bare and nursed the three champions that have been described.

When these had grown into the ripeness of man's estate, and had begun to show signs of love for deeds of arms, and for the rash provoking of perils, her motherly heart began to doubt and fear for their safety: she therefore, being desirous to know the end of all their days by her wondrous skill and power, sought her way to the

[p. 117]

dwelling of the three fatal sisters, who in the bottom of the deep abyss sit in darkness, and round about the dreadful distaff draw out with unwearied fingers the threads of human life. These fearful beings she humbly accosted, desiring to see the threads of her three sons' lives drawn forth, which Clotho, one of the sisterhood, granting, drew out, to her grief and amazement, threads thin as the spider's web, and so short that their ends seemed to come forth at once.

Having learned the decree of the fates, she entreated, and obtained her request, that the life of each, as it terminated, might pass into the next survivor; so that when two were dead, the life of the third might be trebly enlarged. And so returning home with contented heart, this careful fairy concealed from her sons the knowledge of their destiny, warning them from time to time to be faithful and true to each other whatever might befall them. And this they truly did all their days. Discord never arose amongst them, which greatly augmented their good fame. And now they joined in love of Canace, upon which ground the great battle grew that is about to be described.

Early on the morning of the day which was to witness the event of this hardy challenge to fight with Camballo for Canace, these warlike champions were all assembled in the field. The lists were enclosed, to bar out the press of the assembled multitude. On one side six judges were seated, who were to decide the deeds of arms; and on the other fair Canace upon a lofty stage, to witness the fortune of the fray and to be seen as the worthy reward of him that could win her with the adventuring of his life.

[p. 118]

[paragraph continues] Then Camballo first entered the list with a stately step and undaunted countenance, as if he surely knew the victory to be his own. Immediately after came the three brethren, in brave array and goodly carriage, with gilded escutcheons and broad banners displayed; and three times they lowly bowed to the noble maid, all the while the trumpets and clarions blowing loud notes of defiance, which being done, the challenger came forth all armed to point to confirm his challenge; against whom, Sir Priamond, equally prepared and equipped, set forward. A trumpet blew, and both rushed together with dreadful force and furious intent, careless of danger, as if they were reckless of sparing that life which should be shortly quenched.

Sir Priamond was practised and thoroughly skilled in the use of the shield and spear, and Camballo was not behind him in the use of his weapons, so that it was hard to decide who was the superior knight. Many mighty strokes, that seemed to carry death with them, were delivered on both sides, but both were so watchful and well eyed that they were avoided and passed by harmless. Yet one given by Priamond was so strongly urged home that it struck through Camballo's shoulder, and made him withdraw his shield. He was sorely grieved at this mischance, yet no drop of blood issued from the wound, but uncommon pain, which exasperated his haughty courage and fell revenge. Pain never daunts the mighty heart, but makes it swell the more. With that he fiercely drove his spear close underneath the shield of Priamond, so that it entered his thigh through the mail, and the blood gushed forth upon the green plain. Priamond could not

[p. 119]

uplift himself, on account of the bitterness of the wound, but reeled to and fro in great bewilderment. When Camballo perceived him to be off his guard, he drove at him again with double vehemence, so that nothing could stay his weapon, till its mortal point was entrenched in his side; where, being firmly fixed, as he was striving to wrest it forth, the staff broke and left the head behind. Then drawing his sword he charged him afresh, and with a desperate lunge it pierced through his beaver, and entering his brow he fell backward with the force of the stroke, his weary spirit quitting its earthly tenement. Yet did it not vanish into air, or flee as others are wont to the dreary realms of Pluto, but, according to the prayer of his mother, it quickly passed into his brethren, and so lived anew.

When Diamond, the second born, beheld the fate of his brother, grieving at the heavy sight, he rushed forth with a generous feeling of vengeance to resume the battle, as in reversion of his brother's right; and challenging the virgin as his due, his foe was quickly prepared, and the trumpets sounded the charge. With that they fiercely met together, as though each intended to devour his enemy, and with their axes so heavily smote that neither plate nor mail could resist the storm, but was shivered like rotten wood, whilst through the rifts the blood poured forth, filling the lookers-on with ruth and wonder. Many and many a stroke of mortal design were interchanged and warily avoided, till Diamond, disdaining the long delay of fortune, resolved to bring the event, one way or other, to an issue; and so with a mighty sweep he heaved his murderous axe, and aimed a dreadful blow

[p. 120]

which, had it fallen as it was intended, the strife would have quickly ceased; but Camballo, being nimbly on his guard, swerved aside, while the other, missing his aim, well-nigh fell with the force of his stroke, an advantage not to be lost by the brother of Canace, for before he could recover himself, and get his exposed side under guard again, with the full stretch of all his might he severed his head clean from his shoulders. The headless trunk stood upright awhile, then fell prone upon the earth. The spirit, which had inhabited it, straight entering into Triamond, filled him with double life and grief; leaping therefore from his place, he rushed forth into the field against Camballo, and fiercely defied him, who, without delay, prepared for the third onset.

Ye may well wonder how that noble knight, who had been so sorely pressed and wounded, could thus stand on foot and renew fight after fight. But had ye then seen him advancing you would have deemed him some newborn champion, so fresh and fierce he seemed. All this arose from the virtue of the magic ring he wore, which not only prevented the shedding of his blood, but renewed his weakened powers, else could he not have matched three mighty champions who were equal to a host.

Triamond, nought dreading, or desperate of so glorious a victory, sharply assailed him with a storm of blows that rattled like hail, while the fire flashed from his sword fast as spray from a rock. The blows fell so thickly, and with such vengeance, that Camballo was forced to retreat till the heat of his antagonist's fury had somewhat spent itself, which, as soon as he perceived it begin to abate,

[p. 121]

through waste of breath, he charged anew with might and main. And so the battle wavered to and fro, yet each deemed he should be the victor, until at length Sir Triamond stood still, feeble and faint with loss of blood. But Camballo waxed stronger and stronger through the ring's virtue; his blood was not shed, nor were his powers wasted. Through which advantage he rose in his strength and struck the other so stern a blow that it passed through the joint of his hauberk into his throat, and he fell down dead in the sight of all; yet he was not dead, although the living spirit forsook its nest; one soul only left his body, and winged its way from human misery.

Nevertheless, while the people were gazing on thinking him dead, as he appeared, he started up unawares, like one roused from a dream, and again prepared to assail his foe, who, half afraid of so uncouth a sight, stood still holding idly his sword as though he had seen a ghost, till repeated blows roused him into self-defence again. From this time, however, he resolved to fight warily, nor follow on so fast, but rather seek to save himself; which Triamond perceiving, thought he began to faint, and that the victory was his own. Therefore he raised his mighty hand, with intent to make an end of all that should withstand the blow, which Camballo watching was not slow to avoid; and at the same instant, while the other's arm was raised to its height, he struck him from behind his shield full in the armpit, so that his sword passed through his body. The dreadful stroke, however, held on its way, and falling heavily upon Camballo's crest, smote him so hugely that it felled him to the earth and carved a ghastly wound in his head, and indeed had not the sword

[p. 122]

first rested on the brim of his broad-plated shield it would have cloven him down to the breast. Thus both fell dead at once, upon the field, each giving his antagonist the victory.

When the multitude saw this event, they surely deemed the war concluded: the judges arose, the marshal of the field broke up the lists, and Can ace began to bewail her dearest friend and brother. But, suddenly, both arose again, the one from the swoon in which he had lain, and the other breathing now another spirit, and each commenced a fresh attack. Long did they continue in this manner, as though the battle had only then begun, despising alike strokes, wounds, and weapons; so desirous were they to end the strife that neither cared to guard or to avoid danger; and so weary were they with fighting, that life itself seemed irksome and preservation an evil.

Thus while the event hung doubtfully in the balance, and all stood gazing in secret fear of the fatal issue, suddenly they heard far away the noise as of a dangerous tumult, confused with the cries of women and shouts of men. At which the champions stood still a little to learn the meaning of the clamour, when they perceived one in a strangely fashioned car driving towards them with the fury of a storm. The car was bedecked in a wondrous manner, with gold and many gorgeous ornaments, after the fancy of the old Persian monarchs, and, strange to tell, it was drawn by two grim lions, whose cruel nature was brought under subjection and made to obey the rider's will. And in the car sat a bright and surpassingly fair lady, who seemed one of the company of angels. She was deeply skilled in the subtle arts of magic, having for

[p. 123]

many a year been well instructed in such lore by the fairy her mother; understanding, therefore, by her power, in how evil a plight her beloved brother, Triamond, at that time stood, she hastened to protect him and pacify the strife which had caused such deadly doings. So, as she passed through the press of people who thronged to gaze upon her, her angry team, breaking their peaceful curbs, dashed through the heaps as if they had been folded sheep, rolling them in the dust. Some shrieked with fear, others howled with pain; some laughed, and others shouted for wonder.

This beautiful lady bore in her right hand a wand, about which were twined two serpents crowned with an olive garland. It was like the famous rod that Mercury bears when he goes forth with some charge from the gods. In her other hand she held a fair cup filled to the brim with nepenthe. Nepenthe is a celestial cordial, ordained by the gods to assuage all grief of the heart; to chase away bitter contention, and anguish from rage and strife, and to establish instead sweet peace in the troubled mind. Few men but those who are sedate and wise do the gods permit to taste of nepenthe; such as drink, however, find eternal happiness.

When she had arrived at the side of the lists, she gently struck the rail with her wand and it flew open to give her entrance. Then, stepping from her car, she gracefully saluted all; first, her brother, whom she tenderly loved, and Camballo next, whose rueful look made her change colour, for she was secretly in love with that princely knight. They slightly returned her salutation, and instantly prepared to renew the combat. When she

[p. 124]

saw this, she threw herself down upon the bloody field, and with tears and prayers besought them to be at peace with each other. But, finding that entreaties availed her nothing, she struck them slightly with her powerful wand; when, suddenly, as if their hearts had failed them, the swords fell from their hands and they remained fixed like men in a trance. So while their minds were bound by this master spirit, she reached to them the golden cup, of which, being parched with toil and thirst, they drank a hearty draught. And now behold another wonder! No sooner had they tasted the heavenly liquor than all their bitter enmity was changed into brotherly love. They embraced and plighted hands in eternal friendship. The multitude seeing this sudden change--the friendly agreement of such mortal foes--shouted for joy till the heavens rang again.

So when all was happily accorded the trumpets sounded, and in great glee the company arose to depart; the champions choosing to march home together, and the wise lady, whose name was Cambina, taking by her side into her car the fair Canace, fresh as a morning rose; and so they went along cheered and admired by the people.

And this fair party spent their days in bands of mutual alliance, for Triamond had Canace to wife, with whom he lived long and happily; and Camballo no less rejoiced in his union with Cambina. So all loved and were beloved alike, and no such lovers have been found since their days.

Footnotes

^114:* There appears here some mistake either in the original MS. as to the name mentioned, or Chaucer forgot that he had already described Camballo as the brother of Canace. How then could he fight "the two brethren"? and which two, he being one of the two, and only two named? and how could he win her to wife?

      
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 125]

  

The Pardoner's Tale

  

PROLOGUE

"Now, my good friend, Master Pardoner," said our host, "let us have from you a right merry tale full of well-conceited jests." "It shall be done," said he, "by St. Ronion. But, first, let me take a snack of cake and a draught at this ale-house." Forthwith all the gentles in the company began to cry, "No, no, let us have no ribaldry: tell us some moral thing that we may learn; some sound sense, and we will gladly listen to you." "Very well," said he, "but give me time to think of an honest tale while I take my liquor. . . . My lords and gentlemen," said he, "whenever I am about to perform duty in church, my first care is to learn by rote all I have to preach, and then to pitch my voice in a full and high key, ringing it out as round and clear as a bell. My theme is always, and ever has been the same, Radix malorum est cupiditas (Covetousness is the root of all evil) . First, I pronounce whence I have come, and then display my letters of authority from the pope. The seal of our liege lord upon my patent I display to prove my warrant, that no man, whether priest or clerk, may be so bold as to disturb me in the exercise of Christ's holy work. After this I enter upon my discourse, ever and anon mixing up with it small scraps of Latin to saffron [**] my preaching and steer

[p. 126]

men to devotion; then I draw forth my relics--crystals, clouts, and bones, the shoulder of a holy sheep enclosed in brass--and say, 'Good men and brethren, take heed to my words; if this bone be dipped in any well, and your cattle be infected with the worm, or stung, take but the water of that well and wash them, and forthwith they shall be healed: or if your sheep have the rot, let them drink one draught of the water and they shall be cured. Lay up these words of mine therefore in your hearts. If also any good man who owns cattle will, every week before cock-crow, drink a draught of that well, fasting, his store shall multiply like the flock of holy Jacob of old. Moreover, sirs, it healeth jealousy; for let a man fall into the most grievous rage, mix but his potage with that water, and he will never more suspect his wife of deceit, even though he know the truth of her fault.

"'Behold this mitten! He that will thrust his hand into this glove (if he offer a few groats or pence to holy church) shall find his corn multiply in seed time.

"'But of one thing I warn you, my brethren: if any one now before me in this congregation have committed a deadly sin, so that he dare not for shame be shrived of it; or if any woman, young or old, have been treacherous to her husband, such shall have no power to offer to my relics. But whoso is aware of such sin, let him come to me and offer up in the name of God, and I will absolve him from his crime by the authority of this bull here, granted to me by his holiness at Rome.'

"By such tricks as these, my masters, have I, year by year, made a hundred marks ever since I followed the duty of a pardoner. I stand forth in my pulpit like any

[p. 127]

learned clerk, and preach, as you have heard, to the ignorant multitude, using a hundred other tricks than I have already told. And all the while I stretch out my neck, east and west, becking upon the people, like a dove sitting on a barn. My hands and tongue I ply so briskly that it is a joy to see me at work. All my discourse is set against avarice and such cursedness, that I may make the hearers free in offering their pence--namely, to me; for gain is all my care, and nothing for the correction of sin: I reck not when once they are buried, although their souls be gone to the dwelling of blackness.

"For of a truth many a sermon springeth oft-time from an evil intention: some to flatter and please the hearer and by hypocrisy to advance one's own interest; some through vain glory, and others through private hate; for when I dare not in any other manner ply my discourse, then do I sting the object of attack with my tongue, and in such a way that if he have offended the brotherhood or myself, he shall not start at being defamed falsely; for though I do not call him forth by name, I take good care, by signs and other circumstances, that all his neighbours shall 'place the saddle on the right horse.' And after this fashion am I even with those who offend us, under colour of religion and an appearance of piety and truth, spitting out my venom upon them. In short, I preach of nothing but covetousness, therefore the whole burthen of my song has ever been Radix malorum est cupiditas.

"Thus, you see, I can preach against this same vice of which I myself am guilty, this avarice. Although, however, I be steeped to the lips in that sin, yet have I the wit to wean others from the same offence and bring them to

[p. 128]

a sore repentance. Yet is not this my principal intent, but to root out covetousness; I preach nought else.

"Furthermore, I tell them many examples of old stories long ago; for simple and ignorant people delight in old tales--they easily retain and report them again. What! do you think that while I teach and gather gold and silver by my prayers that I will myself live in wilful poverty? No, no such matter never crossed my brain; my duty is

to preach from land to land, to collect all the wealth I can for mother church; I have nought to do with labour or handicraft--I am no basket-maker--no counterfeit of the Apostles: money--money and provender will I have--aye, even from the sorriest hind, or poorest widow in the village, although her children pine for it. Wine and revelry for me! and these I get in every town.

"But to conclude, my lords and gentlemen, it is your wish to have my story. Now, having drunk a draught of corny ale, I hope to tell you one to your liking; for, though no saint myself, I can relate a moral tale, one that I sometimes deliver from the pulpit, and so, craving your silence, I thus begin.

 

IN Flanders, a long while ago, there was a company of young men who committed every act of riot and foolishness--drinking, dancing, playing, and throwing of the dice; night and day this was evermore their game. With abominable superfluity also they eat and drank beyond their strength, sacrificing to the devil in his own temple, the scene of their wickedness and foolishness. The oaths they uttered were great and heinous, that it was a dreadful thing to hear them swear. The body of

[p. 129]

Click to enlarge
The Pardoner

our blessed Lord they horribly profaned; and then each would laugh at the other's sin. Sometimes, while they were in their revelry, dancing women, young and comely; fruit-girls, singers, and harp-players, sellers of wafercake--a wanton band--would come in and minister to their gluttony and luxury. The holy writ bear me witness that gluttony and drunkenness are the foundation of all luxury.

O gluttony!--fellest curse!--first cause of our confusion!--origin of our condemnation!--till Jesus bought our redemption again with his blood. How dearly, alas! was this misdeed purchased: the whole world became corrupt through gluttony alone. For this vice were Adam our forefather and his helpmate driven out of Paradise to labour and sorrow. While he abstained he dwelt in that blest abode, and when he ate of the fruit of the forbidden tree he became an outcast to woe and pain. O gluttony! well may we beshrew thy triumph. Let a man think of the many maladies that follow upon the excess of gluttony, and he will be more measurable of his diet. Alas! the short throat, the tender mouth, cause men to labour in earth, and air, and water, from east to west, that the glutton may be served daintily with his meat and drink. Well hast thou treated this matter, Paul, our apostle. "Meats for the belly," he says, "and the belly for meats: but God shall destroy both it and them." A foul thing is it to say, but fouler is the deed when a man so drinks to excess that his throat becomes the common-sewer to this detested superfluity. The apostle also says, "Many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you,

[p. 130]

even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose god is their belly." For what is the cook's labour--with the marrow and the spicery, the herbs and leaves, the barks and roots, but to make them go softly and sweetly through the throat, and by their delights to create a newer appetite? yet know, of a surety, that he who haunts these dainties is but dead while living in his vice.

And thou, too, O drunken man!--disfigured is thy face, sour thy breath, and foul and odious art thou to embrace. Thou fallest down like a slaughtered swine: thy tongue is lost to thee, and all thine honest care; for drunkenness is the very sepulchre of a man's wit and discretion. He is unfit to keep counsel over whom wine has dominion. Refrain, therefore, from the alluring white and red drink, and, above all, from the strong drink of them of Spain, whose country wines have crept subtly into our milder vintages of Rochelle and Bourdeaux; so that by the time a man has taken his three draughts he knows not whether he be at home in Cheap or rolling in fair Cadiz' Bay.

Having preached to you against gluttony and drunkenness, I would also forbid you the vice of gaming. Gaming is the mother of lying, deceit, treachery, and perjury: the gambler is a blasphemer of his Maker, a destroyer of man--of his own substance, and of precious time. It is a reproof and a dishonour to be held a common gambler, and the higher his condition the more abandoned is he esteemed. In every good government, and in all wise policy, the reputation of that prince is ever held light if he be addicted to gaming. Chilon, a wise ambassador, was sent from Lacedemon to Corinth to create an alliance

[p. 131]

with that state; and when he arrived there he found the nobles of the place all infected with the vice of gaming: so, with the least possible delay, he stole home again to his own country, for, said he, "I will not lose my fair name or so dishonour myself as to ally you with a nation of gamblers: send out, if you deem it meet, other ambassadors, for, by my truth, I would rather die than frame for you such an alliance. Ye who have ever been glorious in honour, shall never, by any will or treaty of mine, be connected with gamesters." Such was the speech of this true philosopher. One more example and I have done. The King of Parthia, in scorn of King Demetrius, who had been a noted gambler, sent him a pair of golden dice, signifying that he held his glory and renown in no value or reputation. Our lords may find other diversion honest enough to drive the day away.

A word or two I would say upon oaths, both false and great. Swearing at all is an abomination, but false-swearing is infinitely more reprehensible. Our Lord has forbade all swearing, as we read in St. Matthew, but especially the holy Jeremiah has said, "Thou shalt swear in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness": but idle swearing is a cursed thing. The second command in the great God's table of laws is, "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain." Such swearing is forbidden before the commission of homicide or any other crime. And, of a surety, I declare to you that vengeance will not depart from his house that is outrageous in oaths. For the love of Him, therefore, who died for us, forbear your oaths of any kind. And now, sirs, I will go on with my tale.

[p. 132]

These three rioters I spoke of, long before the first chime of early bell, were drinking together in a tavern; and as they sat, they heard a knell going before a corpse that was being carried to the grave: when one of them, calling to the tapster lad, "Go and inquire," said he, "what corpse is that just passing by, and bring us word." "Sir," said the boy, "I need not do that, for I heard two hours before you came here. He was an old companion of yours: he was carried off suddenly last night as he sat upon his bench--drunk. There came a private thief, called Death, who kills all the people in this country, and with his spear striking him to the heart, he went his way without speaking a word. He has slain a thousand people, this pestilence: and, master, before you come into his presence, I think it proper that you should beware of such an adversary. Be evermore ready to meet him. So my mother taught me."

"By St. Mary," said the tavern-keeper, "the child says true, for this year, in a great village, about a mile hence, Death has killed both man, woman, and child. I guess he must be thereabouts. He were a wise man who should be on his guard to prevent his doing him some mischief."

Then, with a frightful oath, did this rioter say, "Is there such peril in meeting with him? I vow to hunt him in every stile and street in the neighbourhood. Hearken, comrades--let us all three join hands, as sworn brethren, to seek out this traitor Death and slay him." And so, all stark mad and drunk, they staggered forth towards the village of which the taverner had spoken.

They had scarcely reached half a mile from home when, getting over a stile, they met a poor old man, who

[p. 133]

greeted them very meekly. "What, churl," said the proudest of the three, "do you do here clouted up, and crawling about at your age? Why don't you die?"

This old man looked him steadily in the face, and said, "Because I cannot find a man, although I were to walk to the Indies to seek him, who will change his youth for my great age; and, therefore, must I bear my age as long as it is the will of God I should do so. Death, alas! will not take my life: and thus I walk about like a restless wretch, and on the ground, which is my mother's door, early and late I knock with my staff and say to her, 'Dear mother, let me in. Behold how I dwindle in my body. Alas! when shall my weary bones have rest? With you, mother, would I change my coffin, that has long been my chamber companion, for a hair-cloth to wrap me in, and lie down in peace.' Yet will she not grant me this boon; and, therefore, pale and withered is my face. But, sirs, it is not courteous in you to offer insult to an old man, who trespasses neither in word nor deed. The holy writ has taught you that 'you shall rise before the hoary head'; and, therefore, harm not an old man now, any more than you would desire to be harmed in age, if you are allowed so long to abide. God be with you, I must go forth upon my travel."

"Nay, nay, old churl," said another of the gamblers, "by St. John we do not part so lightly. You just now spoke of that traitor 'Death,' that goes about this country killing all our friends. By my truth, tell us where he is (for I take you to be his spy), or you shall dearly abide the consequences of your refusal. I doubt not that you are leagued with him to murder us youngsters, you false thief!"

[p. 134]

"Sirs," said he, "if it be your pleasure to find out 'Death' turn up yon crooked path; for, upon my faith, I left him in that grove under a tree, and there he will remain for some time; neither will he attempt to hide himself in spite of all your boasting. Do you see that oak? There you will meet with him. God preserve and amend you," said this old man.

These three rioters ran off immediately till they came to the tree, and there they found a large heap of fine gold florins. They sought no longer after Death, so glad were they at the sight of these fair and bright coins. And down they sat by the precious hoard, when the worst of the three proposed that as fortune had sent them the treasure to live in mirth and jollity, they should spend it as lightly as it came. "But," said he, "if we take all this gold home to either of our houses, we shall run the chance of being taken up for thieves, and mayhap be hanged. We had, therefore, best carry it home slyly at night; and, in the meantime, let us draw lots who shall go to the next town and buy us bread and wine, while the other two stay and watch the money."

So, having drawn the lots, the youngest was doomed to go to the town. As soon as he was out of sight, one of the two said to the other, "You know that we have long been sworn brothers; now, if you listen to me, I will show how all this gold, which is to be divided among three, shall become the property of us two only." The other said he knew not how that could be, for their companion was aware that the money was with them two.

"Well," said the other, "do not betray me, and I will show you how we may bring it about. We two are

[p. 135]

stronger than one: when, therefore, he has sat down, you must get up and pretend to play with him, and while you are struggling as in game, I will yerk him under the ribs, and see that with your dagger you then do the same. Then all this gold will be shared between you and me, my dear friend! and we may do with it as we please." So these cursed wretches agreed to murder the third.

The youngest, as he went towards the town, cast about in his mind the beauty of the florins. "O Lord!" said he to himself, "if I could but have all this treasure to myself, not a man under heaven would be happier than I." Then did the great enemy of mankind put it into his head to buy poison with which he might despatch his two companions; and forth he went to an apothecary in the town, who sold him a confectionary, the smallest portion of which, to the amount of a corn of wheat, would strike a man dead before one could walk a mile.

Then this cursed villain went and purchased three bottles, into two of which he poured the poison, filling them all three with wine, and returned to his mates, thinking to carry away the gold himself by night.

What need I to proceed with my tale? As the two had contrived his death, so they murdered him; and afterward sat down to feast, proposing, when they had finished, to bury him out of the way. It so happened, however, that they took one of the bottles containing the poison, and no wretches suffered more dreadfully in their death than they. So ended the lives of these homicides, and their poisoner. The old man they met was--"Death."

HERE ENDS THE PARDONER'S TALE

Footnotes

^125:* An expressive term. Saffron was used to give colour as well as flavour to confectionaries.

      
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

  

The Nun's Priest's Tale

OUR host next called out, with a rough familiarity, to the Nun's Priest, "Now, Parson! draw near, Sir John, [**] and tell us something to gladden our hearts. Although you do still ride upon a jade, man, and your beast is poor and lean; so long as he serves your turn, no matter. See that you keep a merry heart, that is the chief care of this life."

"Yes, host," said he, "riding or walking, blame me if I be not merry withal." And straightway this goodly Priest opened upon his tale.

 

LONG ago, a poor widow, somewhat stooping with the weight of years, dwelt in a little cottage beside a grove which stood in a dale. Ever since she had ceased to be a wife, she earned her bread in patience and simplicity: slender was her stock, and slender was her rent. With careful husbandry she supported herself and two daughters. She had three hogs, three cows, and a ewe. Smoky was her cabin in which she ate many a frugal

[p. 137]

meal: no pungent sauce to whet her appetite, or dainty morsel entered her lips: her diet accorded with her apparel, and both were humble. She never ailed through repletion, and temperance was her only medicine. Activity and exercise were all her heart's delight; no gout prevented her from dancing, and apoplexy made not her head to tremble. Wine formed no part of her household store, but milk was her beverage; and her meals consisted of brown bread, singed bacon, and an egg or two.

She had a little yard enclosed with sticks, and on the outside a dry ditch. In this yard she kept a cock called Chanticleer--a merrier crow than his was not to be heard in all the country round. He was as true to his matin hour as the abbey clock. He could tell by instinct the ascension of the equinox, and when it had risen fifteen degrees, then would he crow so that it was a joy to hear him. His comb was ruddier than the finest coral, and embattled like a castle-tower. His bill was black, and shone like jet; his legs and toes were azure, his nails were whiter than the lily-flower, and his neck and back were burnished gold.

This gentle cock had seven hens in his train--his wives; all of various colours, of which the fairest about the throat and breast was Dame Partlet. She was a most courteous, discreet, debonair, and companionable lady; conducting herself withal so fairly that since the day she was a week old she had held fast imprisoned the heart of Sir Chanticleer. What a pleasure it was to hear them singing, in sweet accord, as the bright sun began to arise: "My love, my joy, is far in land." [**] For, in those days, I

[p. 138]

have heard that birds and beasts could both speak and sing as we do.

It happened one day, just before the dawn, as Chanticleer sat upon his perch among his wives, and next to him fair Partlet, he began to groan in his throat like one sore troubled in a dream. And when she so heard him roar, she became alarmed, and said, "My own dear heart! what makes you groan in this manner? truly you are a fine sleeper! fie, for shame!" And he answering her said, "Madam, I entreat you not to be uneasy; but, upon my truth, I had just now fallen into such mischief that my heart still quakes with fear at the thought of it. Heaven send me a clean quittance of my dream, and keep me safe and sound in body. Methought that I was walking up and down our yard, when I saw a beast like a hound, who would have seized upon me and put me to death. His colour was a light tawny, betwixt yellow and red, and both his ears and tail were tipped with black; his snout was sharp, and he had two sparkling eyes. The look of him still makes me ready to die. This, most likely, occasioned my groaning."

"Away!" said she, "fie on your faint heart! Alas! by Heaven! you have forfeited all my affection. In faith, I cannot love a coward; for be sure that, whatever a woman may say, we all desire our husbands to be bold, wise, and free; neither a fool nor a niggard; and, above all, no braggart. How durst you for shame say to your love that anything could make you afraid? Have you a man's beard and not his heart? To be frightened at a dream! which, Heaven knows, is all vanity. Dreams frequently arise from fume and repletion, when the humours increase;

[p. 139]

and, no doubt, this dream which you have had to-night came from the great over-flowing of your red choler, which makes people dream of arrows, and of fire with ruddy flames, of red beasts that try to bite them, of contentions and strifes, and great and small red wasps: as the humour of melancholy will cause a man to cry out in his sleep for fear of black bulls and bears, and black devils ready to snap them up. I could tell you too of other humours, that cause one much trouble in his sleep but let them pass. Does not Cato, that wise man, say, 'Pay no regard to dreams'?"

"Now, sir," said she, "when you fly down from the beam, let me urge you, for the love of Heaven, to take some cooling herbs. Depend upon it I give you good advice in recommending you to clear away both choler and melancholy; and that you may lose no time, as there is not an apothecary in the town, I will inform you of a few simples that I shall find in our yard, which have the property of thoroughly purifying your blood. You are of a very choleric complexion, and must take great care when the sun comes out in his strength that you do not become full of hot humours; else I lay a wager that you will be laid up with an ague or tertian fever. For a day or two, I would recommend your eating some worms by way of digestive before you take your alteratives [**] of laureola, centaury, or fumetery, of hellebore, spurge, or dog-wood berries, or ground-ivy, that is growing in the yard. Pick them where they grow, and eat them. Come, be merry, my dear husband! for the sake of your father's kindred do not be afraid of dreams."

[p. 140]

"Madam," said he, "gramercy of your great learning; but, nevertheless, touching that same Cato, who had such a reputation for wisdom, although he told us to 'take no heed of dreams,' I assure you that you may read in old books of a higher authority than ever Cato possessed, that the very reverse of his opinion is a matter of well founded experience; for that dreams are warnings both of the joys and tribulations that people are to endure in this life. The thing needs no argument; indeed the proof of it carries conviction. One of the greatest authors [**] we read of relates that formerly two men went forth upon a pilgrimage, and it happened that they came into a town where there was such a congregation of people, and the lodging so scanty, that they could not find so much as a cottage in which they could remain together; they were, therefore, compelled to part company for that night, and each of them to go to his inn, and put up with such entertainment as he might find. One of them was lodged in an ox-stall, and the other, by that good luck which at times attends every one, was comfortably provided. Now it happened that during the night he who was well-housed dreamed that the other cried out to him for help, for that he was being murdered in an ox's-stall, where he was lodged for the night. 'Hasten to help me, dear brother,' said he, 'or I shall die.' The man started from his sleep, but thinking it only a dream he took no heed of it; so, turning round, went off again. Twice, however, he dreamed the same; and the third time, his companion, as

[p. 141]

he thought, came to him and said, 'I am now slain, behold my deep and wide gashes; arise up early on the morrow and go to the west gate of the town, where you shall see a cart full of dung; in this my body is privately concealed. Boldly arrest that cart. My gold was the cause of my being murdered'; and so he told him, with a pale and piteous face, every point how he was slain. And be sure that he found his dream all true, for in the morning, as soon as it was day, he went to his companion's inn, and when he came to the ox-stall he inquired after him. The ostler told him that his fellow-traveller had left the town at day-break. The survivor, bearing his dream in mind, began to suspect, and immediately went to the west gate, where he found a dung-cart exactly as the dead man had described, when he began to cry out lustily for help and vengeance, saying that his companion lay murdered in that cart. What more need I say? The people rushed out and overturned the cart, where, in the midst of the dung, they found the dead man newly murdered.

"O good, true, and blessed God! behold how thou dost always cause murder to betray itself! Every day do we find the saying true that 'murder will out'; so loathsome and abominable to a just God is this crime that he will not suffer it to be hidden, though it remain concealed for years. Straightway the magistrates of that town having seized the carter and ostler, and put them to the rack, they confessed their wickedness, and were both hanged.

"Thus you may see that dreams are to be feared. And in the very next chapter of the same book you may read of two who were about to take a voyage to a far country, but were detained by reason of contrary winds. One day,

[p. 142]

however, at eventide, the wind began to change; and gladly they retired to rest, thinking to set sail early on the morrow. But a strange event happened to one of the two. As he lay asleep he dreamed that a man stood by his bedside and ordered him to abide behind; 'for if,' said he, 'you go to-morrow you will be drowned.' He awoke, and told his companion what had happened to him, and entreated that he would put off his voyage for that day. The other, who lay by his bed-side, began to laugh and scoff at him. 'No dream,' said he, 'can deter my heart from attending to my concerns. I value not your dreams a straw, they are all vanity. Men dream of things that never did or will come to pass. But since I see you are inclined to lose your tide, fare you well.' And so he took his leave and went away. But, before he had gone half his course, I know not by what chance it came about, the ship split, and both vessel and man went to the bottom in the sight of others sailing in company. Therefore, dear Partlet, by these old examples you may see that no one should be reckless of dreams, for many a one is to be sorely dreaded.

"But let us drop all this, and think only of mirth and jollity. Madam Partlet, so happy am I when I look upon the beauty of your face--you have so fine a scarlet round your eyes, that it banishes all my fear, for truly may we say, In principio mulier est hominis confusio (madam, the meaning of this Latin is, 'Woman is man's joy and delight,' [**]), for when I feel by night your soft side, as we are seated upon our narrow perch, I am so full of comfort and happiness that I defy all dreams and augury."

[p. 143]

[paragraph continues] And with that word he and all his hens flew down from the beam, for it was day: then with a chuck he began to call them round him, for he had found some corn in the yard. Right royal he was, and had lost all his fear. He looked about him as grimly as a lion, and roamed up and down upon his toes, disdaining to set his feet upon the ground. And when he had discovered a grain of corn, he chucked, and all his wives ran to him.

And so I leave our Chanticleer at his pasture, like a royal prince in his banqueting hall, and turn to relate his adventures. In the opening of the month of May it happened that, as Chanticleer, in all the pride of his seven wives, who were walking by his side, cast up his eyes to the bright sun, who had made somewhat more than twenty degrees in the sign of Taurus, he knew by instinct that it was six o'clock, and then he sounded the hour with his merry note. "Madam Partlet," said he, "my world's bliss, only hearken how those happy birds are singing, and see the fresh flowers how they grow! all these things fill my heart with such joy and comfort!" But suddenly a sorrowful mishap befell him (for grief ever follows upon the heels of joy), and heaven knows that worldly joy has soon fled--a chronicler may safely note this down for a sovereign truth. Now, hearken to me, gentles all, and wise: the story I am now telling is as true as that book of Sir Launcelot du Lake, which all the women hold in so great reverence.

A fox, full of sly iniquity, who for three years had dwelt in the grove hard by, that same night broke through the hedge into the yard where fair Chanticleer, with his wives, was accustomed to repair, and in a bed of

[p. 144]

cabbages he lay quietly till about nine o'clock, watching his opportunity to fall upon him. O Chanticleer! evil befall the morning on which you flew from your perch into that yard. Full well had you been warned in your dream that this day was unpropitious to you--but what has been ordained needs must come to pass. You took counsel of your wife, and the advice of women is apt to be lukewarm or cold. Woman's advice first "brought us all our woe, with loss of paradise" to Adam, where he led a merry life and at his ease. As I may offend many, however, by my disparagement of women's discretion in giving advice, I pass the matter over--these are the cock's words, not my own: I can divine no harm in woman.

Dame Partlet and all her sisters were bathing themselves in the dust against the sun, and Chanticleer singing as merrily as a mermaid, when happening to cast his eye upon a butterfly among the cabbages, he was aware of this fox crouching upon his belly. He had no idea then of crowing; but up he started and cried out, "Cok! cok! cok!" like one heart-stricken with fright: for it is natural in a beast to flee from his enemy, although he had never before set eyes on him. So Chanticleer would have made off, but that the fox said quickly, "Gentle sir, what are you going to do? Are you afraid of me, who am your friend? Worse than a fiend were I if I should offer you any harm or villainy. I come not to pry into your counsel, but only for the purpose of hearing you sing; for by my faith you have as merry a note as any angel in heaven; and withal you have a finer feeling for music than Boethius himself, or any songster. My lord, your father (heaven rest his soul!) and your mother too, in her gentility, have both

Click to enlarge
The Nun's Priest

[p. 145]

been at my house, to my great delight, and most happy, sir, should I be to please you. But speaking of singing, I will say, that, excepting yourself, I never heard any one like your father in a morning: he put his heart into everything he sang; and to give his voice the more strength he would strive so that it made him wink his eyes with the loudness of his note, standing too upon tiptoe and stretching forth his long small neck. And then he had such judgment that no man anywhere could surpass him either in song or wisdom. I have read in the verses of Dan [**] Burnel the ass, of a cock that, because a priest's son gave him a knock upon his leg, he contrived to make him lose his benefice: but certainly there is no comparison betwixt the wisdom and discretion of your father and his subtlety. Now then, sir, for charity's sake be pleased to sing, and let us see if you can counterfeit your father."

This Chanticleer, like a man unconscious of treachery, began to beat his wings, so ravished was he with all this flattery. Alas! for you lords; many a false flatterer have you in your courts, who please you more than he that will tell you nothing but the truth. Beware, lords, of the treachery of such dependants.

Our Chanticleer, standing high upon his toes, stretching his neck, and holding close his eyes, began to crow with all his might. Up starts Dan Russell [*+] and catches him by the gorge, bearing him off on his back toward the wood, for as yet there was no one to follow him.

O fate, that may not be avoided! alas that Chanticleer flew from his perch! alas that his wife had no faith in dreams! On a Friday, too, fell all this mischance.

[p. 146]

O Geoffrey, [**] dear sovereign master of the poetic art, who, when thy worthy King Richard was slain, so sorely bewailed his death, why have I not thy learning to chide as thou didst this same unlucky day (for on a Friday also was he killed)? Then would I show you how to lament the painful fate of Chanticleer.

When Troy was sacked, and Pyrrhus with his stern sword, having seized old Priam by his grey beard, slew him, the ladies of the palace made not so great cry and lamentation as did all the hens in the close when they witnessed the spectacle of their beloved Chanticleer. Above them all shrieked Dame Partlet, louder than the wife of Asdrubal at the death of her husband, when the Romans burned Carthage. So full of fury and torment was that noble-minded woman, that with a stedfast heart she wilfully rushed into the fire, giving herself for a burnt-offering to her lord. But to my tale again.

The simple widow and her two daughters heard the woful shouting of the hens, and out they started, when they saw the fox making towards the wood bearing the cock upon his back. "The fox! the fox!" they cried, and after him they scoured; many neighbours also came out with sticks. Out ran Col the dog, and Talbot and Garland; and Malkin with her distaff in her hand: away ran the cow and calf; the very hogs too scoured off, and ran ready to break their hearts at the barking of the dogs and the shouting of the people. They all yelled like fiends in torment. The ducks screamed, the geese flew over the trees, and even a swarm of bees scrambled out of their hive. So hideous was the noise that Jack Straw and his men, when

[p. 147]

they were going to kill a Fleming, were not so outrageous as these in pursuing the fox.

And now I pray you to mark how suddenly Madam Fortune will, upon occasion, check the hope and pride of her enemies! This cock as he lay upon the fox's back in a deadly fright said to him, "If I were you, sir, I would turn again upon these churls, and bid them sheer off, with a pestilence; for, having reached the wood-side, you would make a meal of your cock in spite of their heads."

"And so I will, i'faith," answered the fox, and as he opened his mouth in speaking, suddenly the cock broke away from him and flew up into a tree.

When he saw his prey was gone, "Alas! Chanticleer," said he, "I did you an ill turn in frightening you so when I brought you out of the yard; but, sir, I did not do it with a wicked intention; come down, and I will explain everything."

"No, no!" said the cock, "beshrew us both--and hang me up body and bones, if ever you cheat me a second time: your flattery shall no more get me to sing and wink my eyes, for ill betide him who winks when he should be looking about him."

"Nay then," said the fox, "heaven send him bad luck who will keep jangling when he should be silent."

And here, gentlemen, you see the evil of thoughtlessness and trusting to flattery. You, who look upon the fable of a fox, a cock, and a hen as so much folly, will do well to give heed to the moral of it--take the grain and leave the chaff.

HERE THE NUN'S PRIEST'S TALE ENDS

AND HERE BEGINS

Footnotes

^136:* Sir John. I know not how it has happened that in the principal modern languages, John (or its equivalent) is a name of contempt, or at least of slight. So the Italians use Gianni, from whence Zani; the Spaniards Juan, as Bobo Juan, a foolish John; the French Jean, with various additions; and in English, when we call a man a John, we do not mean it as a title of honour. Chaucer uses Jack-fool as the Spaniards do Bobo Juan, and I suppose Jackass has the same etymology. The title of Sir, or Sire, was usually given, by courtesy, to priests, both secular and regular.--Note to Tyrwhitt's Edition of The Canterbury Tales, 1775. If the host then used the title John in an impertinent or contemptuous sense, that of Sir must also be understood as an additional piece of rudeness, because of its affectation of courtesy and respect.

^137:* The first words of a song most probably familiar to the poet's readers.

^139:* Alterative medicines are those which, unperceived, restore the body from indisposition to clear health.

^140:* Cicero [De Divinitate, B. l, c. 27] relates this and the following story, but in a contrary order, and with so many other differences, that one might be led to suspect that he was here quoted at second hand, if it were not usual with Chaucer, in these stories of familiar life, to throw in a number of natural circumstances not to be found in his original authors.--Note to Tyrwhitt's Edition.

^142:* The impudent wag! he knew that Dame Partlet was no scholar, or she would have told him that the translation of the saying was, "In the beginning woman was man's confusion."

^145:* Dan was formerly a title of distinction commonly given to monks.

^145:+ Chaucer possibly calls the fox Russell, from his red, or russet colour.

^146:* Geoffrey de Vinsauf, author of a poem on the death of Richard the First.

      
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 148]

  

The Cook's Tale of Gamelin

LISTEN to me, lords, and you shall hear tell of a doughty knight whose name was Sir John of Bounds. He owned a very large store of game, with three sons. The eldest was of an evil disposition, and early began to give proof of it. His brothers loved their father, and stood in awe of him; but the eldest deserved his curse, and, at the last, he received it. Although this good old knight had lived to a great age, death overtook and sorely handled him. While he lay in his last sickness he was much perplexed to think how his children should fare when he was gone.

All the land he possessed was his own by purchase, and earnestly he wished that it should be equally divided among the three. He therefore sent, by word of letter, to skilful knights in the country desiring them to help him parcel out his lands and apportion them fairly; adding, moreover, that if they would see him alive they must set forth quickly.

As soon as the knights heard of his sickness, they rested neither night nor day till they came where he lay quietly abiding the will of God.

"My lords," said the good old knight, "I may no longer remain here, for by the will of God death is drawing me down to the ground."

They all pitied him in his helpless plight, telling him

[p. 149]

not to be cast down, for that he might still see the end of his suffering.

"An end of my suffering God may send," said he, "but I shall not see it; for the love you bear me, therefore, lords, divide my lands among my three sons; and deal them not amiss, my friends, and forget not Gamelin, my youngest: regard him equally with his elders, for it is seldom that you see an heir who will help his brother as he ought."

The knights left the sick man and went in to counsel upon the division of his land, which they portioned out to the two eldest, and to Gamelin they awarded nothing, saying that his brothers could give him his due when he came of age. Having so dealt out the property, they returned and told the knight how they had decided, who liked not their judgment, but said angrily, "By Saint Martin! I swear, for all that you have done the land is still mine, and I shall deal it according to my own will. John, my eldest son, shall have my father's inheritance, amounting to five ploughs of land; my second shall also have five ploughs, which I myself acquired by the labour of my own right hand; and all my other purchases of ground, with my good steeds, I bequeath to Gamelin; and I beseech you, who know the law regarding landed property, that for the love of Gamelin this my bequest may stand." Soon after this he lay as still as a stone, and when his hour came he died.

No sooner was the old knight laid beneath the grass than the eldest brother beguiled the young one, and took into his hands the management of all his inheritance, and Gamelin himself to clothe and feed. Barbarous and

[p. 150]

savage was his fare; his lands and houses, parks and woods, were let away, and nothing that belonged to him went on well.

So long did young Gamelin dwell in his brother's hall that he had reached the age of manhood, when the strongest in the place began to fear his prowess. Neither young nor old, however courageous, cared to anger him. One day as he was standing in his brother's premises, thoughtfully handling his beard, he remembered how all his lands lay waste and desolate, and his fair large oaks were hewn down; his parks broken in and deer all rived; and how, of all his good steeds, not one was left to him; his houses too were going to ruin; and young Gamelin thought to himself, "All this cannot be right."

At this moment his brother came walking in with a proud and stately air, and said to him, "Is the dinner ready?" Then poor Gamelin's wrath arose, and he swore a bitter oath, "You shall go and bake your meats yourself," said he, "for I will not be your cook." "What! brother Gamelin," said the other, "do you answer me so? why, you never spoke such a word as this before!"

"By my faith," said Gamelin, "I find the need to do so. I have never yet heeded all the injuries I have received; my parks are broken up and my deer taken away; none of my good horses with their furniture is left, all that my father bequeathed to me is gone to rack and ruin; a curse, therefore, light upon you, brother John!"

"Stand still and hold your peace, you gadling," [**] answered John, "you shall be glad enough to have your food and clothing; what have you to do with lands?"

[p. 151]

"Evil befall him," said Gamelin, "who calls me gad- ling. Brother John, I am no worse gadling than yourself, and am no worse man; I was born of a lady, and my father was a knight."

John dared not stir one foot nearer to him, but he called his men, and desired them to "go and beat that boy, and teach him to answer better another time."

"If I must needs be beaten," said Gamelin, "you shall be the one to do it." Yet his brother in furious passion ordered his men to bring their staves. Gamelin was aware of their coming, and, looking about him, saw a stake under a wall; and, being nimble, he leaped towards them, and drove all his brother's men in a heap. He looked like a wild lion, and laid on in good earnest; which, when his brother saw, he ran away and locked himself in a garret: so Gamelin with his staff made them all aghast. Then he sought his brother where he had fled, and saw him looking out of the window. "Come down, brother," said he, "and I will teach you to play at buckler." But while he held that staff he would not come near him. "Throw away your weapon," said he, "and I will make peace with you and never anger you more." "I must needs be wroth," said Gamelin, "seeing that you would make your men break my bones. If it had not been for the strength of my own arm to drive them before me, they would have done me a mischief." "I meant you no harm," said John, "but only to try your strength who are so young; do not, therefore, be angry, for I were loth to see you hurt."

"Come down, then," said Gamelin, "and grant me my boon; but one thing will I demand, and we shall be

[p. 152]

quickly agreed." So down came the fickle and treacherous brother, but he stood in awe of Gamelin's trusty staff. "Ask me now your boon," said John, "and blame me if it be not quickly granted."

"Brother of mine," answered Gamelin, "if we are to be one, you must restore all that my father bequeathed to me; you must do this if we are to have no more strife."

"That you shall have, Gamelin, I pledge you my oath, all and more than your father's bequest if you desire it. Your land, that now lies fallow, shall be well cropped, and your houses raised again." So spoke the knight, but only with his mouth; he thought only of falsehood, as was his nature, but Gamelin had no guile. His brother kissed him, and they were friends.

Alas for young Gamelin! he little knew of the treason that his brother was plotting against him with that kiss.

There happened to be in that quarter a wrestling match for a prize ram and a ring, and Gamelin had a mind to go to it and prove his strength. "Brother," said he, "you must lend me a horse to-night, fresh at the spurs; I must go on an errand here beside."

"Choose the best horse in my stall, brother; but tell me where you are going." Gamelin told him his intent, adding, "How much worship will it be to us if I could bring home to the hall the prize rain and ring."

A fleet horse was saddled, and Gamelin, having buckled on his spurs, bestrode him and hied away to the wrestling. When he had gone, his false brother locked the gate and prayed heaven that he might break his neck at the match.

As soon as he arrived at the wrestling place, he alighted

[p. 153]

and stood upon the grass. And there he heard a Franklin lamenting and bitterly wringing his hands. Gamelin asked the cause of his grief, and if any one could help him out of his care.

"Alas!" said the Franklin, "that ever I was born, for I have lost two brave sons. The champion here has slain them. I would give ten pounds, and more, could I meet with a man to handle him in kind."

"My good man," said Gamelin, "will you have this well done? Hold my horse while my man draws off my shoes; and do you help him to keep my clothes and my horse, and I will go into the place and look how I may speed."

"So be it," replied the Franklin, "and I will be your man to draw off your shoes; and take no thought of your clothes or your horse: go forth, and heaven speed you."

Barefoot and ungirt, Gamelin came into the ring, and all wondered, that knew him, how he dared adventure against so doughty a champion; who, starting up, advanced quickly towards him and said, "Who is your father, youngster? forsooth, you are a great fool to come here."

"You knew my father full well; his name was Sir John of Bounds, and I am Gamelin."

"Right well I knew your father," answered the champion, "and yourself, while you were a young boy, for a turbulent fellow."

"Now, then, that I am older, you shall find me more." "Welcome," said the champion; "come once within my gripe and you shall not escape."

It was night, and the bright moon was shining, when

[p. 154]

the two wrestlers came together. The champion cast about to throw his fellow, but he stood still, and bade him do his best. "Now that I have proved many of your turns," [**] said Gamelin, "you must prove one or two of mine." With that he went briskly in to his antagonist, and of all the turns he was master of he showed him but one. He threw him on his left side and broke three of his ribs: his left arm too gave a great crack. "Shall it hold for a cast or not?" said the youth gaily. "Whatever it be," replied the other, "he that comes under your hand shall not escape."

Then the Franklin, who had lost his two sons, blessed the conqueror, and jeeringly told the champion he had been taught how to play; who, liking nothing at that time passing well, pronounced Gamelin to be the master of them all and his play to be fatal. "Since first I wrestled (now yore ago) I never was so handled as to-day."

The young champion now stood alone in the place, fearless, and cried, "If there be any more, let them come to work; for my fellow here, judging by his countenance, does not seem desirous to go on." But not one answered the challenge when they beheld his rough handling. Two gentlemen, owners of the place, then came forward, and told him to put on his hose and shoes for that the fair was over. Yet Gamelin wished to continue, "For," said he, "I have not half sold my ware." "He is a fool who buys of you," replied the conquered champion, "for you sell your ware so dear." "Why do you want so much of his goods?" said the Franklin, "by St. James, you have bought them a great deal too cheap." Then the wardens came forth

[p. 155]

and brought Gamelin the prize ram and the ring; and in the morning he set forwards to his home with joy and triumph.

His brother saw him coming with all the crowd, and ordered the porter to shut the gate and keep him outside. So when he arrived and found the door fastened, he told the fellow to open it and let in many a good man's son. The hireling, however, insolently refused, and swore he should not enter the yard. "You lie!" said Gamelin, and with that word he smote the wicket with his foot and broke away the bolt. When the porter saw it might be no better, he set foot to earth and fled away as fast as he could. But Gamelin was as light of foot as he, and having overtaken him, he girt him full upon the neck and broke the bone. Then with the same arm he took up the carcass and threw it into a deep well. The other servants in the yard made off, dreading his vengeance and the company he had brought with him.

Afterwards he threw wide open the gates and welcomed his attendants, saying, "We will be masters here, and ask no man's leave. It was but yesterday that I left in my brother's cellars five tuns of right good wine, and we will not part company while a sup remains. And if my brother grudge, or make us a foul cheer, I am the caterer, and for his grudging he shall have our holy lady's curse. He is but a niggard, and we will spend largely what he has hoarded. And whoever else here dares gainsay our will shall keep company with the porter." Seven days and seven nights Gamelin held his feast, and all the while his brother lay close in a little turret, seeing him waste his goods, and feared to speak.

[p. 156]

Early on the morning of the eighth day the guests prepared to depart from their host, who grieved that they should go before the wine was spent; but they bade him farewell and went their way. All the while he was in possession of the store his brother thought how he could wreak upon him his treachery. So when the guests had left Gamelin stood alone and without a friend, and, shortly after, he was taken by surprise and bound. Then came the false knight from his hiding-place, and, drawing near to his brother, asked who made him so bold as to waste and destroy his store? "Brother," answered Gamelin, "spare your wrath, for many a day since the whole was purchased with my money. Fifteen ploughs of land have you had for full sixteen years; and of all the beasts you have bred, that my father bequeathed to me, I give you the profit for the meat and drink that we have now spent."

"Hearken, then, brother Gamelin," said the false knight, "what I will give you. Since I have no heir, I will make you the heir of my whole possession." The guileless youth, not suspecting his brother, yielded to his terms.

"One thing, then I must needs tell you," said he; "when you threw my porter into the well, I vowed in my wrath that you should be bound both hand and foot. Let me not, therefore, I beseech you, brother Gamelin, be forsworn, but consent to be confined only for the maintenance of my oath."

"You shall not be forsworn for me," replied the youth: so they bound him hand and foot, and the knight, knowing and fearing his strength, added great fetters to the bonds. They fastened him to a post in the hall, and the

[p. 157]

knight told those who came in and looked upon him that he was mad.

"Now, by my head, brother," said Gamelin, "I see that you are a false one." And when he had remained there two days and two nights without food, he said at last to Adam le Dispenser, [**] "Adam, I have fasted over long; I beseech you, therefore, of the great love which my father bore you, if you can come by the keys, that you will release me from bondage, and I will divide my inheritance with you."

Adam Spenser answered him, "I have served your brother full sixteen years, and if I were to set you free he would afterwards account me a traitor."

"Adam," said Gamelin, "by my head, you shall prove my brother at the last to be right false. Loosen me, therefore, out of prison, and I will part with you my own free lands."

"Upon so good a promise," said he, "I will do all that in me lies."

"As you hold by me, I will maintain my covenant with you," said Gamelin.

Anon after this, when his lord had gone to bed, Adam took the keys and set him free. He loosed him hand and foot, hoping for the advancement that he had been promised.

"Heaven be praised," said Gamelin, "now am I at liberty. Had I but eaten and drank a meal, there is none in this house that should bind me to-night."

Then Adam took him hastily, and as still as a stone, to the store-room, and set him blithely at his supper. When

[p. 158]

he had eaten well, and drunk well too of the red wine, "Adam," said he, "give me now your advice, shall I go and strike off my brother's head?"

"No," said the other, "I will give you counsel worth two of that. On Sunday we are to have a feasting of abbots and priors, and many other holy churchmen. You shall stand up by the post as before, bound hand and foot, and I will leave your fetters unlocked that you may cast them off at will. When they have finished eating, and washed their hands, you shall bespeak them all to release you from your bonds: and if they become your security, so much the better fare; you will be out of prison and I out of blame. But if each of them deny us, then do I swear to do another thing. You shall have a good staff, and I will have one too; and evil befall him who is untrue to the other."

"And if I fail on my side," said Gamelin, "evil attend me. So do you give me warning when to begin, and we will assoil them of their sins."

"When I wink at you," answered Adam, "look to be off; cast away your fetters and come straight to me."

"Bless your bones, Adam, but that is right good advice. Only let them refuse to free me from prison, and I will handsomely pound their loins."

The Sunday came, and all the folks sat down to the feast. As each passed in at the hall door, he cast an eye upon Gamelin; for they had been set against him by the foul slander of his brother, the knight. And when they had been served with two or three messes, the prisoner called aloud, "In what manner have I been provided? Is it well that I should sit here fasting, while others, in my own

[p. 159]

home, are taking their fill and making glad?" Then the false knight told them all that he was a mad man. But Gamelin remained still and answered nothing, for he held all Adam's words in his thought. Some time after he dolefully implored the great lords, who were sitting there in hall, to help him out of his bondage, and one of the abbots answered, "Ill betide the man who shall become your pledge and release you from prison, and all worship wait upon him who shall meet you with sorrow." A second wished his head were off, although he were his own brother. A third--a prior--said that it was a great sorrow and care to have him alive.

"On, on!" said young Gamelin: "so is my petition broken; now have I found out that I have no friends in the world. May no good follow him who would bestow any upon abbots or priors."

Adam had now taken away the cloth, and watching his young master saw that his rage was running high; so thinking, at that time, little about the pantry, he brought two good stakes to the hall door, and looked the signal to Gamelin, who threw off his fetters and walked forth. Then Gamelin with Adam Spenser by his side came into the hall, and, looking fiercely round, both set to work. The one sprinkled the holy water with his good oak cudgel, and many a one bowed to the dispensation: some to the ground; others tumbled into the fire: abbot and prior, monk and canon, all that he overtook felt his supremacy; and not one of the hirelings the while, who waited in the hall, wished him anything but good; so they stood by and let the two work on, for none had pity on the churchmen. All who came within reach of Gamelin's

[p. 160]

staff he otherthrew, and was quit of his debt. "Pay them good wages," said Adam, "for love of me; I will guard the door, and may I never hear mass again if any go out unassoiled."

"Doubt nothing," said Gamelin, "while we hold together; you keep well the door and I will work here."

"Do them everything but good," rejoined Adam, "for they are churchmen; draw no blood from them--save their crowns, but crack their arms and legs." So Gamelin and Adam played away upon the monks and made them all aghast; and they who had come riding there jollily were carried home again in carts and waggons. "Alas! alas! my lord abbot," said a grey friar, "what did we do here? We had better have been at home with our bread and water."

All this while the knight remained quite still, and made a dismal appearance. Then Gamelin up with his staff and by one blow on his neck upset him; and ended with laying him in the same fetters where he had been before. "Sit you there, my brother John," said he, "and cool your hot blood, as I did mine."

After they had well finished their task with their enemies, they asked for water to wash themselves; and all the servants yielded obedience, some for love and some for fear.

The sheriff, who lived about five miles off, was quickly told how Gamelin and Adam had bound and wounded many persons against the king's peace. Strife awoke at the outrage, and he was casting about to take the author of it when a score of bold young fellows came to the sheriff and gained his leave to bring them away by force.

[p. 161]

Click to enlarge
The Cook

[paragraph continues] They started off at full speed, nor once rested till they arrived at the house; and when they knocked at the gate, the porter who served Gamelin with loving faithfulness looked slyly out of a hole at them for a little time and, dreading some treachery, kept the wicket fast and asked their will. One only of the company spoke, desiring that they should be let in. "Before I do that, I must know your errand," said the porter. "Then tell Adam and Gamelin that we would speak two or three words with them." "You stand quietly there, then," said the porter, "and I will go and know his will." He went to his master and warned him that his enemies were without. "The sheriff's men, sir," said he, "are now all at the gate to take you both; you cannot escape!" Gamelin answered him, "My good porter, as I may prosper you, I will allow your words when I see my time for it." Then turning to Adam, "Look to be gone--enemies are at the gate; the sheriff's men have come, and sworn together to take us." "Go forth briskly," said Adam, "and evil follow me if I leave you this day. We will so welcome these sheriff-fellows, that some of them, I guess, will make their beds in the fen."

So the two, with each a good sturdy quarterstaff in hand, went out of the postern gate and began laying about them; Adam felled his two, and Gamelin brought three to the ground; the rest set foot to earth and began to scour off. "Hollo!" said Adam, "stay and take a cup of wine with us." "No, no," said they, "we don't like your drink; it will lay a man's brains in his hood."

Then Gamelin stood still and, looking about him, saw the sheriff coming with a great crowd. "We must stay

[p. 162]

here no longer," said he, "unless we would have ugly fare. It is better to be at liberty in the woods than bound in a town." So each took the other's hand, and drank a draught of wine together, and afterwards pursued their course. The sheriff came up and found the nest, but the birds had flown. So he alighted, and went into the hall, where the lord lay fettered, whom he released, and after sent for a surgeon to come and heal his wound. And here we will leave the false knight, lying in trouble, and look after Gamelin to see how he fares.

The outcast wandered, in silence, about the wild wood and Adam little liked the prospect before them, but thought it was a merrier thing to be a dispenser. "Now," said he, "would I much rather be handling my keys than walking up and down these woods and tearing my clothes."

"Do not be cast down, Adam," replied his friend, "many a good man's child is brought into trouble."

While they were talking in an under-breath, they heard voices near to them; and looking below the boughs, perceived full seven score young men, well clad, all seated at meat. "Now, cast aside all your doubts," said Gamelin; "help comes after sorrow, and, if I see right, there is good meat and drink." Adam looked under the bough, and was glad enough when he surely saw the fare, for sorely did he long after a good meal. Just at that moment, the master of the band noticed the two standing under the shaw, [**] and desired his men to go and bring them to him that he might inquire who they were. And quickly at the word seven started up from their

[p. 163]

dinner and, coming near to the wanderers, claimed that they should yield their bows and arrows. "Sorrow be to them," said Gamelin, "who yield to you; though you may fetch five more, and then there will be twelve of you." They thought by his speech that he could trust in the strength of his arm; not one, therefore, came forth to make the trial, but all mildly entreated him to come before their master and tell his will. "Upon your loyalty, young man," said Gamelin to one of the company, "tell me who is your master?" All of them answered him sincerely, "Our master is the crowned king of the outlaws." Then said Gamelin to Adam, "Go we, in heaven's name; he cannot, for shame, refuse us meat and drink; and if he be courteous, and come of gentle blood, we shall fare well." "By St. James," answered Adam, "whatever harm I get I will adventure to the very door for some food."

So both went forth together and greeted the master of the band, who asked of them what they were seeking under the woody shaves. "He must needs walk the forest," said young Gamelin, "who dare not keep the town. Sir, we design no harm here, unless peradventure to shoot the deer we may meet, as men who are hungry, and have no food, and are hard bestead in the forest wilds." Then the master had pity on him for his words, and told the two to sit down and fare of the best.

While they were eating, it became known to one another that their new guest was young Gamelin. So the master was summoned to council, and the thing was told to him; whereupon the new outlaw was made master of the troop under their king.

Within the third week after this, tidings came to the

[p. 164]

head master that he might return home, for that his peace was made; upon which young Gamelin was crowned King of the Outlaws in his place; and for a while he held sway under the woody shaws.

The false knight, his brother, was now created sheriff, and through hatred and revenge he issued out an indictment against him. Then were all the bondmen of the knight sorry that the hue and cry of "Wolf's Head" [**] should be proclaimed against their young lord, and they sent messengers to seek him in the wilds and inform him of the event; also that all his goods were forfeit and taken away and his hirelings scattered. "Alas!" said Gamelin, "that my hand was so slack as not to have broken his neck. Go, and tell all my friends, that as God shall have my life so will I be present at the next county meeting."

True to his appointment he came boldly into the hall, and courteously putting aside his hood, greeted the lords assembled; "But as for you, broken-back sheriff, evil be your portion! Why have you done that shame and villainy as to send forth against me the wolf's head hue and cry?" The other made no reply, but ordered him to be seized and thrown into prison, where he was heavily fettered.

Gamelin had a brother, named Sir Ote, a courteous and good man. A messenger came and informed him altogether how evilly the youngest of his mother's sons was used. The gentle knight was grieved at the news, and quickly saddling his horse came straight to his two brothers. "Sir," said he to the sheriff, "there be only

[p. 165]

three of us, and you have imprisoned the best of all. Evil follow such a brother as you are!"

"Sir Ote," said the false knight, "spare your curses, for he shall only fare the worse for your big words. He has been legally taken to the king's gaol, and there he shall remain till the judge arrives."

"But," said the other, "it were better to bail him; I therefore require that you take my pledge for his deliverance at the next session, and then let Gamelin fairly stand his chance."

"Brother," said the knight, "I take your promise; and, by the soul of my father, if he be not ready to appear when the court is sitting, you shall endure the penalty of the sentence."

The two parties agreed to the terms proposed, when Gamelin was delivered to Sir Ote, and that night both dwelt together.

On the morrow Gamelin desired to go and see how his company fared in the woods. "Nay then," said Sir Ote, "I now see that all the care will fall on my own head, for if you be not found when the judge is sitting I shall be taken and shall suffer in your place." "Brother," said Gamelin, "be not afraid to trust me; for, by St. James, if God do but grant me life and wit, I will be ready in court when the judge arrives." "God shield you from shame, Gamelin, my brother," said the good knight, "come when you see the fit time, and bring us out of reproach." So the young outlaw went his way to the free woods, where he found all his young men, to whom he related how he had been bound; and they in return recounted to him their adventures during his thraldom. All the while that

[p. 166]

[paragraph continues] Gamelin was an outlaw no man fared the worse for his deeds; no curse clave to him, except it were that of the abbots, priors, and all the fraternity of monks: with them, indeed, he left nought that could be reft away. So he and his jolly company carried on their game of free booty, and mirth grew rife among them; but at the same time, the false knight was plying every art to gain over the jury, that he might hang his brother.

At length, on a certain day, as Gamelin stood and surveyed the shadowy woods within the wild field, he thought upon Sir Ote, his good brother, how that he had promised him to be ready when the justice was seated, and that he would, without more delay, hold his word, and come up to judgment. He therefore told his young men to be prepared quickly, for that he must needs go, or his brother, who had become bail for him, would be thrown into prison. So he, and all his bold compeers, came away to the town, where they found that the false knight had basely suborned the jury to condemn whichever brother might be brought before them. "The court is seated, Adam," said Gamelin, "do you go in and see what process they make." He went, and soon returned, bringing word that he saw the space filled with great lords and stout, and his brother, Sir Ote, standing in the midst of the court, fettered. "God grant us success in our undertaking," said the young chieftain, "and he shall sorely abide who brought my brother to that pass." "Then," said Adam, "if you will follow my advice, there is not one in that hall who shall bear away his head." "Not so, Adam," answered his lord, "we will slay the guilty only, and let the rest go free. I will myself go into

[p. 167]

the hall and hear the cause go on, and woe betide the doers of false judgment. Let none escape at the door, for I will be justice to-day and award the doom. Heaven speed me in this my new work! Adam, you shall come with me and be my clerk of the court." His men all promised to do their best, and be at hand should he need their help: "For we will stand by you so long as we may endure, and if we work not mainly pay us no wages." "As . ye abide by me, so shall you find me a trusty master," said Gamelin. So when the whole court were assembled, in he went, and boldly stood amongst them all.

First he unfettered his brother Sir Ote, who said, "Gamelin, you have stayed away almost too long, for the quest has gone out against me that I should be hanged."

"Brother," said Gamelin, "Heaven grant me success, but this good day they who have been upon your trial shall themselves suffer a felon's death; both they and the judge, together with our brother, for through him all this began."

Then said the youth to that false judge, "Arise, and void your place, your power is at an end: you have given an unjust doom; I, therefore, will take your place and set all right." But the judge kept his seat and would not arise for his words, when Gamelin with his sword clave his cheek bone, and after seizing him in his arms, without any more speech threw him over the bar and broke his worship's arm. No one dared say aught but good to Gamelin, for fear of the great company who stood without the doors. He then sat down in the judgment seat, Sir Ote was at his side, and Adam took his place at his footstool.

First he ordered the judge and his false brother to be

[p. 168]

placed side by side at the bar; after which he made inquiry who were upon the quest to doom that his good brother should be hanged; and when they were pointed out he ordered them all to be fettered and placed also at the bar. Then, addressing himself to the unrighteous judge, he told him that he had passed a foul and unlawful sentence: "You and the twelve jurymen," said he, "shall certainly be hanged this day." The sheriff now began piteously to entreat his mercy, and to call to mind that he was his brother. "And, therefore," said Gamelin, "may evil dog your footsteps; had you been master still, I should have fared the worse."

To make short my tale, he ordained a jury of his own strong young fellows; and, at their sentence, the judge and sheriff, together with the twelve jurymen, were all hanged up and left to wave and dry in the wind.

Sir Ote was now the eldest, and Gamelin still young; so with their friends they went to court and made their peace with the king. The king loved Sir Ote well, and made him a justice of assize; and Gamelin he ordained head warden of all his free forests. The act of outlawry passed against his young men was repealed, and all were appointed to good offices about the court.

And so young Gamelin regained all his lands and quitted himself with his enemies. Sir Ote also made him his heir, and afterwards our hero married a good and fair wife, with whom he lived in bliss till he was gathered to mother earth.

HERE ENDS THE COOK'S TALE OF GAMELIN;

AND NEXT BEGINS

Footnotes

^150:* Gadling--an idle vagabond. The brother calls him this name on account of its similarity to that of Gamelin, as well as through contempt.

^154:* Turn, a sleight in wrestling.

^157:* The dispenser was the steward of the store-room.

^162:* Shaw: a shade of trees.

^164:* This term evidently took its origin from the well-known proclamation of King Edgar, who, to clear the country of wolves, set a price upon every head that should be brought into the hundred or tithing court.

     
Tales from Chaucer, by Charles Cowden Clarke, [1833], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 169]

  

The Canon's Yeoman's Tale

  

PROLOGUE

BEFORE we had ridden five miles after the conclusion of the last tale, a man overtook us at Boughton-under-Blee. He was wearing a black cloak, and under it a white surplice. His hack, which was a dapple grey, was all in a lather; it seemed as though it had galloped hard for three miles at the least. His Yeoman's beast, too, was in the same condition; the foam stood so high upon its breastplate that it was spotted like a magpie. The rider seemed accoutred for a journey, for on the crupper behind him he carried a double portmanteau. The master rode light for summer travelling. I began to consider of what description was his quality, till I perceived that his cloak was sewed to the hood, when I guessed him to be some Canon. His hat hung down his back by a lace, because he had ridden at such a rate. He had put a dock-leaf under his hood to keep it from the moisture of his head, and that from the heat of the cloth. His forehead dropped like the retort of a still. When he had come up with us he called out, "God save this jolly company! I have ridden at a sharp rate to overtake you in order that I might join your society."

His Yeoman was also equally courteous, and said, "Gentlemen, I saw you ride out of your inn early this morning, and gave my master notice of the circumstance,

[p. 170]

for he loves amusement." "Friend," said our host, "good luck betide you for the warning you gave your master: he looks to be a wise man and, I doubt not, is a jocund one. Tell me--can he tell us a merry tale or two to please our company?" "Who, sir? my master? Aye truly, sir, he has anything but enough of mirth and jollity; and, sir, if you knew him as well as I do, you would wonder to see in how many ways and how craftily he can work. Many a great undertaking has he taken in hand which it were full hard for any one here to bring about unless by his assistance. Simply and homely as he there rides amongst you, his acquaintance would turn to the profit of any one. I dare lay all I am worth that not one of you would forego his acquaintance for the good he could bring you. He is a passing man, and of high discretion, and so I give you warning."

"Well--but," said our host, "is he a clerk, or what? Tell us what he is."

"Nay he is greater than a clerk," said the Yeoman, "and in few words I will show you some of his skill. My lord, here, I say, is master of such an art (I can't let you into the whole secret of his craft, although I help him in his work) that all the ground we have ridden over till we come to Canterbury he could pave with silver and gold."

"Bless us!" said our host, "but this is a marvelous thing to me that, with such a gift, your master should set so little store by his worship. Why, his dress is so shabby and torn that it is not worth a farthing. If your master's power is equal to your description, why does he go about in so slovenly a fashion?"

[p. 171]

"Why?" said the Yeoman, "why do you ask me? The reason is, I believe, that he is too wise. As our clerks say, 'That which is overdone turns to a fault.' So in this matter I think him foolish; for your men of overmuch sense are apt to misuse it, and that, heaven mend him! is the case with my master."

"Well, no matter for his dress," said our host, "but, good Yeoman, since you know somewhat of your lord's skill, pray tell us what and how he works; and where do you live?"

"In the suburbs of a town," said he, "among corners and blind lanes; where thieves and those of their kind hold their fearful residence; men who dare not show their faces by day. In such places, if I must say the truth, we live."

"Well, but again," said our host, "what makes your face so discoloured?"

"Why, my complexion is changed with blowing hot fires. I don't pass my time in looking at myself in the glass, but in hard labour. We are always poring over the furnace; and yet withal I do not find that we gain our desires. We persuade people to lend us money and gold, you see, and make them believe that we can turn one pound into two. And yet, with all our trying and groping, there's no such thing. That science is so far beyond us that, swear how we may that we shall overtake it, it slips away, and will make beggars of us at last."

While the Yeoman was thus talking away, the Canon drew near, and heard what he was saying, for he was always suspicious when people were in conversation: as Cato says, "He that is guilty believes that every speech

[p. 172]

refers to himself." Therefore he said to his Yeoman, "Hold your peace, or you shall dearly abide your folly. You are slandering me in this company, and discovering what you ought to conceal."

"Tell on, tell on," said our host, "whatever betide; don't reckon his threats at a farthing."

"I'faith," said he, "I do but little." And when this Canon found that his Yeoman would betray his secret, he fled away for very sorrow and shame.

"Aha!" said the Yeoman, "now we'll have some fun. Since he is off I'll tell you all I know about him. The foul fiend catch him; for never more, I promise you, will I join with him for a penny or pound. Shame and trouble follow him that first brought me to that game. I feel it, say what they will of me; and yet for all my sorrow and hard labour and misdeeds, I could not bring myself to leave the trade. I wish I could tell you all that belongs to that art; some of it, however, I can tell, and since my master is gone I will not spare, but relate all I know." [**]

 

ALTHOUGH I lived with this canon for seven years, yet am I no nearer to the secret of the art that he practised. All that I possessed in the world have I lost by it, and so indeed have many more than I. At that time

[p. 173]

[paragraph continues] I was accustomed to be gay of heart and fresh in my clothing; now may I go with a hose for the covering of my head. And whereas my colour was fresh and rosy, now its hue is wan and leaden. Hard labour, too, has bleared my eyes. Such is the advantage of increase and multiplication! That slippery science has left me so bare that wherever I go I reap no benefit. So deeply, too, am I in debt, from the gold I have borrowed, that while I live I shall never be a free man. Let every one take warning by my error, for whoever enters upon the same pursuit and follows it up, he may count his gain for loss: empty will be his purse and empty his wits. And when, through his madness and folly, he has hazarded and lost his own wealth, then he excites others to the same headlong course; for joy is it to bad natures to have fellowship in pain and disease. This saying was taught me by a clerk, but let that pass; and now to speak of our handicraft.

When we enter upon our fantastic avocation, we put on a face of prodigious wisdom, using none but quaint and learned terms, and all the while my business is to blow the fire till my heart faints within me. I need not detail the proportions of every material that we work upon, such as five or six ounces of silver, as may be, or trouble myself and you with names, such as orpiment, [**] burnt bones, iron scales and fragments, ground all together to a fine powder; and how all is placed in an earthen pot, putting in beforehand salt and pepper, the whole being well closed with a glass receiver that none of the air may escape; and of the gentle fire that is

[p. 174]

made, and of the care and toil that we take in sublimating our materials, and in amalgamating and calcining quicksilver, that is called crude mercury. For all this our sleights of hand come to no good conclusion; our orpiment and sublimated mercury, our white lead ground on marble, certain ounces of each, are of no avail; our labour is all in vain. Neither our spirits' ascension nor our materials may in our work avail us anything; for lost is all our labour, and all the cost expended upon it is gone too.

Many other matters also appertain to our craft, though, being an unlettered man, I cannot rehearse them in their proper order; yet I will tell them as they arise in my mind, as bole ammoniac, verdigris, borax, and earthen and glass vessels; descensories, [**] vials, crucibles, and sublimatories; [*+] cucurbites [*++] and alembics, and other such stuff, dear enough at the price of a leek. Rubifying waters, ox-gall and arsenic, sal-ammoniac, and brimstone; with herbs a long list, as agrimony, valerian, and moonwort, and a hundred others. Our lamps burning night and day, and our calcining furnaces to bring about our craft--if possible: our waters of albification, with unslaked lime, chalk, white of egg, various powders, ashes, manure and clay, saltpetre and vitriol, salt of tartar, alkali, and prepared salt; clay made with horse and man's hair; oil of tartar, alum, glass, yeast, wort, and argoil; [* section] red arsenic, and other imbibing and

[p. 175]

incorporating materials; our silver citrination, our cementing and fermenting, our ingots and vessels for assaying the metals, and many other things besides.

I will tell you also, as I have heard my master name them, of the four spirits and seven bodies. The first spirit is called quicksilver, the second orpiment, the third sal-ammoniac, and the fourth brimstone. Of the seven bodies, Sol is gold, Luna silver, Mars iron, Mercury is quicksilver, Saturn lead, Jupiter is tin, and Venus copper. But I forgot to speak of our corrosive waters, and metal filings, of mollifying bodies, and of their induration; oils, ablusions, and fusible metal; all which to enumerate would exceed the largest book that ever was written. So let them be, for I must come shortly to my story.

Before the pot is placed upon the fire, my master (and no one but himself) tempers the metals; and though he has such a name for skill (now he is gone I will say it boldly), he sometimes makes sore blunders; for it often happens that the vessel will burst, and then good-bye to all our labour. These metals are so violent in their operation that stone walls cannot resist them. Some are blown into the ground, or scattered about the floor, or fly through the roof, and in this way have we lost many a pound. Then comes the disappointment and chiding of the adventurers, some complaining that the metal was too long upon the fire; others of the blowing (then would I begin to quake, for that was my office) . Pshaw! cries a third, you know nothing about it: it was not properly tempered. The cause of it all, says a fourth, is that the fire was not made with beechwood. All I know of the matter, myself, was that there was a terrible outcry and

[p. 176]

strife among us. Then would my master say, "Come, come, there is no more to do but to pluck up our hearts and sweep the floor. I am sure the pot was cracked; but I can soon remedy all this mischief."

The rubbish being all swept into a heap and put into a canvas and sifted, one of them would say, "Here is some of our metal, though not all of it; and though this misfortune has befallen us, another chance may prove a lucky one. We must put out our money to a venture; the merchant is not always prosperous; one time his wealth is swallowed by the sea, and another it comes safely to land."

"Peace, peace!" would my master then say, "the next time I will contrive better--only trust to my wits--there was some mistake somewhere." Then, again, one would say the fire was too hot; but, too hot or too cold, this I know, that we were all at fault, and never got what we were seeking: and so in our madness every one seemed to himself a Solomon: but all is not gold that shines like gold; nor is every apple, fair to the eye, good at heart: and so it was amongst us; he that seemed the wisest proved the greatest fool, and he a thief who appeared most true; all which you will find by the time I have concluded my tale.

There was a canon dwelt among us who would have infected a whole city, be it as large as Nineveh, or any three such. His tricks and infinite falseness no one could describe, though he were to live a thousand years: he was peerless in this world of falsehood and treachery. So artfully would he wind his words that he would beguile any one of his senses, although he were a fiend like himself;

Click to enlarge
The Canon's Yeoman

[p. 177]

and therefore men have ridden miles to make his acquaintance, not knowing the treachery of his nature. In London, too, lived a priest, an annualler, [**] and had resided there many years. So pleasant and serviceable was he to the good woman where he lodged that she would suffer him to pay nothing for his board and clothes, however gaily he might appear. He had plenty of money to spend, and this brought our false canon to him one day, who entreated that he would lend him a certain sum, a mark or so, promising to pay it again. "In three days," said he, "I will restore it, and if you find me false, hang me up by the neck."

The priest gave him the mark, and the canon, thanking him over and over again, took his leave. On the third day he brought back the money, and gladdened the heart of the priest. "It is no inconvenience to me," said he, "to lend whatever I have to one who is so punctual to his promise in returning it."

"What!" answered the canon, "shall I break my word! No, no, sir, truth is a thing I shall ever hold sacred to the day that I creep into my grave: God forbid it should be otherwise. Believe this as surely as your creed, and I thank God to be enabled to say it: never was the man ill paid that at any time lent me his silver or gold, and never falsehood found shelter in my heart. And now, sir, since you have been so kind to me, to quit you of your gentleness, I will show you, if you are inclined to learn, how I work in philosophy."

"You, sir!" said the priest, "will you? Most heartily do I accept your offer, and thank you."

[p. 178]

"Doubtless, at your command, sir," answered the canon. How true is the old saying that "Proffered service hath an ill intent," and that I shall soon verify in this canon.

Perhaps you may be thinking, Sir Host, that this man was my master, but indeed it was another canon; my lord had not a hundredth part of his subtlety; many are the folks, it is true, that he has betrayed, and whenever I speak of his falsehood my cheeks burn with shame: redness I know I have little enough, for the fumes of the metals have discharged the colour from my face.

"Sir," said this canon, "let your man go and purchase two or three ounces of quicksilver, and when he returns you shall behold a more wonderful sight than ever met your eyes." The servant went and soon brought the quicksilver, when the canon took the three ounces and bid the man bring coals that he might begin his work. The fire being properly laid, the canon took a crucible from his bosom and showed it to the priest. "Take this instrument," said he, "and put into it an ounce of the quicksilver, and begin the labour of a philosopher. There are very few men to whom I would show so much of my science; but you shall see that I will destroy this metal, and turn it into as fine silver as that which is in your purse. Here is a costly powder that will make all good, for it is the cause of all the craft that I shall show you. Send your man out of the room and shut the door, that no one may see us at our philosophy."

The priest, at the canon's bidding, set the crucible upon the fire and began to blow it, and the canon threw into the crucible a powder, made up of I know not what

[p. 179]

[paragraph continues] --chalk or glass--not worth a fly, to blind the priest, at the same time bidding him heap the coals above the crucible; "For, as a proof of my love for you," said the canon, "your own hands shall achieve the whole work that is to be done."

Glad was the simple priest, and attended to all he was bidden. So, while he was busy, his treacherous companion took out from his bosom a beech coal, which he had privately hollowed out, and put into it some silver filings, stopping them in with wax. This he kept concealed in his hand, and while the priest was busily heaping the coals, "My good friend," said he, "the fire is not piled as it should be, let me manage it, while you wipe the moisture from your face." And as the priest was using the cloth, the canon slipped the coal into the crucible, and began to blow the fire. "Now let us sit down," said he, "and have something to drink, and I answer for it that all will soon be right." When the beech coal was burnt, the filings naturally fell down into the crucible, the priest all the while perfectly innocent of the trick passed upon him.

When the alchymist saw his time, he desired the priest to rise up and stand by him, "And, as I suppose," said he, "you have no ingot by you, go and bring me a piece of chalk, and I will make it into the same form as an ingot. Bring also a bowl or pan full of water, and you shall see how our undertaking will thrive. Yet, in order that you may entertain no suspicion of me, during your absence, I will not leave your side, but go and return with you." So they fastened the chamber door, taking with them the key.

[p. 180]

When they returned, our canon took the chalk and fashioned it into the shape of a thin plate of silver that lay concealed in his sleeve, which he cunningly contrived, undetected by the priest. This he slipped into the crucible on the fire, and after due time turned the whole into the water, desiring his dupe to put in his hand and search, for that he hoped he might find some silver: and what else should there be? A plate of silver is a silver plate, all the world over!

The priest did as he was told, and certainly brought out the metal which the canon had put there. Who was so happy, now, as this poor deluded man? "Heaven's choice blessings reward you, Sir Canon," said he, "and misfortune cleave to me but I will be yours in everything, if you do but vouchsafe to teach me this noble craft."

"I will make a second trial," said the canon, "that you may take notice, and become expert in the art, and at your need essay to do the same at any future time during my absence. Take an ounce of quicksilver, and proceed exactly as you have done with this, which has now become pure silver metal."

The priest blithely set about his work as the canon directed him, who in the meanwhile had ready in his hand a hollow stick, at the end of which was enclosed just an ounce, and no more, of silver filings. These, as before with the coal, were stopped in with wax. And while the priest was busied about his work, the canon, with stick in hand, began to cast the powders into the fire. Then stirring up the materials in the crucible, the wax naturally melted, and the contents quickly dropped out.

When the priest, suspecting nothing but truth, was a

[p. 181]

second time beguiled, he was so rejoiced that I cannot describe his mirth and gladness; and, forthwith, he proffered his all to the canon--body and goods. "Aye, aye!" said the cheat, "poor though I am, you will find me very skilful. There is still more behind. Have you any copper in the house?" "Yes, sir," said he, "I believe there is." "Else go and buy some quickly." He went his way, and returned with the copper, of which the canon weighed out an ounce. This he placed in the crucible and set on the fire, casting in the powder, and made the priest blow the coals, and cower down over his work as before. Afterwards he turned it all into the water, and put in his own hand. In his sleeve, as you have heard me tell already, he had another plate of silver; this he slyly took out, and left at the bottom of the pan; and as he groped and rumbled about in the water, he privately took out the ounce of copper, concealing it away. "Now," said he, "stoop down, and help me as I did you the last time, put your hand in and see what is there." The priest, of course, took out the piece of silver. Then the canon said, "Let us now go with these three plates to some goldsmith, and know if they be worth anything; for, by my hood, I hold that they will prove to be fine silver." The pieces were put to trial by the goldsmith and pronounced what they ought to be.

No one was now more glad than this besotted priest. The roosting bird was not happier at the approach of day; the nightingale at May-tide was never better inclined to sing; or lady more mirthful in her carolling or to speak of love and womanhood; or knight in arms to achieve a hardy deed that he might stand in his lady's

[p. 182]

grace, than was our priest to be taught this craft. "Tell me, I beseech you," said he, "for the love of heaven, what will be the cost of this receipt?"

"By our Lady," said the canon, "it's dear. I assure you that no man in England but myself and a friar can do what you have seen."

"No matter, sir," said the priest, "but tell me, for heaven's sake, what I shall pay you."

"Well, then, I tell you again the secret is a dear one; but, sir, since you desire to possess it, in one word, you shall pay me forty pounds; and I should have charged you more, but for your former friendship towards me."

The priest quickly brought out the forty pounds in nobles, and gave them to the canon for his receipt.

"Now, Sir Priest," said he, "I am only desirous to have my craft kept close; as you love me, therefore, let it remain a secret, for if it were made public people would so envy me and my philosophy that they would certainly take my life."

"Heaven forbid what you say," replied the priest. "I had rather spend all the wealth I have (I were mad else), than you should fall into such mischief."

"For your good will sir," answered the canon, "may you have a prosperous trial of your skill; and so farewell, and many thanks." He went his way, and from that day forth the priest never saw him more. And when he proved the value of his receipt--farewell!--it was nought. So was he befooled and cheated. Thus ends my tale, and God grant to every one an end of his troubles.

 

 

 

Footnotes

^172:* It is worthy of remark that in this early stage of science Chaucer should have had the good sense to see through the folly of the art of alchemy, or the power of turning baser metals into gold; which for ages deluded so many people, shrewd ones as well as simple. So lately even as in the time of Steele the wild pursuit was not wholly abandoned; for the author of the Tatler and Spectator, who was acute enough in perceiving the weaknesses of his fellow mortals, could himself be induced to lose that time in the attempt, which a steady employment of his pen, and prudent economy of its proceeds, would have superseded. Steele had the power of working a greater miracle than that of turning lead into gold. He needed but to write words upon paper. The leaden thoughts of some writers, and their success in making account of them, would lead one to conclude that the science of alchemy is no other than an allegory.

^173:* A fossil of a bright and beautiful yellow colour, like pure gold.

^174:* Vessels used in chemistry for the extracting of oils.

^174:+ Vessels used in sublimation; that is, separating certain parts of a body, and driving them to the top of a vessel in the form of a very fine powder.

^174:++ A vessel shaped like a gourd (so called from the Latin for that fruit) used in distillation.

^174: section Potter's clay.

^177:* A priest employed solely to sing annuals, or anniversary masses for the dead, without having any cure of souls.

 

    


===== BOOK: tft.txt =====


    
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iii]

  

TIBETAN FOLK TALES

  

TRANSLATED BY

  

A. L. SHELTON, M.D.

  

(Shelton of Tibet)

  

EDITED WITH

  

AN INTRODUCTION BY

  

FLORA BEAL SHELTON

  

ILLUSTRATED BY

  

MILDRED BRYANT

  

ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI

  

UNITED CHRISTIAN MISSIONARY SOCIETY

  

[1925]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, July 2005, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was not renewed in a timely fashion at the US Copyright Office as required by law at the time.

Click to enlarge
THE SEVEN SONS WHEN PLAYING IN THE FOREST FOUND A BEAUTIFUL GIRL, WHO WAS HERDING A YAK.     Story of the Two Devils.

Click to enlarge
Front Cover and Spine

Click to enlarge
Title Page

[p. iv]

Click to enlarge
Verso

[p. v]

          DEDICATED TO MY TWO LITTLE GIRLS

DORRIS AND DOROTHY

WHO HAVE MADE   SUNSHINE IN THE LAND WHERE THESE TALES WERE GLEANED

     
   
     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

PREFACE

It is found among the old, old histories of the Tibetans that a female demon living among the mountains in Northern India mated with a monkey from the forests of Tibet, and from this union sprang the Tibetan race of people. The greater part of their literature is of a sacred nature, telling of their creation, of the formation of the world, of Buddha and his miraculous birth and death, of his reincarnations and the revisions of his teachings.

A kind of almanac, a little astronomy, plans for casting a horoscope, and many books filled with religious teachings and superstitions, including the worship of devils and demons, are about all that can be found.

The little stories in this book are told as the people sit around their boiling tea made over a three stone camp-fire. They are handed down from father to son, from mother to daughter, and though often filled with their superstitious beliefs, through them all run a vein of humor and the teachings of a moral truth which is quite unexpected.

These tales were gathered by Dr. A. L. Shelton on his trips among the Tibetans, around their camp-fires at night, and in their black tents high up in the mountains.

[p. viii]

Every country has its folk-lore tales that have always been a joy and pleasure to the children, not only of their own land, but of other lands as well.

May these stories add a little to this pleasure and enjoyment everywhere, in whatsoever tongue they may be translated or in whatever land they may be read.

FLORA BEAL SHELTON.
 (Mrs. A. L. Shelton.)   

 

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

  

CONTENTS

         

        

       PAGE

     
      ONE:

       The Wise Bat

       <page 17>

     
      TWO:

       The Tiger and   the Frog

       <page 21>

     
      THREE:

       The Cony Who   Got Into Bad Company

       <page 26>

     
      FOUR:

       The Story of   the Donkey and the Rock. (A Black Tent Story)

       <page 29>

     
      FIVE:

       Story of the   Foolish Head-man

       <page 34>

     
      SIX:

       How the Fox Fell   a Victim to His Own Deceit

       <page 36>

     
      SEVEN:

       The Ingratitude   of Man

       <page 39>

     
      EIGHT:

       Covetousness

       <page 44>

     
      NINE:

       The Wise   Carpenter

       <page 46>

     
      TEN:

       The Story of   Drashup and the Goddesses

       <page 50>

     
      ELEVEN:

       How the Louse   Got the Black Streak Down His Back

       <page 55>

     
      TWELVE:

       The Man and the   Ghost

       <page 57>

     
      THIRTEEN:

       The Wicked   Stepmother

       <page 62>

     
      FOURTEEN:

       Story of the   Two Devils. (Frontispiece and color   plate)

       <page 70>

     
      FIFTEEN:

       The Wise Woman

       <page 76>

     
      SIXTEEN:

       The Three   Friends

       <page 78>

     
      SEVENTEEN:

       The Rabbit and   Bumblebee Bee

       <page 80>

     
      EIGHTEEN:

       How the Rabbit   Killed the Lion

       <page 81>

     
      NINETEEN:

       How the King   Lost His Great Jewel

       <page 86>

     
       

       [p. x]

        

     
       

        

       PAGE

     
      TWENTY:

       The Story of   the Three Hunters

       <page 87>

     
      TWENTY-ONE:

       The Hunter and   the Unicorn

       <page 91>

     
      TWENTY-TWO:

       The Decision of   the Official as to Who Owned the One Hundred Ounces of Silver

       <page 92>

     
      TWENTY-THREE:

       Story of the   Prince's Friend

       <page 94>

     
      TWENTY-FOUR:

       How the Raven   Saved the Hunter

       <page 103>

     
      TWENTY-FIVE:

       The Two   Thieves. (A Black Tent Story)

       <page 105>

     
      TWENTY-SIX:

       The Golden   Squash. (A Black Tent Story)

       <page 107>

     
      TWENTY-SEVEN:

       The Story of   the Bald-Headed Man

       <page 112>

     
      TWENTY-EIGHT:

       The Man with   Five Friends with Different Colored Eyes. (A Black Tent Story)

       <page 114>

     
      TWENTY-NINE:

       The Story of   the Violinist

       <page 117>

     
      THIRTY:

       How the Sacred   Duck Got His Yellow Breast

       <page 123>

     
      THIRTY-ONE:

       The Two Little   Cats

       <page 128>

     
      THIRTY-TWO:

       Story of a   Juggler's Tricks

       <page 131>

     
      THIRTY-THREE:

       How the Wolf,   the Fox and the Rabbit Committed a Crime

       <page 136>

     
      THIRTY-FOUR:

       The Pewter Vase

       <page 138>

     
      THIRTY-FIVE:

       A Rabbit Story

       <page 141>

     
      THIRTY-SIX:

       The Story of a   Juggler

       <page 144>

     
      THIRTY-SEVEN:

       The Story of a   Turquoise

       <page 147>

     
      THIRTY-EIGHT:

       A Wise Idiot

       <page 151>

     
      THIRTY-NINE:

       The Man and the   Monkeys

       <page 155>

     
      FORTY:

       The Story of   the Tree of Life

       <page 159>

     
       

       [p. xi]

        

     
       

        

       PAGE

     
      FORTY-ONE:

       The Story of   the Man with the Goitre

       <page 163>

     
      FORTY-TWO:

       The Story of   the Beggar

       <page 166>

     
      FORTY-THREE:

       The, Wily Poor   Man

       <page 167>

     
      FORTY-FOUR:

       The Quarrel of   the Five Friends

       <page 172>

     
      FORTY-FIVE:

       The Frugal   Woman

       <page 178>

     
      FORTY-SIX:

       The Story of   Yugpacan the Brahman. From Jaschke

       <page 184>

     
      FORTY-SEVEN:

       The Story of   DaJang. From Amundsen

       <page 187>

     
      FORTY-EIGHT:

       Like Unto   Solomon. From Jaschke

       <page 190>

     
      FORTY-NINE:

       Tibetan Song,   Translated from the Tibetan, with music

       <page 193>

     
  

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiii]

  

ILLUSTRATIONS

        The Seven Sons   when playing in the forest found a beautiful girl, who was herding a yak

       

     
       

       PAGE

     
      The Frog climbed   upon a little bunch of sod and when the Tiger came near, called out:   "Hello, where are you going?"

       

     
      The Donkey,   almost covered with the load of wood, did not see the jar, and broke it,   spilling all the oil

       31

     
      In that dark   old dungeon, with no bed to lie on, no food to eat, in the cold and damp, he   was about to starve, when the Rat he had rescued came and asked him how he   happened to be in that place

       41

     
      One day he   wandered away upon the mountain and lay down and went to sleep, grieving over   his troubles

       51

     
      The man now   disguised himself as a holy Lama, begging Tsamba and, carrying his prayer   wheel and the sack, started for the city

       59

     
      The King of the   Beasts at this time was a Lion and every morning all the animals had to come   and kotow to him

       83

     
      He went up to   the tree where the little Bird sat and said, "If you are my sister, hop   on my hand." When the little Bird hopped onto his hand they began to   cry, as they knew their sister was dead

       89

     
      The Bird   returned bearing a seed in his mouth, which he gave to the old man

       109

     
      [p. xiv]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      A big Duck, very   dark in color, flying over, stopped a minute and asked the Frog his trouble

       125

     
      One of the   Monkeys saw him fall into the water and hastened to help him out

       157

     
      One day a big Crane   flying over the palace, carrying a few heads of rice for his own food,   dropped some grains into the palace garden

       

     
  

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 17]

  

TIBETAN FOLK TALES

  

ONE

  

The Wise Bat

If you are a parable unto yourself--there exists no evil.
                                                Tibetan Proverb.

A LONG time ago, a very long time ago, when men and animals spoke to each other and understood the languages of one another, there lived a very powerful king. He lived far off in a corner of the world and alone ruled all the animals and men in his jurisdiction. Around his grounds and palace were great forests and in these forests many birds and animals lived. Every one seemed happy, except the king's wife, and she said that so many birds singing at the same time made such frightful discord that it worried her. One day she asked the king to call them all in and cut off their bills so they couldn't sing any more.

"All right," the king said. "We will do that in a few days."

Now, hanging under the eaves of the palace, close to the queen's room, was a little bat, and though he seemed to be asleep, he heard and understood everything the queen had said. He said

[p. 18]

to himself, "This is very bad indeed. I wonder what I can do to help all the birds."

The next day the king sent letters by runners into every corner of the kingdom, telling all the birds that by the third day at noon--and it mustn't be forgotten, so put this word down in the center of their hearts--that all of them were to assemble at the palace.

The bat heard the order, but because he was very wise and understood everything he sat very still thinking and thinking about what the queen had said and didn't go to the king's audience on the third day, but waited until the fourth. When he entered, the king said angrily:

"What do you mean by coming on the fourth day when I ordered every one to be here on the third day!" Oh, he was very angry indeed.

The bat replied, "All these birds have no business and can come whenever the king calls, but I have many affairs to look after. My father worked and I too must work. My duty is to keep the death rate from ever exceeding what it should be, in order to govern the sex question, by keeping the men and women of equal numbers."

The king, much surprised, said, "I never heard of all this business before. How does it come that you can do this?"

The bat answered, "I have to keep the day and night equal as well."

The king, more surprised, asked, "How do you do that? You must be a very busy and powerful

[p. 19]

subject to attend to all these matters. Please explain how you do it."

"Well," the bat replied, "when the nights are short I take a little off the morning, and when the nights are long I take a little off the evening and so keep the day and night equal. Besides, the people don't die fast enough. I have to make the lame and the blind to die at the proper time in order to keep the birth and death rate in proportion. Then sometimes there are more men than women, and some of these men say, 'Yes, yes,' to everything a woman asks them to do and think they must do everything a woman says. These men I just turn into women and so keep the sexes even."

The king understood very well what the bat meant, but didn't allow him to know it. He was very angry with himself because he had agreed to do so quickly what the queen had asked, and thought perhaps the bat might change him into a woman.

"I am not a good king," he thought, "when I listen to a woman's words and yield so easily, and I am terribly ashamed to have given this order. I'll just not do what my wife asks, but send these birds all back home and not cut off their bills."

So he called the birds all to him and said, "Heretofore, men haven't known how to mete out punishment and laws for you, but now I am going to make the Cuckoo your king, and what I called you up to-day for is this: I wanted to ask your King and the prime minister, the Hoopoe, to rule

[p. 20]

wisely, judge justly, and not oppress the people. If big or little come to you in a law-suit you must judge rightly between them and not favor either rich or poor. Now, you may all return to your homes."

But the king in his heart was still angry at the bat because he hadn't obeyed him and came the fourth day instead of the third, and to show him he was the ruler and to be instantly obeyed he gave him a light spanking for his disobedience and then turned him loose.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 21]

  

TWO

  

The Tiger and the Frog

The tall strong pine is a great help, for with its support the weak vine may climb as high.
                         Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time, in the days when the world was young and all animals understood each other's languages, an old, old tiger named Tsuden went out hunting for some food. As he was creeping quietly along the banks of a stream a frog saw him and was badly scared. He thought, "This tiger is coming to eat me up." He climbed up on a little bunch of sod and when the tiger came near, called out, "Hello, where are you going?"

The tiger answered, "I am going up into the forest to hunt something to eat. I haven't had any food for two or three days and I am very weak and hungry. I guess I'll eat you up. You're awfully small, but I can't find anything else. Who are you, anyway?"

The frog replied, swelling up as big as he could, "I am the king of the frogs. I can jump any distance and can do anything. Here's a river, let's see who can jump across."

The tiger answered, "All right," and as he crouched ready to jump, the frog slipped up and

[p. 22]

got hold of the end of his tail with his mouth, and when the tiger jumped he was thrown away up the bank across the river. After Tsuden got across he turned around and looked and looked into the river for the frog. But as the tiger turned, the frog let loose of his tail and said, "What are you looking for, old tiger, down there?"

The tiger whirled quickly, very much surprised to see the frog away up the bank behind him.

Said the frog, "Now I beat you in that test, let's try another. Suppose we both vomit." The tiger being empty could only throw up a little water, but the frog spit up some tiger hair. The tiger much astonished asked, "How do you happen to be able to do that?" The frog replied, "Oh, yesterday I killed a tiger and ate him, and these are just a few of the hairs that aren't yet digested."

The tiger began to think to himself, "He must be very strong. Yesterday he killed and ate a tiger, and now he has jumped farther than I did over the river. Guess I'd better slip away before he eats me." Then he sidled away a little piece, quickly turned and began to run away as fast as he could, up the mountain.

He met a fox coming down who asked, "What's the matter, why are you running away so fast?"

"Say," the old tiger said, "I met the king of all the frogs, who is very strong. Why, he has been eating tigers and he jumped across the river and landed farther up the bank than I did."

The fox laughed at him and said, "What, are you running away from that little frog? He is

[p. 23]

 

Click to enlarge
THE FROG CLIMBED UP ON A LITTLE BUNCH OF SOD AND WHEN THE TIGER CAME NEAR, CALLED OUT: ''HELLO, WHERE ARE YOU GOING?''

 

[p. 24] [p. 25]

nothing at all. I am only a little fox, but I could put my foot on him and kill him."

The tiger answered, "I know what this frog can do, but if you think you can kill him, I'll go back with you. I am afraid you will get frightened and run away, however, so we must tie our tails together."

So they tied their tails fast in a lot of knots and went down to see the frog, who still sat on his piece of sod, looking as important as he could. He saw them coming and called out to the fox, "You're a great fox. You haven't paid your toll to the king to-day nor brought any meat either. Is that a dog you've got tied to your tail and are you bringing him for my dinner?"

Then the tiger was frightened, for he thought the fox was taking him to the king to be eaten. So he turned and ran and ran as fast as he could go, dragging the poor fox with him, and if they are not dead, they are still running to-day.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 26]

  

THREE

  

The Cony Who Got into Bad Company

If you are without kindness, you will meet no kindness in return.
                        Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time, a long, long time ago, when the world was young and new and the mountain tops were all peaks and the garden of Eden had not been pushed up towards the sky by the big high mountains of Central Tibet, men and animals understood each other. In a desert place, away among the mountains, was a little hut of mud and stone, and in this little hut with its dirt floor dwelt an old Lama. His house furnishings were very meager. There was a small piece of beaten felt upon which he slept at night and sat on cross-legged most of the day. He had no clothing and no covering at night except the one gown that he wore. He had some baskets of grain and sacks of tsamba, an earthen-ware pot for tea, and a small wooden bowl from which he ate. He dwelt in this house away from people that he might meditate and pray a good deal, and so acquire holiness. Every day he sat pondering the questions of life, and thinking about the little animals as well.

There was a cony by the name of Susha and a

[p. 27]

rat by the name of Mukjong. These two were great friends and cronies, and both pretended to be friends with the old Lama, but at night when he was asleep for a little while, they would sneak into his hut and steal all the grain they could find. One day the Lama decided that these two were not really his friends, but were just pretending to be, and that they came to see him every day to discover what he had in the hut and then plan to come back at night and steal it. He said, "I'll just set a trap and catch them." So he fixed one of his round baskets into a little drop trap and that night caught them both. Next morning he found them, cut off their whiskers, ears and tails and turned them loose. They were very angry and said to him, "We belong to the Aberrang, and that is a class that doesn't lie, nor steal nor do any bad or dishonest thing. And you know we are your friends and have not stolen your stuff at all. We just wanted to see what you had in your basket and now see what you've done to us. Well, we're going to our own kings and ask them to send an army to take your grain for sure. So you better make a lot of traps to catch us all when we come."

The rat, very much ashamed of his condition, went to the king and showed him what had been done to him, telling him that he was innocent and asking that his king organize an army and attack the old Lama as a punishment for what had been done to him. The king, who was an old man, agreed to do so at once if the king of the conies

[p. 28]

would aid him. But when he asked the king of the conies he refused to help, as he knew the rat had been guilty. After the delegation had gone, the king of the conies called the cony to him, who came, looking very much ashamed, and told what had happened to him. The king said, "You only got what you deserved. When you are found in bad company you are judged as guilty as they. The rats are thieves and robbers and have been since the beginning of time, and when you are found with that kind of people you are thought to be just as bad as they. The conies are not a thieving folk, as you well know, and my advice to you is never to be found in the company of the rat or his kind of people again."

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 29]

  

FOUR

  

The Story of the Donkey and the Rock

  

(A Black Tent Story)

Between iron and brass there is union if the welding is skillful.
                                   Tibetan Proverb.

A Jg VERY long time ago, somewhere in that far A away land of Tibet, away up so high that it seems a little nearer the sky than any other land, in one corner was a country governed by a very just man. He was noted in all parts of the dominion for his fair judgment in all cases. In the city where this good king lived and had his home, dwelt two poor men. Both were very good, did the very best they could every day and each had an old mother to support.

One day one of the men started to a village high up in the mountains carrying a jar of oil, selling it as he went. Walking along, he grew very tired and set his jar of oil on a rock by the roadside while he sat down to rest a while. As he sat there, his neighbor came down the mountain driving his donkey in front of him. There were two big loads of wood stacked one on each side of the little donkey, which almost covered him. He didn't happen to see the jar, so came too near and knocked it off, breaking it, and spilling all the oil.

[p. 30]

[paragraph continues] The man who owned the oil was very angry indeed, and the man who owned the donkey said it wasn't he who had done the damage, but the donkey. So they quarreled and quarreled and kept on quarreling. The man who owned the oil said he couldn't afford to lose it, as it was all he had in the world to sell for food for his mother and himself, and it couldn't have been his fault the jar was broken. They both went to the king who questioned them very carefully about the matter and finally said he couldn't see that either one was to blame. They were both good men, took good care of their old mothers and were honest in all their dealings, and so far as he could see no one was at fault but the donkey and the rock, and he would judge them. So the little donkey was chained with chains around his legs and around his neck and led into prison, while five of the king's men were sent out for the rock. As soon as they brought it in he ordered it wrapped with chains and tied outside the prison door to a post. By this time the news of this strange case and the queer doings of the king had spread throughout the city. When the people heard their great king was having a trial about a donkey and a rock they thought he had surely gone mad. The next morning the king announced by his runners through the city that the case would be tried. The idea that a donkey and a rock could have a trial in court was more than the people could understand, but early next day everybody in the city was at the courtyard to see

[p. 31]

Click to enlarge
THE DONKEY, ALMOST COVERED WITH THE LOAD OF WOOD, DID NOT SEE THE JAR, AND BROKE IT, SPILLING ALL THE OIL.

[p. 32] [p. 33]

the result of the trial. When the time arrived the judge came, took his seat, instructed the door-keepers to shut and lock all the gates, thus locking in everybody, and then proceeded to pronounce his judgment on the case.

"As you very well know, there is no law by which a donkey and a rock can be judged. Why have you all come to see so absurd a thing? Now, because of your curiosity in the matter, every one of you shall pay a half-cent before he gets out."

The people, looking much ashamed, and glad to get out, handed over this bit of money and slipped through the gate. The cash taken in this way was given to the man who had lost his oil, so he was happy, the debt was paid, and the court closed.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

  

FIVE

  

Story of the Foolish Head-Man

Do not brag of your family--without fame they may be--the strain on the string of an arrow soon makes it useless. The horse traveling fast comes to the end of his strength very quickly.--Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time, away among the mountains, were located two little villages. One was called Jangdo and the other Jangmeh. One head-man ruled over these two villages. He was a very wise man, but had an only son who was foolish, with a wife that was very wise. After a while the old man died, and his place had to be filled by the son, who was an idiot. A river ran alongside of the village and a takin died and fell into the water. The upper village claimed it and the lower village claimed it, so both villages came with the request that it belonged to them.

His wife said to him, "Now you do not know to which place this animal belongs, but you must go and decide about it. Decide in this way: say that the upper half above the ribs belongs to the upper village and the lower part belongs to the lower village and the middle part is yours because you are a middle man." He did as his wife said, and when the people heard this decision they

[p. 35]

thought, "Why, we have always thought this man to be foolish, but he is a very wise man," and his fame spread abroad.

After two or three months had passed, a leopard died and floated down the river, stopping in the same place as the takin, and the villagers quarreled again. Only this time they did not want it, so the upper village said, It is yours, and the lower village said, It is yours. They finally took it to the head-man, who thought to himself, "I will not ask my wife this time, I will do it myself. I know how it ought to be done and I will do it just as I did the takin." So he divided it just as he had done before. But one village said, "Well, we don't want this part," and the other village said, "We don't want ours either." So they gave it all to the head-man, who put it all on a horse and took it home. His reputation for wisdom was done and the people said he had turned again into a foolish man.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 36]

  

SIX

  

How the Fox Fell a Victim to His Own Deceit

Between the official and his people is confidence if the head-man is skillful.
                Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time, away up in the corner of the mountains, in a little cave, lived a tiger and her baby cub. She had brought for this baby, one day when she was out hunting, a little fox to be his playmate. The fox had a happy time and an easy one, for he didn't have to work or hunt, but played all day and the mother tiger kept them all supplied with food. One day she went out to hunt and found a little calf, which she took home to be another playmate for her son. But the fox was much displeased and became very jealous of the calf because he thought they all loved the calf better than he and that only the food that was left over was given to him. As a matter of fact, they treated him just the same as ever, but his heart was wrong and he began to plan how he might be revenged on the calf. After a while, the mother tiger became very ill, and as she was about to die she called the calf and her son to her side and said, "Although you are not of the same father and mother, yet you are brothers. I don't want

[p. 37]

you to ever quarrel, but to live happily here together, and if any one should tell you lies don't pay any attention to them, but always be friends." So saying, she died.

Now the fox saw his opportunity. Every morning the calf was in the habit of running and playing and jumping and shaking his horns in fun, bellowing and taking exercise, while the tiger preferred to lie and rest. So one morning while the calf was skipping around, the fox slipped up to the tiger and said, "Although the calf says he is your friend, have you any idea what he is thinking about, when he runs and jumps and shakes his horns in that manner? In his heart he hates you, and in that manner is gaining strength in order that he may be able to kill you."

This, of course, made the tiger suspicious and very angry. So daily he watched the calf very closely and became sour and surly.

Then the fox went to the calf and said, "You know your mother told you and the tiger that you were to be brothers, but see, he is growing larger and stronger every day and his heart has changed and he is preparing to kill and eat you."

The tiger and the calf were now enemies and watched each other with a great deal of suspicion and were very unhappy. Finally one day the calf said to the tiger, "Why do you want to kill me and eat me? I have done you no harm and love you just as your mother said I should."

The tiger replied, "I love you just the same and

[p. 38]

never thought of doing such a thing until the fox said you were preparing to kill me."

Then they realized that the fox had been trying to make them enemies, and they decided on a plan to get even with the fox. The tiger said, "I'll tell you what we'll do. We'll have a sham fight saying we hate each other and we're going to fight it out and see who wins. Ask him to be present and while we're in the midst of it, I'll attack him."

The day came and they began their fight. They maneuvered round and round and seemed to be fighting very fiercely until they came very near the fox, when the tiger made a jump, landed on him and killed him and sat down and had a feast of the carcass.

This shows what happens to those who try to make trouble between friends.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 39]

  

SEVEN

  

The Ingratitude of Man

Whatever you have promised make it not as changeable as a loop in a string, but as firm as a line on a rock.
                    Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time in a far, far away land, in a very high, high land, when the old world was very, very young and animals and men spoke and lived together, such a thing as gratitude was known.

Away in the mountains was a narrow road that passed along the side of a deep chasm. It was a dangerous place to travel, and along this path one night, just at dark, when a man, a crow, a rat and a snake were walking along together, a part of the road gave way and they fell into the depths below. They were not hurt, but much shaken, and they sat there waiting and thinking of their plight, wondering how they could get out, or what they could do to keep from starving, when a traveler coming along reached the broken road and looked down and saw them. They all at one time began to clamor and beg to be helped out, so he threw a long rope down to them and drew them all out one after the other. They all professed great gratitude and said they would never forget him and never forget the help he had given

[p. 40]

them, and that some time they'd help him. The traveler, in his heart, rather scorned the professions of friendship from the crow, the rat and the snake, and really didn't believe they could do anything for him, but thought possibly the man might be able to aid him some time.

A long time after this had taken place, in the palace of the king, in this far away country, the queen was on the top of the flat roof washing her hair. She took off her jeweled necklace and laid it down near her on a low bench, and when her hair was dry went downstairs and forgot her jewels. Near by in the top of a tree sat the crow who had been rescued by the man a long time ago. He saw the necklace and said, "This will be a good present to give to that man who saved me from the chasm," so he flew down, picked it up in his bill, flew away with it and took it to the man and told him where he got it.

The next day the traveler with the necklace met the man he had rescued and said, "Look here. I didn't think that crow would be much of a friend, but see, he has brought me these magnificent jewels that belong to the queen."

The rescued man, hearing this, went at once to the king and said to him, "The queen's necklace you will find in the house of such a man," and gave the name of his rescuer. The king at once sent his men, arrested the traveler and cast him into prison. In that dark old dungeon, with no bed to lie on, the walls dripping moisture, no food to eat, and no friend to bring him any, he

[p. 41]

Click to enlarge
IN THAT DARK OLD DUNGEON, WITH NO BED TO LIE ON, NO FOOD TO EAT, IN THE COLD AND DAMP, HE WAS ABOUT TO STARVE, WHEN THE RAT HE HAD RESCUED CAME AND ASKED HIM HOW HE HAPPENED TO BE IN THAT PLACE.

[p. 42] [p. 43]

was about to starve to death, when the rat he had rescued and who lived there came and asked him how he happened to be in that place. He related the story of his arrest and the ingratitude of the man he had saved and said he was about to starve and would surely die unless help came very soon. The rat went away, entered into the king's palace, stole the food from his table, carried it to the man in the dungeon and saved him.

Another day the snake came in to see him and asked how it was that he happened to be in the prison. He told him the story again and the snake said, "Never mind, I'll get you free."

Now this snake was a magic snake, and making himself into a ghost wound around and around the king's neck and almost choked him to death. He could be felt but not seen. The king wildly called for his great men, his wise men and his lamas who cast lots and told him that this ghost that was choking him was one of the patron saints of the man in the prison, and if he would loose the prisoner and treat him kindly, his troubles would cease. So he called for the prisoner to be brought before him, gave him much money and many jewels and sent him away speedily.

The king's misery stopped and the traveler was made happy by the friendship of the three whom he had doubted and scorned.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

  

EIGHT

  

Covetousness

As hail leads rain--so a quarrel leads relatives apart.
                         Tibetan Proverb.

LONG ago, hidden in a deep valley in the mountains, was a pool where all the animals went to drink. Near the pool was a road, and across the road a hunter had set a big bow that would shoot a long spear into whatever animal loosed the taut string. A bear coming along tripped over the string, the spear was loosed and it killed him instantly. A fox came along and said, "Ah, here is enough meat to last me a year, but I guess I had better cut the string that holds the bow, for fear the hunter will return and set it again for me."

So he chewed it and the bow sprang, striking him on the head and killing him instantly. Near the place where the two lay dead was a gully, and in it lay an elephant asleep. A rabbit came along and saw the elephant lying still, played and hopped around, until finally the elephant opened his eyes and watched him.

"That's very queer that a little fellow like you can jump so far. I believe I'll try it," he thought. So he gave a big jump and his front feet caught and loosed a big rock that fell on his back and killed him. All three were dead now, the bear, the

[p. 45]

fox and the elephant. Then seven robbers came along and exclaimed, "Just look at the meat, we will stay here a few days and eat." But they must have water too, and nobody wanted to carry it. Each wanted the other to go. They finally got three to go and the four who were left said, "We will fix up three nice pieces of meat and put some poison in it for them when they get back, and we four will have all this meat, bones and ivory." So they fixed up the poison meat for the three men who were gone, for they had to go a long way over the mountain after the water. The three who carried the water said: "Those four fellows are bad men, we are doing all the work carrying this water for them, so we will put some poison in it, then we can have all the meat." When they got back the others were very thirsty and took a big drink, and in a little while they were all dead. "Now," said the three, "we will have all this meat and stuff ourselves." So the three took meat already cut and ate that, and in a little bit they were dead too.

Now the moral is, "First, people shouldn't be greedy when there is plenty for all (the fox wanted all the meat to eat for a year and tried to ruin the bow and got killed). Second, you mustn't do what you aren't fitted for (the elephant tried to do what the rabbit was doing and got killed). Then the four men begrudged the three and the three begrudged the four, so they all died.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 46]

  

NINE

  

The Wise Carpenter

For men there is no hope--except to find happiness in the worship of the gods.
                   Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time in the city which was called Snalong lived a King whose name was Gendong. This King died and his son, Genchog, ruled in his stead. Among the people under him were two men, one a painter, who did exceedingly fine work, the other a carpenter, who was also of the best, and these two men were enemies. One day the painter came up to the new King and said, "Last night as I was ready to go to sleep, your father sent an angel out of Heaven to call me, and I went to Heaven with him to see what your father wanted and found him rich beyond belief. He gave me a letter to bring to you, and here it is; this letter is about that fine carpenter that dwells here in this city."

The King opened the letter and read: "My son, I am here in Heaven, very wealthy, and I have all that I want except one thing, and that is I wish to build a Hlakang, or temple, to the gods. But there are no good carpenters here and I want you to send me up the best one in the city. The painter who brings this to you knows all that I mean, for

[p. 47]

he has been here, and I'm sending the letter by him."

So the King, Genchog, said, "This must be my father's letter, for it is like him to want to build a temple to the gods, and I must see to his wishes at once." So he called the carpenter before him and told him, "My father is in the dwelling of the gods, is very happy, but wants to build a Hlakang and asked me to send you up to help him."

The carpenter thought it queer that such a thing could occur, and said to himself, "It must be a scheme of that painter to get rid of me. I must think of some plan to get ahead of him." Then he said, "Laso, [which means so-be-it] but how am I to get there?" Then the King called the painter and asked him how he was to send the carpenter to his father. The painter said, "This is the way. He is to bring all his tools that he will need up there, put them on a pile on the ground, sit on them, then wood must be piled around him and set on fire. As the smoke goes up, he can ride on it to Heaven." "Well, that's all right," said the carpenter, "but I want to start from my own field." The King gave him seven days to get ready. The carpenter went back home to his wife and said, "That painter has fixed a scheme to kill me, and I have only seven days to wait to be burned up, so we must work, for I want a tunnel dug from my house out to the field where the burning is to take place." They got it done and put a few sticks over the opening where he could pile his tools and sit on them. The

[p. 48]

[paragraph continues] King, as soon as the seven days were up, ordered his people to bring several loads of wood, each to carry a load and a bowl of oil. So the wood was piled four square around the carpenter, the oil poured on and set on fire. While the fire was big the carpenter slipped down in the tunnel. The painter exclaimed, "Look, there he goes, riding the smoke to Heaven." They all took it for the truth and went home.

Now, the carpenter had a dark secret room in his house and in there he stayed, washing himself every day and having some clothes made like the gods wear. At the end of three months, putting on these garments, and with skin as white as a lily, he came out of his house and went to see the King, bearing a letter to him from his father. Thus read the letter, "My dear son Genchog, it is said that you are a good ruler and rule your people wisely and well. Some three months ago you sent me a carpenter to build a Hlakang, and he has finished it beautifully, and I want you to see that he has his reward on earth when he comes back. Now that the temple is done I want the best painter that you have in the kingdom to come and paint it for me. The same plan that you chose in sending the carpenter will do very well for sending the painter." The carpenter told him how rich his father was and of his adventures in the sky. The King gave him great riches, making him happy for life. And after reading the letter the King sent for the painter and said, "The carpenter has just come down from Heaven,

[p. 49]

and has brought a letter asking you to come and paint the Hlakang for my father." The painter looking at the carpenter, with his skin so white, dressed in such strange clothes, with strings of coral about his neck, while he was still in his old clothes, thought perhaps that it was all right to go to Heaven that way, and half believed that the carpenter had really been there. So he got all of his things together; as he had been given seven days to prepare, the wood and oil had been brought with some things which the King wished to send to his father. When all was ready the carpenter said that they must make music for him as he ascended. So they got drums, horns and cymbals, and as the fire started began to beat loudly and made a great noise. As soon as the fire reached the painter he yelled that he was being burned up, but the noise was so great he couldn't be heard, so he really did go to Heaven.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 50]

  

TEN

  

The Story of Drashup and the Goddesses

In birth and death there is no fear, and in fear there is no doubt.
                                Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE, long ago, in this land of mystery, where men lived and loved and wondered and died, lived a man named Drashup, who was all alone in the world. All his kin were dead. He had no wife, no children, and he was very, very poor. One day he wandered away upon the mountain and lay down and went to sleep, grieving over his troubles.

Just at this time, in a small village far below at the foot of the mountain, a little girl was born. In the tree under which the man was lying asleep dwelt a goddess. All around him in the wood dwelt a number of goddesses, and it was their duty to cast lots and foretell this new little lady's future: who her husband would be, when she was to be married, if she would live to be old, and the day of her death. The goddess who lived in the tree under which Drashup was sleeping invited all the others to come to her tree, as she had a guest asleep near her dwelling. So they came and began to forecast the lady's future:--She would

[p. 51]

 

Click to enlarge
ONE DAY HE WANDERED AWAY UPON THE MOUNTAIN AND LAY DOWN AND WENT TO SLEEP, GRIEVING OVER HIS TROUBLES.

 

[p. 52] [p. 53]

be only middle-aged when she would die from eating the shoulder of a sheep and the man asleep under the tree was to be her husband.

The man was not very sound asleep and overheard all these predictions, which made him very angry, and he said, "Such talk! It is all foolishness. I'm a middle-aged man now and the very idea that I'm to be the husband of a baby just born."

But nevertheless he started out to hunt this child. He traveled and traveled up and down the country, and finally found in the village at the foot of the mountain, a little girl who had been born on that very day, and he knew that it was she about whom they had been speaking. So he slipped quietly up by the side of the house, picked up a small ax used to chop firewood, slipped around where the girl was and struck her. Believing he had killed her he ran away into a far country; but she recovered and grew to womanhood.

By and by the girl's parents died and she was left an orphan with nothing at all, so she left her home and went traveling. By chance she went to the city where Drashup had taken up his residence. They met one day and instantly fell in love. As he was talking to her one time, he saw a big scar on her head and asked her how it came to be there.

"My parents told me that one time a man named Drashup took an ax and tried to kill me, in the village where I was born," she told him.

[p. 54]

When Drashup heard this, he knew there was no use to try to get away from the words of the future foretold by the goddesses of the mountain, but he didn't tell her how she was to die, though he remembered that, also.

They were married and lived happily, though he was so much older than she. But he was always very careful to take the shoulder of the mutton for himself and see that she never got any of it. She, however, wondered why he always wanted the shoulder for himself, and one day when he was absent from home on business she killed a sheep and said, "As Drashup isn't here I'll eat the shoulder myself." After eating it she remarked, "It was awfully good, no wonder he always wanted it himself." Then suddenly she became violently ill and Drashup found her dead when he came home, and knew for sure that never could any one get away from the decision of the goddesses.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

  

ELEVEN

  

How the Louse Got the Black Streak Down His Back

Eating pleasant things is like listening to words of praise.
                        Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time in this wonderful land where we dwell, where the sky is so blue and the mountains so high and the clouds so white and soft and woolly and so very close to the earth, here it was animals and men worked and struggled and spoke together.

At the foot of a great mountain one day a louse and a flea were preparing to go up into the timber and carry down a load of wood. Each had his rawhide strap with which to tie on his load, but before they left, knowing they would be hungry, they stood up three stones and put a big pot of soup and flour and meat upon them; then built a fire under it, leaving it to simmer until they should return, agreeing that whoever came down first with his load could eat it all up.

The flea was sure he would get home first because he could jump so far, but he found every time he jumped his load of wood slipped and some of his sticks fell out and he had to stop and replace and retie it. The louse plodded slowly along, but kept going steadily, so he got there first and ate up

[p. 56]

the pot of food. When the flea arrived, he was as angry as could be and said, "You've eaten all the food," and grabbing the empty black kettle threw it at the louse, who dodged the blow by turning his back, and the kettle struck him squarely in the middle where it left a long black streak from the soot on the outside of the pot.

So to-day you can see that mark down the back of a louse if you will take the trouble to catch him and look.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 57]

  

TWELVE

  

The Man and the Ghost

As you desire the sun, so you desire your friend's return.
                       Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time a man was walking along a narrow mountain path, when he met a ghost. The ghost turned around at once and walked along beside him. The man was very much frightened, but didn't care to let the ghost know it. Pretty soon they came to a river which had to be crossed, and as there was no bridge or boat both had to swim it. The man, of course, made a good deal of noise, splashing and paddling the water, while the ghost made none at all.

Said the ghost to the man: "How does it happen that you make so much noise in the water?"

The man answered, "Oh, I am a ghost and have a right to make all the noise I want to."

"Well," the ghost replied, "suppose we two become good friends, and if I can help you I will, and if you can ever aid me you will do so."

The man agreed, and as they walked along the ghost asked him what he feared more than anything else in the world. The man said he wasn't afraid of anything he saw, though inwardly quaking all the while. Then he asked the ghost what he was afraid of. "Of nothing at all," said the

[p. 58]

ghost, "but the wind as it blows through the tall-headed barley fields."

By and by they came near a city, and the ghost said he was going in to town. But the man said he was tired and that he would lie down and sleep a while in the barley field at the edge of the city. The ghost went on into town and played havoc, as ghosts generally do. He proceeded to steal the soul of the king's son and tying it up in a yak hair sack carried it out to the edge of the barley field where the man lay asleep, and called out to him, "Here is the soul of the king's son in this bag. I'll leave it here for a while and you can take care of it for me, as I have a little business elsewhere."

So saying, he put the sack down and went away. The man now disguised himself as a holy lama, begging tsamba, and, carrying his prayer wheel and the sack, started for the city. When he arrived he heard at once that the king's son was about to die and he knew what was the matter with him. So he went to the palace begging and the king's chamberlain said to him, "You are a very holy man, perhaps you can do something to help the king's son get well." The man said he would try if they would let him in to see the king.

When the king saw him he said, "If you will heal my son, I'll give you half of all I have, lands, gold, cattle and everything." So the man said he would. He took his yak hair sack, sat down on the ground, cross-legged, as all Buddhists sit, made a little idol of tsamba meal, opened the sack and thrust it in, allowing the soul to escape. Then

[p. 59]

 

Click to enlarge
THE MAN NOW DISGUISED HIMSELF AS A HOLY LAMA, BEGGING TSAMBA, AND, CARRYING HIS PRAYER WHEEL AND THE SACK, STARTED FOR THE CITY.

 

[p. 60] [p. 61]

he tied the mouth of the bag with nine knots, blew his breath upon it, said many charms and prayers over it, and while he talked, lo, they brought the king word that the boy was recovering. The father was so pleased and happy, he kept his word and gave the man half of all he possessed. The ghost never, so the story goes, came back or claimed the sack he had left with the man, and the man thought, "Perhaps that is the customary etiquette between a man and a ghost."

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 62]

  

THIRTEEN

  

The Wicked Stepmother

Eating much the tiger can swallow no more, so the vulture may safely come down.
                                              Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time, on the very tiptop of a big flat mountain, there was situated a country over which ruled a king named Genchog. He married a beautiful wife who gave him one son whom they named Nyema. In giving birth to him she died, but the baby lived. The king got him another wife and had another son whom they called Dawa. One day, thinking to herself, she said, "There is no chance for my son to be king, for the older son has the birthright and he is sure to be the ruler."

So she began to plan and plot and see if she could think of some way to kill the older son and let her son rule the kingdom.

One day she feigned to be very ill and rolled over on the floor groaning and crying. The king saw her and very much alarmed exclaimed, "What is the matter with you?" And she answered, "Oh, I have had this sickness since I was a little girl, but it has never been so hard as it is this time. There is a way to cure it, but it is too hard and bitter, so I will have to die this time."

[p. 63]

The king asked, "What is the way to heal you? I don't want you to die, for it would break my heart and I wouldn't want to be king any longer. You must tell me the remedy so I can save you."

She demurred for some time but finally said, "Well, one of your sons must be killed and I must eat his heart with butter, but you see your older son is the prince and heir to the throne and the younger son is my own flesh and blood, so I could not eat his heart even if it were to save my life."

The king was dreadfully grieved and finally said, "Well, I love one son as much as another and my heart would ache the same for each of them, but in a day or two I will kill the elder, as it would do no good to kill the younger."

After a while the younger brother found out what was to be done and went to the older brother and told him, and asked, "What shall we do about it?" The older brother said, "Little brother, you must stay with your father and become the king. He won't kill you and I'll run away." The younger brother felt very sorry about it and his heart was sore as he said, "If you are going away I want to go too. I don't want to stay here without you." "Very well," answered the other, "you may go if you wish." So they arranged together to slip away that night at midnight and tell nobody of their going. They could take no tsamba for fear some one would find out they were going. They had some tsamba bags and in them were some dried tsamba tormas that the

[p. 64]

lamas had been using. Now these tormas are little cone-shaped bodies made of tsamba and are used when the lamas are reading prayers. They are supposed to be full of devils, which the lamas coaxed into them when they read their holy books.

They started about midnight on the fifteenth of the month and traveled day and night, over the mountains and through the valleys, until their dried tsamba was all gone and they were very hungry and thirsty. They finally came to a village, but there was no water. The younger was getting weak now as they had had but little food and no water for some time. So Nyema said to him, "Wait and rest here in this little village, and I will go and see if I can find some water." He kept on going until he had gone entirely around the mountain in his search for water, but found none. Going back to the place where he had left his younger brother, he saw that he was dead. He was very much grieved and built a tomb for him of prayer stones and prayed that in his next incarnation he would have a happy life and not have to have so much sorrow as he had had this time. Nyema then left and, crossing two mountain ranges, came to a cliff in which was a big door through which he entered, and there found an old hermit lama in the cave. When the old man saw him he said, "You are a good man, I know by looking at you. How did you happen to come here?" Then Nyema told all that had happened to him and why he had run away from home, so the old man said, "You can stay here

[p. 65]

and be my son and I will pray to the gods to bring your younger brother to life again." In a few days the younger brother did come to life, and following his older brother's tracks came to the old hermit's house, and the two stayed there as the old lama's sons.

Below this cave, which was high up on the mountain, was a city where dwelt a very good king, and near the city was a big lake by which all the people watered their fields. Every year an offering had to be made to the snake god who dwelt in the lake, so that he wouldn't be angry and keep the water away. For this offering the people must sacrifice a human being who had been born in the tiger year. But the time came when all the people born in this year were dead and gone, and none was left to offer. One day the children, seeing the king, said to him, "Every day when we go up on the mountain to herd the cattle, we see a lama who lives up there. This lama has two sons, and the older one was born in the tiger year." So the king sent three men to see if it was true. The men went up to the cave and knocked on the door. The lama opened it and asked, "What do you want?"

"The king has heard you have two sons and that one was born in the tiger year," answered the men, "and we need him for the offering to the god of the lake."

The lama answered, "I am a lama, how could I have two sons?" Then he shut the door in their faces and hid the boys in a big water cask. This

[p. 66]

treatment angered the men so they took some rocks and beat the door down. They looked everywhere for the boys, but they were so care-fully hidden they couldn't be found, so in their disappointment they took some rocks and beat the old man. The boys couldn't stand this, so they came out of their hiding place and called, "Here we are, don't beat him any more." Then the men tied the older son and took him with them to the king. The lama and the younger brother felt very sad after he was gone. The men led Nyema to the king's palace, and since it wasn't quite time for the offering to be made, he was allowed his freedom in the courtyard of the palace. The king had a daughter, who fell violently in love with Nyema when she saw how handsome he was, and watched him wherever he went.

The day finally came and they took Nyema to the lake to throw him in. The king's daughter followed, saying pleadingly, "Please don't throw him into the lake, but if you must, throw me in too."

It made the king angry to see his daughter act in that manner, and he called out, "Throw her in too." So they threw them both in. Nyema felt very sad and he thought, "It doesn't matter if I am thrown in, as I was born in the tiger year and the people will all starve if the snake god is angry, but it seems useless that the princess should die on my account." The girl thought to herself, "I am only a girl and it doesn't matter if they do

[p. 67]

throw me in, but it is too bad to kill this handsome young man."

The god that ruled the lake thought it would be a pity that since they loved each other so much either should die, so when they were thrown into the water he carried them to the shore and neither of them was drowned. Then the god told the people it wasn't necessary to sacrifice any more, that he would see that there was plenty of water without it.

Nyema said to the princess, "You go to your father and tell him what the snake god says. I want to go see the lama and my brother for a little while. In a few days I will return and we will be married."

The princess went back to the palace, and Nyema to the cave. When he knocked on the door a faint voice answered, and when he opened the door the old lama said weakly, "I had two sons, but the king took one away from me to sacrifice to the snake god and now myself and my other son are about to die."

Nyema said, "This is your son returned." Then he washed and fed them and they were soon better and very happy to have him with them again.

When the princess returned to the palace every one was glad to see her and rejoiced. Her father asked her if Nyema was dead and she answered, "No, and it is because of his goodness that I live. The snake god doesn't want any more human

[p. 68]

sacrifices of the tiger year nor any other year, and the water will always come and will never be stopped."

The king and his head-men thought it miraculous that they had been saved and that the god of the lake had been so kind. The king then ordered Nyema to be brought before him. So they sent messengers and this time invited the three to come down the mountain, and when they arrived the king set them on high benches to give them honor.

Then he said to Nyema, "You are a worker of wonders, are you really a son of this old hermit? Nyema answered, "No, I am the son of King Genchog. My brother and I ran away from the kingdom and from my father's wife, who was not my real mother, to save our lives." So the king, knowing him to be the son of a king, was much pleased to give him his daughter in marriage. Not only his daughter did he give him, but his scepter as well, and let him rule in his stead, for he was growing old.

Then Nyema made a feast for all the people and gave them a happy time for a period of seven days. When he had mounted the throne one day he said to Dowd, "Little brother, you must go back home and see your father and mother, as it has been a long time since we left them." The new king gave his brother jewels and gold and silver, and then decided they would all go. They took yak loads of goods, many presents, all their servants and the two sons with the princess, started on their way. About half way over the

[p. 69]

big mountains they wrote a letter and sent it on ahead by a runner, telling their father they were coming. When the father heard his two sons were still alive he was very happy and sent out people to meet them. When he had welcomed them and found his older son had a kingdom, he turned his crown over to the younger son, which was just what the mother wanted. After a visit the older son took his princess and went back to his king-dom, where the two ruled long and well and lived happily ever afterwards.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 70]

  

FOURTEEN

  

The Story of the Two Devils

The golden eagle flying high you are not able to bind, and great water running swiftly you are not able to dam. 
                               Tibetan Proverb.

A LONG time ago in a country so high that it would make most boys and girls tired if they tried to run and play, was a great flat table-land entirely surrounded by a forest. On this table-land was located one large city and several smaller ones, all ruled over by a king who had seven sons. The sons went out in the forest to play one day and found a beautiful girl, who was herding a yak. She told them she was the daughter of the King of the west, that their yak had wandered away and she had come to hunt it. The seven sons thought that she was very pretty to look at, so they proposed to her that she become the wife of the seven, which was the custom of the country. Now, in reality, the girl was a she-devil and the yak was her husband. They could change their form whenever they chose. She didn't tell the men that the yak was her husband, but drove it away and consented to become the wife of the brothers and went home with them.

Every year one of the sons died, beginning with the eldest, until all were dead except the youngest,

[p. 71]

and he became very ill and was about to die. The head-men of the villages got together and wondered and wondered what could be done, shaking their heads and muttering that this was a very queer affair, that these six sons, whom they had cared for and to whom they had given all the medicine they knew of, had all died. They thought the matter over and decided to send for a man who they knew could tell fortunes, and see if he could discover what was the matter. Four men were chosen to go and see him. They traveled until they found him, told him all about the death of the six brothers, and asked him to cast lots and see what was the matter. He told them that he would lie down and sleep and receive a vision on the affair and to-morrow would relate it. Actually he didn't know what in the world to do nor what to say, for he was not a really-truly fortune teller at all, but only a quack. That night he went to ask his wife what to do, and she said, "You've told a lot of lies about things before this, so it won't hurt you to lie some more. You came out fairly well the other times, so I think that you can fix up a plan for this affair."

The next morning when the four men came, he said, "My vision was fine, I will get out my black clothes and black hat and read prayers for you. We will all go back together and these charms that I read will make everything all right in the palace."

So he took a big rosary in one hand and the skull of a hog in the other and traveled along with

[p. 72]

them. When they arrived the woman didn't know exactly what to think, and wondered if this fellow really did know her and her husband and what they had done. The fortune teller made a tsamba torma and placed it at the head of the sick man, along with the hog's skull, and covered them both with a cloth. When the she-devil left the room the sick man got a little better and went to sleep. This scared the fortune teller so badly he didn't know what to do. He thought the man was dying. Really the man's soul had been about half eaten up before the woman left, and when she went away it grew stronger. The fortune teller was badly scared and called out two or three times for help and began to think he had better step out and take his things and run off, but the door was locked and he couldn't get it open. He wondered if he could hide some place until he had a chance to slip away, so he sneaked upstairs to the top of the roof and fell through the opening in the dark, astride the yak's horns, and the yak went bucking and tearing away with him on its head.

The she-devil was down there too, because she was afraid. The yak called out, "This man knows us all right, for he lit right on top of my head and knows I am the he-devil, for his charm is in his hand and he is beating me to death with it. What shall I do?"

His wife replied, "He knows me and I dare not come over and help you; and just as sure as can be in the morning he will call all the people together,

[p. 73]

and they will be planning some scheme to get rid of us."

They thought in their hearts that perhaps he would call all the women to carry wood and burn them in the fire, or kill them in some other dreadful way.

"Truly," she said, "to try and find out if we are real they will hit us with rocks to see if it will hurt, and cut us open to see what is inside of us and put us in the fire to see if it will burn us."

The man in the meantime had rolled off the yak and heard all this, so he knew now what to do. Slipping back upstairs he set up his tsamba torma and hog's skull and began to read prayers again.

The King's son was awake by this time and the fortune teller asked him if he wasn't better and he said "Yes."

"Well then," the man said, "in the morning you must call your head-men together, have them tell all the people to bring their guns and swords and some of the women to bring wood."

The next morning they were all there with the wood piled around the center as if for an offering to an idol, as the fortune teller had commanded them. He asked that his saddle be put on the yak. He donned his black clothes and rode the yak all over the city until he came to the pile of wood. He now grabbed his hog's head and hit the yak three times saying, "I want to see the real body of this yak," and the yak turned at once into a he-devil

[p. 74]

with a hideous face, two of his upper teeth hanging down to his breast and two lower ones extending up to his forehead. The men standing around killed him with their swords and guns. Then the fortune teller called for the woman to come. She came screaming, and he struck her with the hog's skull and she turned into a terrible thing, with a most ugly face, clawlike hands, a great long tongue and teeth like her husband's. The people killed her with rocks and knives and burned them both in the fire; then hastened to do great honor to the fortune teller, who had gone back to the sick man.

The King's son got well right away and was so pleased he said to the fortune teller, "Whatever you wish, ask, and I will give you."

"Well," said the fortune teller, "I would like some of those wooden rings that are used to lead the yak around by their noses." (The reason he wanted them was because his wife always said he couldn't make them properly.) So the son gave him one hundred rings and enough goods to make seven yak loads and he returned to his home.

His wife saw him coming, took some wine and went to meet him. That night she asked him all about his adventures and he told her about the death of the two devils and the recovery of the King's son.

"And is this all you have, some dried cheese and meat and a few rings for the yak?" she said, and scolded him soundly. "To-morrow I will go and see the King's son." But she wrote a letter

[p. 75]

instead which said, "You have given my husband this little bit of stuff and the nose rings which can have but one meaning, which is, that perhaps your disease may return."

When the King's son received the letter he said, "That is all true. I gave him all he asked for, but perhaps I should have given him more." So the next day he went to visit the fortune teller and said to him, "You have saved my life and done so much for me, now I will make you ruler of half my kingdom." So he made him as powerful as himself.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 76]

  

FIFTEEN

  

The Wise Woman

Either going up or down a ladder it is an evil thing if you are pushed.
                                Tibetan Proverb.

A LONG, long time ago there were two countries adjoining each other and one was a little smaller than the other. The king of the farther and bigger country was named Gezongongdu, and the king of the smaller country was named Drashi. The king of the larger country thought he would like to make the smaller country subject to himself. "But first," he said, "I want to see if their king is very wily and wise. If he isn't I can conquer him; but if he is, I shall not attempt it."

He took a mare and a colt that were exactly alike in color and size and asked the king to decide which was mare and which was colt. The head-men came first and looked and looked and couldn't tell at all. One of them went home and told his wife and she said, "That's easy, I'll tell you how to do it. You make a manger and put some grass in it for them. The mother will keep pushing the food over toward the colt." Sure enough it happened as she said it would, so they were able to answer the king's first riddle.

[p. 77]

The next day the king sent a stick shaped the same at both ends and asked them to tell which was the top and which the root. The men all came and looked and looked again, but couldn't tell. The same head-man told his wife and she said, "That's easy, throw it into the water and the head will go down stream first and the root will come last." They did so and the problem was solved for the king that day.

Then the king of the larger country sent over two snakes, male and female, and none of the wise men could tell them apart. The head-man again went to his wife and she said, "That's easy, take a piece of silk and place it near them, the female will think it is nice and soft and she will lie down on it, curl up and go to sleep; but the male will run away and refuse to sleep." They did that and it all came true just as she said.

So the king of the big country decided he didn't want to fight the king of the small country, for he was too smart. But the little king knew he had been saved from war and called up his head-man and asked him how he had got all these things right when everybody else had failed. He answered that he didn't know anything about these things, it was his wife. So the king called the head-man's wife and gave her many gifts and made her husband chief head-man of his kingdom.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 78]

  

SIXTEEN

  

The Three Friends

The man who agrees with every one and has no opinion of his own is like a horse who with a bridle is driven in every direction.
                        Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE, a long, long time ago, in a little mud village tucked in between the mountains, there lived three friends. Two of them were very rich, but one was poor. Nearly every week they went out to have a jolly time and always took food along with them and spent the day playing in the woods and talking together. The two that were rich always carried the lunch, but the poor one never brought anything at all. He was the biggest eater of the lot and would finish about everything left over from what the others had brought with them. So the two began to think of a scheme that just once they might get ahead of him.

One day, fixing up their lunch bags, they slipped away from him and followed the river around the mountain until they came to a nice shady place well hidden among the trees, and there decided to have their dinner and a good time without the other man. He hunted and hunted, but couldn't find them, and said, "They didn't tell me the truth to-day as to where they were going and I can't

[p. 79]

find them, but I expect they have gone down the river." So he said to his sister, "You get me a box quick, bring it here and put me in it and shove it out into the stream, and I'll float down the river and come to the place where they are hiding. They'll see the big box and think they have found something worth while, and will pull me out."

Sure enough, in about an hour, the rich men saw the big box come floating down and were very much excited. They got a rope, threw it over the box and drew it to the bank.

"I expect we have found something great," one of them said, and could hardly wait until, with stones and knives, they had the board off the top; but when they found the man they were running away from they were as angry as could be.

The poor man said, "What in the world did you pull me out for? Heretofore I have always eaten your food and had nothing to bring, until I was so ashamed I decided to drown myself and got in this box to do it. Now it's just my luck that you pulled me out. You have saved my life, so bring your food and I will help you eat it up. It is your own fault, for you pulled me out of the water; so we will eat good and full." He proceeded to do so, and as everything was finished, he remarked, "Well, when you have anything good to eat another time, just tell me about it and I won't trouble you to pull me out of the water again."

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 80]

  

SEVENTEEN

  

The Rabbit and Bumblebee Bet

An empty-handed official has no chance, neither will a wet vine cause the tea to boil.
                                                  Tibetan Proverb.

ONE day a rabbit was sitting by the side of the road under a bunch of nice grass, and near him sat a bumblebee on a big yellow flower. As they sat talking together they made a bet; the rabbit saying, "I can swell up bigger than you can," the bumblebee replying, "You can not." So they decided to try. The rabbit swelled and swelled, and some one passing said, "Look at that rabbit, he looks as big as a wolf." Then the bumblebee puffed and puffed until some one passing said, "Look at that bumblebee, he looks as big as a yak;" so he won the bet.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 81]

  

EIGHTEEN

  

How the Rabbit Killed the Lion

To your foe do not give a promise, for he carries a sword.
                                         Tibetan Proverb.

A LONG, long time ago, before the mountains were melted, and the trees were burned, and the animals all died, the sun was so hot that the mountains all ran down level with the plains. Then the king of beasts on the earth was the lion, and every morning all the animals had to come and kotow to him. One day there was a rabbit in a nice soft bed of grass, feeling so comfortable that he didn't want to go and kotow to the king. He didn't see any use of it, didn't know exactly where the lion was, and he was having too good a time anyway. All of a sudden the king stood before him looking like a thunder cloud. He spoke and said, "You little split-nosed rascal, here you are having a nice time eating grass, and have not come to kotow to me. All the other animals have made obeisance this morning. You do not value your life at all, do you?"

The rabbit thought, "If I don't tell this lion a lot of big lies, he will surely kill me, so I must tell them to save myself." Very politely, he said, "This morning when I got up to go to make my

[p. 82]

obeisance to you, I came to a stream of water, and in it was a big she-devil and I was afraid, and ran up here a few minutes ago to hide in this grass."

The lion asked, "Did that devil harm you?"

"No," answered the rabbit, "she didn't hurt me, she only yelled as I went by and my heart seemed as if it would break into two pieces, and that was enough for me. She asked, 'You little short-footed fellow, where are you going so fast?' I answered, 'I'm going to make my obeisance to the king of beasts.' Then she said, 'Well, we are going to see about that, son, and find out who is greater, he or I. I've hunted every place for this lion and can't find him, so when you go to kotow to him, you tell him for me, that I want him to come here where I am in this water, and we will see who is to be the ruler of the beasts.' So if you have anything to say to her I'll go take the message, as it would not do for you to go down there."

The lion answered, "I haven't anything to tell you, but I have something to say to that devil, and I'll go down and say it myself. There isn't anything on earth or any devil that can be bigger or think themselves bigger than I am, or more able to rule the beasts, for I'm the biggest there is. If she whips me, I'll be the same as a dog and let her rule."

The rabbit thought, "I'm in for it now, I'll lead him down and let him see for himself." He led him to the stream, and when the lion saw his reflection

[p. 83]

 

Click to enlarge
THE KING OF THE BEASTS AT THIS TIME WAS A LION AND EVERY MORNING ALL THE ANIMALS HAD TO COME AND KOTOW TO HIM.

 

[p. 84] [p. 85]

his hair all bristled up and his tail lashed from side to side. The rabbit, dancing up and down, yelled, "There she is, there she is." Whereupon the lion flew into a great rage, jumped into the water to fight and drowned himself.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 86]

  

NINETEEN

  

How the King Lost His Great Jewel

During the dark of the moon the robber can steal the yak's calf.
                                    Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time there was a king who had a great diamond which he admired very much; he liked to let the sun shine on it and see it sparkle. But he had some servants who were very dishonest and who decided to rob him of the jewel. So that there would be no suspicion attached to them, the servants decided that they would make the jewel disappear while the king was looking at it. It was the king's custom to have it taken out in the light so that he might see all the colors of the rainbow in it. This day he took the jewel out and placed it quite a distance away, and as he looked at it, it shone and shone, but the sparks seemed to get less and less and it finally disappeared before his eyes. He and his servants went to look for it but they could find nothing, because they had used a piece of ice to deceive him. The king lost his great jewel; it had vanished before his eyes, and the blame could be placed upon no one.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 87]

  

TWENTY

  

The Story of the Three Hunters

Be the work good or bad, we cannot tell what may be said of it, nor how far its result may spread.
                                     Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time, when the world was young and men loved and hated as they do now, in a mountain village there lived three brothers and they were hunters. Each of the brothers had married a wife, and they had one sister who lived with them all. One day they went out to hunt and brought in a deer. When they had all the meat they wanted to eat they gave a leg bone to the sister, who cracked it, took out the marrow and toasted it, so that it looked very good. As she sat eating this delicacy, the wives of the two elder brothers became very angry, just why it would be difficult to say. They were so angry that they decided they would plan some way to kill the sister. They said, "The brothers think so much of her that they won't consider us at all, so we must get her out of the way."

Again the brothers all went out for a hunt, and the women decided now was the time. The wife of the younger brother would have nothing to do with it and told them it was the wrong thing to do, because the sister had had only her share

[p. 88]

of the meat. But the wives of the two older brothers decided to kill her anyway. When the brothers were coming home they stopped on the way to rest and a little bird in a tree kept singing and singing the same tune over and over. Finally one of them said, "That bird seems to want to say something to us, I'm going to see if it does, for it sounds like my sister." He went up to the tree where the little bird sat and said, "If you are my sister, hop up on my hand." The little bird hopped on his hand and they all began to cry, because they knew their sister was dead. They went on home and found the three wives, but the sister was gone. They said nothing about her being away, but later they found the younger wife crying and she wouldn't tell why. They told her they knew why, as they had seen the sister, and her soul had gone into a bird. So the young wife told them the story, and they were so angry that they killed the two big wives and had the third in partnership.

[p. 89]

 

Click to enlarge
HE WENT UP TO THE TREE WHERE THE LITTLE BIRD SAT AND SAID, ''IF YOU ARE MY SISTER, HOP ON MY HAND.'' WHEN THE LITTLE BIRD HOPPED ONTO HIS HAND, THEY BEGAN TO CRY, AS THEY KNEW THEIR SISTER WAS DEAD.

 

[p. 90]

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 91]

  

TWENTY-ONE

  

The Hunter and the Unicorn

An old Lama without religion and a heart without happiness hurt very much.
                                              Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE, long ago when men's hearts were evil and they forgot to be grateful for kindness, a hunter was walking along the road and fell over a cliff, almost killing himself. As he was wondering how he could get to the road again, a unicorn came along, stopped and looked over at him. The man began to beg and plead, saying, "You are such a nice unicorn. I have never harmed any animal, except when I was hunting and hungry, and I never would hurt you." He begged and coaxed until the unicorn came down and helped him up on the road again. When he was safely out he said, "Now I know the road out of here, so I have no more use for you." He grabbed his gun and shot the unicorn dead. Sure enough, it was a bad road and he wandered around and around, but could find no end, no way out, and wished he had asked the unicorn the right road before he had killed him. Finally growing tired and weak and hungry, and no one coming to help him, he fell down the cliff again and died.

Moral: Don't be sure you know more than you do.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 92]

  

TWENTY-TWO

  

The Decision of the Official as to Who Owned the One Hundred Ounces of Silver

When the official is avaricious there is much talk--when a poor man eats meat and wine it is the same.
                                              Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time, in a tiny hut on the side of a mountain, there lived an old wood-cutter who was blind, but who had a dutiful son who cared for him very well. The son went upon the mountain one day to bring in his load of wood, and as he was carrying it on his back down the steep path, he found a little leather bag, in which were ten pieces of ten-ounce silver chunks. This was a great fortune and meant ease for himself and his father all the rest of their lives. He hurried home, and when his father asked him how he had fared that day he answered, "Fine. I've just found a bag of silver, and we won't tell anybody about it at all." But the father said, "No, we must be honest. Bring it here and let me see it, and then take it up to the head-man of the village and tell him all about it." The old man took it out of the sack, felt it all over and put it back again, and then bade his son take it to the official.

One day a man came walking in and said he had lost his bag of silver. The official thought

[p. 93]

he could find it for him and sent for the young fellow to bring him the bag, but when the man found he was going to get his money back so easily he said to himself he would claim a little more. He told the official he had twenty pieces in the bag and the boy had stolen ten of them. The head-man quietly said to one of his servants, "You go down and hear the blind man's story of the affair and come back and tell me what he says."

Then, when the servant returned he said the old man's story was the same as the boy had told. The man who had claimed the silver stood waiting, expecting to have the ten pieces and ten more added to it as well. The official said, "This silver belongs to the boy, this is not yours. Yours had twenty pieces and this has only ten. You will have to look elsewhere for yours and I will let the boy keep this to help him in the support of his old father."

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 94]

  

TWENTY-THREE

  

Story of the Prince's Friend

A man without jewels in the mountain has no need to fear the robbers.
                                  Tibetan Proverb.

AWAY, away up in the mountains was a village, and in the village lived a very wise king and his only son. Near by flowed a river; up above was a big pond from which came the water that irrigated their fields, and above the pond, in a crevice from which flowed the water, lived two big frogs, who belonged to the lower regions. To these frogs, every year, some person had to be sacrificed or the supply of water was cut off by them as they sat in the crevice, through which the supply came. Each family in turn had paid its tax of a child, until now it was the turn of the king to furnish the yearly sacrifice. So the old king began to think and wonder which had better go--he or his son--each one thinking he should be the one. The father said, "I'm an old man, and if I go and get eaten up it doesn't matter, for I wouldn't live much longer anyway. So, my son, when I'm gone you must be a good ruler and govern the people wisely."

The prince said to his father, "This will never

[p. 95]

do; you are a good king to these people and you can get another wife and have more sons, so don't say any more about it, for I'm going."

One morning he started for the place. All the people went with him a little way and felt very bad to see him leave them and his father. After a while all of them returned home except one friend of his childhood, who still went on with him, crying and grieving. The prince now turned to him and said, "You must go back and be a good son to your father and care for him when he is old." But his friend replied, "When I was a child and poor you cared for me, fed me and clothed me, now you must not go and let those frogs eat you up. I'll go in your place."

The prince would hear of no such plan, however, and as his friend refused to return, they both went on together and arrived at the mouth of the gorge where they saw one green frog and one yellow frog sitting together talking. The yellow one said to the green one, "Here comes the prince and his friend, and if they are wise they would take a clod and kill us, then they would have all the water they needed, and whenever they wished they could vomit gold and jewels. But they don't understand frog talk, so they don't know what we are saying." But the king's son did understand, for in those days all kings and their sons understood what the animals said. So he told his friend and they each got a club, killed and ate the frogs, and plenty of water came through the crevices.

[p. 96]

"Well," the friend said, "now these frogs are eaten and out of the way, let's go home."

But the prince said, "No, it would be better if we go to a far country, as the people think we are eaten by those frogs, and if we return now, they will think we are ghosts and fear us exceedingly."

So they crossed the mountain and went down on the other side, where they came to a wine shop kept by a woman and her daughter, and went in.

"Bring out your wine," they said, "we wish to buy some. How much do you ask for it?" When brought they vomited a few jewels which they gave as pay for it.

The two women, when they saw how they got their money for the wine, said, "Drink some more, drink some more," thinking that if they got them real drunk they would throw up a lot of gold. They were soon very sick sure enough and threw up gold and jewels all over the room, and the woman and the girl got more than enough to make them wealthy.

When they began to sober up, they feared they had thrown up a lot of jewels, but were a bit ashamed to ask about it, as they weren't sure what they had done.

So they went on, coming to a big plain where a lot of children were playing. They were quarreling over something, each claiming it to be his. The travelers asked what they were quarreling about and the children replied, "We found a hat and whoever puts it on can't be seen, for he turns into a ghost, and we all want it."

[p. 97]

The prince's friend said, "You needn't quarrel over that; you children all go down there and race up here to me; the one who gets to me first may have the hat. I will hold it."

Soon they came racing back, but the man put the hat on his head and when they arrived they could not find him or the hat, though they searched everywhere and finally had to go home without it. When they were gone the man removed the hat and put it in his bosom. He and the prince then went on and came to a place where a lot of monkeys were quarreling, and when they asked what they were fussing about, they answered: "We found a pair of boots, and whoever puts them on has only to wish where he wants to go and he will be there at once, so we all want them."

The prince's friend said, "Well, don't quarrel; give them to me and you all go and run a race, and the one who wins can have them. In the meantime, I'll hold the boots."

As soon as they were gone he jerked the hat out of his gown, put it on his head, and when they got back he wasn't to be seen. They hunted every place, but could not find him, and finally went away without their boots.

Then the prince and his friend put on a boot each, and the prince wished to find a place where the king was dead, where they wanted a new ruler; and they both went to sleep. Next morning they awakened to find themselves in the midst of a great hollow tree, and around it was a crowd of men who that day were to choose a new king.

[p. 98]

While they stood there they prayed that the god of the sky would throw down a tsamba torma from the clouds and hit whoever was to be the king. So down it came, but instead of hitting any of them it hit the big tree. "This won't do at all," they said, "we haven't any such custom as having a tree for a king." But an old man was there who said, "Let's see if some one isn't in the tree." They looked and found the prince and his friend inside. But the people were not at all pleased.

"This will not do at all," they said, "we don't know these men, we don't know their fathers and mothers and they are probably bad men. We won't have them now, but to-morrow we will have another test and whoever can vomit the most valuable things, he shall be king."

The next day one drank a lot of milk and threw up white every place he went, another ate some-thing green and threw up green, and others different things. The prince vomited gold and said, "You see, I am to be king." The friend of the prince vomited jewels, and said, "You see, I am to be the prime minister." So they were made king and prime minister of the country.

The prince found a beautiful girl, whom he took to be his queen. Now the prince had two houses, one very high on the mountains and another in the city, and every day the queen went up to this high house for a little while, but he did not know she went there. However, his friend did, and wondered and wondered why she went up to that house every day. "Somebody or something

[p. 99]

must be in there that she wants to see," he thought. So he put on his magic hat and went along behind her when she started for the mountain. She went in through an open door, up a flight of stairs, through another door, and up another flight, and so on for five stories, until she reached the top of the house, which was beautifully fixed with rugs and hangings. She took off her everyday clothes and bathed and perfumed and gowned herself in silks and satins and lit incense. The prince's friend was sitting by, in-visible of course! After two or three hours a beautiful bird flew down from heaven. The queen lighted a piece of incense and went before the bird with it, as it had perched itself on a rock near her on the top of the house. It really was the son of a god, disguised as a bird, with only feathers or bird's clothing on the outside. She fixed food for him, and he stepped out of his bird gown, and as he held her hands he said to her, "Your husband was chosen by the gods to be the king; is he a good or a bad ruler?"

The queen answered, "I'm very young, and whether he is good or bad I'm unable to say."

Then they said good-by and she asked him to come again to-morrow morning. So he flew away in his bird gown and she donned her everyday clothes and went back to the palace.

Next morning it was the same thing, the minister of the king accompanying her, invisible again.

The god said to her, "I'm coming to-morrow in

[p. 100]

the king's palace as a bird and see for myself whether the king is good and wise and whether or not he is handsome."

Next day, before the queen came, the prime minister told the king all about his lady, that she went to this high house on the mountain every day to meet the son of a god, and that he had put on his invisible hat and gone along and had seen them, while they could not see him, and he knew all about it.

"So to-morrow," he said, "you make a big fire of charcoal on a 'hopan' and take a sword and kill him."

They were all sitting around a big fire next morning, the king, the prime minister and the court, when the bird came hopping up the stairs into the midst of them. The minister had on his hat and couldn't be seen; he grabbed the bird by the tail, threw some fire on him and the king took his big sword to kill him, when the queen caught his arm and would not allow him to do it. The fire burned the bird on the back and wings a bit and he flew very quietly into heaven again. The next day the queen went again to the high castle, and dressed once more in her beautiful clothes, and again the minister went. She waited a long time and felt dreadfully sad about the whole affair, but that day the bird did not come. One day after this he came flying down very slowly, for he was covered with burns and felt very ill. The queen took his hand and cried over him.

"You need not cry," he said, "the king is a very

[p. 101]

good and handsome man, but it is very queer he should throw fire all over me. I am very sick these days with all these burns and can not fly very well, and will only come once a month to see you, not every day." And he flew slowly away.

The queen went back to her king and began to love him better, because the son of the god came only once a month to see her.

The prime minister one day put on his magic hat and his boots and wished himself back where he had drunk wine in the inn with the woman and her daughter. On the way he passed the door of a small lamasery and slipped up and looked in, where he saw two old men, caretakers of the place, drawing a donkey on a piece of paper; as they turned the paper over one of the men turned into a donkey, got up and rolled over and ran all over the lamasery, braying in a dreadful manner. It seemed that the drawing turned one way, changed the man into a donkey, and turned over, changed him back into a man. When the old man was tired of his queer piece of paper and the tricks it did, he rolled it up and put it behind the big idol. The prince's friend, who had his magic hat on so that the old priest could not see him, slipped in and stole the paper, then went on to the wine shop and said, "I want to pay you for the wine you gave us; here is five tenths of an ounce of silver, and I will give you a paper, which, if you turn it over, it will bring you plenty of gold." They said they would be very glad to have it if they could get hold of wealth that easily. So he gave them the

[p. 102]

paper, and as soon as they turned it over, they both turned into donkeys. Then he led them to the king who used them to carry wood and dirt to fix his houses, and they were half starved and were very bad off indeed. After working and carrying for three years they were very ill and their backs were terribly sore.

One day the king saw them with the tears rolling down their faces, and he asked, "What is the matter with these donkeys; why are they crying? Turn them out and don't make them work so hard;" but the minister had the paper and turned them back by turning the paper over and they returned to their homes. Then he told the king he had punished them for the way they had been treated so long ago.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 103]

  

TWENTY-FOUR

  

How the Raven Saved the Hunter [*1]

For a foolish official to speak skillful words is as difficult as for lightning to split a lump of bronze.
                                                 Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time there was a very poor man with nothing much to eat and very little to wear, who made his living by hunting. One day he went out to hunt and traveled and traveled up hill and down. At last he came to the top of a mountain, hungry, tired and thirsty, as he had had nothing to eat all day. He stood still a few minutes thinking and wondering what he would do. Looking around he saw a valley far below with a cold stream of water flowing through it. Starting down, he made him a cup of a leaf as he went, came to the stream, dipped his leaf full and started to drink it. Just as he was ready to swallow it a big raven flew by and with his wing struck the cup from his hands. The hunter thought it was an accident, so dipped another drink, when the old raven knocked it from his hand again.

Then he began to be angry at the bird, when he dipped the third time and the raven knocked this out of his hand. He said angrily, "All right, I'll

[p. 104]

fix you," drew his bow and shot the raven dead. When the bird was dead the man began to wonder why he didn't want him to drink the water. "Perhaps I had better not drink now, but I'll go to the head of the stream and see where the water comes from." He went a short distance and found that the stream issued from the mouth of a great snake, and looking along the banks he saw many skeletons of birds and animals that had been drinking the water. Then he grieved greatly because he had killed the raven that had tried to save his life.

Footnotes

^103:1 Perhaps a variation of the same story told of Genghis Khan.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 105]

  

TWENTY-FIVE

  

The Two Thieves. (A Black Tent Story)

In the presence of a kind man you are uncomfortable, in the presence of bad food there is an odor.
                                     Tibetan Proverb.

THERE was once upon a time two thieves, one named Lozong, the other Adra. They went out one day and slipping down the mountain stole one of a herd of cattle that belonged to a rich man. They drove this cow into a ravine and killed it where nobody could see them. They were afraid to leave the beef and go and wash the stomach and intestines, as each was afraid the other would run away with it. Adra wanted to stay with the big beef, so finally after much persuasion Lozong took the intestines down to wash them. And both were afraid the rich man would discover what they had done. As Lozong washed and washed and cleaned the intestines he wondered how he could cheat Adra out of his part of the beef. Adra sat and schemed how he could cheat Lozong out of his part. But Lozong had the best plan. He took the stomach and blew it up as big and tight as he could, got him a club and began to beat it as if it were a big drum, all the time yelling. When Adra heard him he was very much frightened and said, "A ka ka, they have caught

[p. 106]

him now, and are giving him a good beating; they would have gotten me if I had gone down there to wash those things, so I will run away as fast as I can and they will think that he was the only man that did the stealing." So he ran away as fast as he could, and when Lozong got back he kept all the beef himself and laughed to think how easily he had won it from the other thief.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 107]

  

TWENTY-SIX

  

The Golden Squash. (A Black Tent Story)

The shepherd will protect his flock of sheep and without power can save a hundred lives.
                                               Tibetan Proverb.

ONE time in a corner of the world, high up among the mountains, there lived two old men who were very good friends. Each had a small garden patch. One was a good old man, naturally; that is, he didn't have to try very hard to be good, for his heart was pure, he loved all animals and birds and was very happy in his little garden. But the other old man wanted very much to be wealthy. One day the first old man found in his garden a little, crippled bird. He took it and cared for it, felt sorry for it, healed it and fed it every day. Then he was able to fly away, and the old man let him go. He soon returned bearing a seed in his mouth which he gave to the old man, saying, "You plant this seed--it's a very fine squash seed, the very finest in the world, and be sure you tend it well."

So the old man planted it and watered it, and at last there grew on the vine just one squash, but it was monstrous big. When cold weather came and it was fully ripe the old man tried to

[p. 108]

pull it and take it into the house, but he couldn't carry it and had to call five men to help him get it in. By and by he wanted to eat some and peeled off the outer skin, which was very thin like paper, and when he cleaned it, he found it to be solid gold. Now, he was very rich, but he made good use of his money and gave to the poor and aided all who were needy. His old neighbor came over one day and asked him where he got the seed for that squash, and he told him the story of the little bird. The old man went home, very envious, and thought he would think up a plan so that he would be rich too.

He got his bow and arrow and slipped out into the garden and waited until he saw a little bird light on a tree. Then he deliberately shot, breaking its leg. Picking it up carefully, he pre-tended to be grieved over its hurt and tended the little thing until it was finally well and able to fly away. One day sure enough the bird flew back bringing a seed which he told the man how to plant and care for because it was very wonderful indeed. It sprouted and grew and grew until finally when winter came he had to have five or six men help him carry his squash into the house. He was much delighted, for he thought, "Now I shall be rich, too." He could hardly wait until he could get his knife and cut the skin, but he had no more than broken it when it popped wide open and out jumped a fierce old man, who said he was sent by the king of the lower regions to weigh him. He grabbed him by the back of

[p. 109]

 

Click to enlarge
THE BIRD RETURNED BEARING A SEED IN HIS MOUTH, WHICH HE GAVE TO THE OLD MAN.

 

[p. 110] [p. 111]

the neck and set him on the scale which he carried and said, "You are far too light and no use at all," and at once took him out and cut off his head.

So much for the sin of covetousness.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 112]

  

TWENTY-SEVEN

  

The Story of the Bald-Headed Man

Eating much of sweetness you do not know if it be sweet any more. But the evil in a man shows and you know it very well.
                                              Tibetan Proverb.

ONE time, when the world was young and men and women were ill because an evil spirit possessed them, there lived a man and his wife who were very poor. A devil came and took possession of each of them and made them both sick. As they were not rich they couldn't invite a holy lama to read prayers for them, so invited a lay-brother in his stead. After a while this man who was reading began to get very hungry. It was the custom to give the priests the best of food, but this man and his wife had no butter nor meat nor fine things to eat. They had no horses, nor yak and only one goat. So the reader began to think to himself that if they would kill this goat he'd have plenty to eat, as it was really pretty fat. The man who owned the house was bald-headed and now he came up and sat on the roof near where the man was reading. He really sat down in front of him and heard the man mumbling his prayers, "Om mani padme hum, Om mani padme hum;" he was reading, and read right on in the

[p. 113]

same tone, "The god says if a man is bald-headed and will take the skin of a goat and put it on his head he will have hair." The old man sat and heard him read this over several times and finally decided it was there in the book of prayers; so he killed the goat. They all had some good eating for a while and the old man put the skin on his head, wore it and wore it for days and days and kept feeling his head, but not a single hair would come. He finally concluded that the man had lied to him out of the book, and besides, he thought, "If I wear this too long, I fear all the skin will be worn off my head and there will be nothing but bone." So he asked the man about it, whether he hadn't lied to him, and he said, "Oh, no, but if a man would have what the gods say come true, he must pray a great deal himself." Thus he got around his lies and had goat to eat as well.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 114]

  

TWENTY-EIGHT

  

The Man with Five Friends with Different Colored Eyes

  

(A Black Tent Story)

A man who can succeed is always sent--if there is nothing to be done, it doesn't matter who goes.
                                  Tibetan Proverb.

ONE time there was a man who had a son.

The man was not wealthy and hadn't much to leave his son, but he said there were just two things he wanted to tell him before he died; if he heeded them he would be happy, if he didn't he would be very miserable. The two things were these: first, when you are married never trust your wife with your secrets until you have ten children; second: choose your friends by their eyes. "Never choose for a friend a man with a light colored eye," he said, "see that the inner corner of the eye is red and that the white of the eye is pure white and not brownish or yellow, and that the colored part is black. Now, if you will observe these two things you will never get into trouble."

After his father's death he soon married, and as he was a very amiable man, made many friends. It happened that one of his friends had blue eyes, one yellow eyes, another brown eyes, another

[p. 115]

black, and only one came up to the father's stipulations. He heeded his father's warning about telling his wife his secrets until after his first son was born, then he was so pleased and so happy, he told her what his father had said, but re-marked, "I believe you will be trustworthy though, so I will tell you some of my secrets." But he was a bit doubtful still, and resolved to put her to the test.

One night, coming home late, he stopped at a man's place and bargained for a hog for twenty rupees, and the man was to tell nobody to whom he had sold the hog or where it had gone. He took the hog, killed it, drew off his trousers and put the hog in them, threw it over his back and carried it home. When he got there he called his wife in a loud whisper, saying, "Let me in, let me in quick."

"Why, what is the matter?" she asked.

"I've killed a man, let us put him in the pond."

So she helped him and they tied rocks to the trousers and sank it in the water. The man was all covered with blood, carrying the dead pig. He went in and washed himself, taking off his soiled clothes, saying to his wife, "You must never tell this to anybody, for it is as much as my life is worth if you do."

One day he and his wife had a quarrel.

"You treat me this way, will you," she said, "I'll show you what about yourself. You know that man you killed, well, I'll tell the official about it." And she did. He sent an officer to come and

[p. 116]

get the man and put him in chains until the time should come for his beheading.

The man sent word now to his five friends. All came and listened to his tale, and four of them said, "Well, you did this, you told your wife you did, and you will have to take the consequences, for we can't help you." Then the four left. His last friend came and after hearing his story said, "This is terrible. I don't know what I can do, but I will save you if I can."

So he went up to the official and told him that his friend had been a very good man and must have been greatly provoked to kill any one, so, if he would spare him, he would give him the man's weight in silver. The official finally consented, had the silver weighed and the man was released. The friend who had helped him was very happy and the man seemed happy too. He turned to the official and said, "May I tell you a good story, one of the best you ever heard?" His friends were all standing near and heard him relate what his father had told him before he died, how he resolved to test it, and how his wife at their first disagreement had told on him to the official, and how his friends had all deserted him but the one whose eyes were as his father said they should be.

The official said, "You are one of the wisest men I ever heard of," and sent men to take up the corpse of the pig, proving his tale to be true, and was so pleased with him that he gave him many presents and made him one of the chief men in all his realm.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 117]

  

TWENTY-NINE

  

The Story of the Violinist

When the robber arrives it is very difficult for the traveler to string his bow and carry tea and wine at the same time.
                                      Tibetan Proverb.

IN a great city, a long time ago, lived a family composed of the father, the mother and three sons. As they grew up and were ready to take up an occupation, the father called them to him and said, "I want you all to go out into the world, each to a different place, and learn a trade." All of them went, and after a year's time came back.

The father said to the oldest, "What have you become?" "Oh, I am a writer," and the father was well pleased, for now he would have some one to keep accounts and look after his business affairs.

To the second one he said, "And what have you learned?" He answered, "I am a carpenter;" and again the father was pleased, because he could build their homes and build the homes of other people, and so make much money.

Then turning to the youngest, "And what have you become?" he asked. "Oh, I have learned to play the violin," he answered. "Oh, very good

[p. 118]

indeed, you have learned a beggar's trade and can stay with me no longer, so you must leave."

So the third son went to a far country, even as far as the shores of the white men, where bounding their country was one black sea. Here he played his violin. In that place dwelt two snakes, a black one and a white one, and one day they began to fight. The black snake was about to kill the white one when the fiddler parted them. Days went by, when one evening an old white-haired woman came and said to the musician, "The king of the lower regions is greatly indebted to you, as you have saved his son, and if you will go to this lower kingdom the king will give you whatever you want and desire the most."

He said, "I don't know how to go to the lower regions, how do you get there, anyway?"

She told him it was not difficult at all. "But if you will shut your eyes, I will carry you, and you will be there in a little while. When you arrive you ask for whatever you desire most." She told him that the daughter of the king was very beautiful, and because she was so pretty she covered her face and body with the skin of a chicken so she could not be seen.

Then the old woman said, "Don't ask for very much, but tell the king if he will give you a hen you will be satisfied, for if you get the daughter of the king you get a very dear treasure, and obtaining her, you can get anything else you want."

Now the old woman picked him up, he closed his eyes, and soon they arrived at the lower kingdom.

[p. 119]

[paragraph continues] The king said, "You saved the life of my son, so I am very much indebted to you. Anything in the world you want, that I will give you." The violinist replied, "There is nothing I want very much, but there is a hen over there you might give me." The king answered, "That is all the daughter I have and I love her very much, but I can't say I won't give her to you, for that would be breaking my word. Daughter, you must go, follow this man up into the hills when a lucky day comes, and if there is anything I have that would be of use to you, I will give it to you to take when you go."

The daughter said, "Whatever my father says, that I will do. I would not dare disobey. I do not want to carry much away, but please give me three things. I want a golden pick, a gold chain as long as I can reach from one hand to the other, and a brass blessing cup (put on the head by the lamas in blessing one). Also, I would like a jar of fruit, a lot of feathers, a few of many kinds of hair; these things I will take."

Then these two, the musician and the daughter of the king, on the first lucky day ascended to the earth and went to a city where ruled a very wicked monarch.

Now the wife of the fiddler had great power within herself, and whatever she wanted came to her, so they did not have to do any work at all. One day the musician thought thus in his heart, "We two are very rich now and are second to the king himself in power, and perhaps if this

[p. 120]

wicked ruler discovers that we are so wealthy he would take all our belongings. I'm going to make a feast to the king, invite him to eat it and see if he so purposes in his heart."

He asked his wife if she thought it would do. "Well," she said, "if you invite the king and give him a feast, when he comes you must be sure to give him the things very quietly, the wine and the good things to eat, but do not be slow in the serving." So the king was invited, and all went well. As the fiddler was a man who liked to be flattered a bit and who wanted to be very polite to the king, he kept saying, "Stay a bit longer, stay a bit longer." His wife, because it was so hot, as they had had a charcoal fire for a long time cooking the feast, threw off her garment of feathers. It seemed as if the house got brighter when she had done this and the king, seeing how pretty she was, wanted her for his wife, and said to the fiddler, "We are going to trade wives," and took her away with him.

After a few days the king called his chamberlains and head-men from different parts of the province and said, "There is a man here who has given me the daughter of the king of the lower regions for my wife. Now heretofore you have not done much work and what you have done has been very poor. There is a mountain standing over on that side of the country and you are to level it even with the plain, making all the land equal in height."

[p. 121]

His servants all answered, "If you will demand another thing we will do it, but this we are not able to do. Suppose you call the former husband of this woman and tell him what is required." So he called the musician and said, "Can you do this?" He answered, "Yes," without thinking, "I can make this level for you." When his wife heard him say this, she waited for him near the stairs, and when he came she said to him, "You know the gold pick I brought with me that my father gave us. You take that and strike the mountain three times on three sides and it will disappear."

The king and his stolen wife went out to see it done, and lo, as he struck the third time the mountain sank and a pond stood in its place.

When the king saw his work he said, "Well, if you can do this you can do a bit more. Where this pond is, make a big lake. On the borders I want the finest of trees bearing luscious fruit, full of singing birds and many animals in among the trees."

The violinist did not know how in the world he could accomplish all this, but thought he would slip around and ask his former wife how to do it. She said, "Take that blessing cup and pour some water from it into the pond and it will become a lake. Take seeds from the fruit we brought and plant on the edge of the lake, and fruit-bearing trees will come. Take some of the feathers and throw them among the branches of the trees and

[p. 122]

birds will spring forth. Then throw the hair among the bushes on the ground and animals will be there."

He went to the king and said, "I have accomplished what you asked me." The king was much pleased, but now he said to him, "You and your wife have the power to show me hell, and would you please to do it." The violinist pondered the question and said, "Give me some time to think about it," but really he wanted to ask his wife what to do.

So when she got the chance she said to him, "You know that golden chain we brought from my father. Well, you take that and drag it up and down the mountain a few times and the door will open and the king can see hell. It looks like a mighty fine place but it is a very terrible place to go to. You do that, and when you have fixed it so that it can be seen, you tell him you want to give it to him as a gift. Make smaller chains of the golden chain you have to fasten the door and keep it open."

Then they took the king to see this fine place, and he and his servants passed through the iron door to see the beautiful temple. Then the fiddler jerked the chains loose and shut the door so that the king and all his people fell into hell. So the fiddler got his wife back again and they ruled the kingdom forever afterwards.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 123]

  

THIRTY

  

How the Sacred Duck Got His Yellow Breast

When life ends you may arise and have peace with Droma, but nevertheless it's a great calamity when the rock rolls down the mountain and takes your life.
                         Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time, on the top of a mountain which was quite flat and covered with grass and flowers, a frog and a rabbit were playing around, having a good time. In the midst of their fun, they found a beautiful golden pot. The frog exclaimed, "See what I have found. It's all mine! What a lot of money I shall have."

The rabbit said angrily, "It's mine, I saw it first."

And soon they were fighting fiercely. But all at once the rabbit stopped and remarked, "This won't do, let's go to the foot of the mountain and race back to the top, and the one that gets here first and gets in the pot shall have it, to-morrow to be the day of the race."

The rabbit was sure of success because he knew he could run and was certain the frog couldn't. The frog knew well enough he couldn't possibly win in that kind of race, so he thought of a

[p. 124]

scheme. He found two of his friends exactly like himself in every way. One, he took to the top of the mountain and put in the pot, the other he placed half way down the mountain, and located himself at the base. When the rabbit came next morning and they were ready to start on the race, the frog gave a few hops while the rabbit skipped on ahead. Much to his astonishment, when he got half way up the mountain, there was the frog hopping wildly along in front of him. He said to himself, "I must do better than this," and away he flew like the wind. But on reaching the summit there sat the frog in the pot. The rabbit had lost the race and also the gold.

Now, the frog didn't know how to get that big pot down the mountain, and while he was puzzling over it, a big duck, very dark in color, with mouse-colored breast, flew over him, stopped a minute, and asked his trouble. The frog told him what was the matter and asked if he could carry the pot to the bottom of the mountain. The duck said he could and would do so if he might have half. As there was nothing else to be done, the frog agreed and the duck carried it down for him, so there it was divided and the duck thought it was so beautiful that he took his half and smeared it on his breast, and that's where the sacred duck got his beautiful golden breast.

 

Note: On the tops of the mountains in Tibet and near the lakes are found these beautiful ducks.

[p. 125]

 

Click to enlarge
A BIG DUCK, VERY DARK IN COLOR, FLYING OVER, STOPPED A MINUTE AND ASKED OF THE FROG HIS TROUBLE.

 

[p. 126] [p. 127]

[paragraph continues] They are very tame and have no fear of people, as they are held to be sacred by the Tibetans, who believe them to be a reincarnation of some holy man because of the beautiful yellow color, which is their sacred color.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 128]

  

THIRTY-ONE

  

The Two Little Cats [*1]

An arrow aimed straight will find the heart of your foe. But if you have no foe it does not matter about the arrow.
                        Tibetan Proverb.

IN the early, early days a very long time ago, there were two little cats going after some salt to put in their butter tea, for you must know that little cats in the early days didn't drink tea without salt. As they trotted along they met a Handre, and a Handre is the worst thing you could meet anywhere, for he has great big teeth that he crunches up little folks with, and horrid big eyes and clawlike hands and feet, so they were very much frightened and ran on faster than ever until they met a cow and the cow said, "Where are you going so fast, little cats?" and they answered, "Oh, we just met a Handre and he is going to come to our house and eat us up." "Never mind," said the cow, "I'll go with you and help protect you from the Handre." So they all ran on together. Soon they met a dog and he asked, "Where are you all going?" and the little cats said, "We are running away from the Handre." "Never mind," said the

[p. 129]

dog, "I'll go with you and help protect you." They ran on and met a crow, and he said, "Stop a minute and tell me where you are going so fast." "Oh, we are running away home as fast as we can," said the little cats, "for the Handre is coming to eat us." Then they met a panful of ashes and it said, "Wait a minute and take me with you, for I can help too." Then they found a package of 100 needles, who asked if they might go and help against the Handre. Then a snake all curled up by the side of the road called out, "Where are you going, little cats?" "Oh, we are running home as fast as we can because the Handre is coming." And the snake said, "Take me along and I'll bite the Handre." As they trotted along they saw on a bench a little bowl of hard black peas. "Where are you going so fast, little cats?" asked the peas. "Oh, we are running home as fast as we can, for the Handre is coming." "Take me with you, little cats, and I'll help protect you from the Handre." So in front of their gowns they took the bowl of peas and all together soon came home. The cow they placed by the stair steps, the dog by the doorway, the peas on the stair steps, the crow in the water kang and the snake in the bread trough, the 100 needles in the bed and the pan of ashes on the ceiling and the little cats hid behind the door.

Soon the Handre came, I presume he flew in at the window, and he thought he would like to have a drink of water and when he went to get it the crow nipped him good and hard. Then he thought

[p. 130]

he would make some bread, and when he went to the bread tray the snake gave him a bite. Then he thought he would go upstairs and lie down on the bed and the needles stuck him dreadfully. He was getting madder and madder. He looked up to the ceiling to see if the little cats were hiding up there and the ashes spilled on him and filled his eyes full. Then he started to run down the stairs and he stepped on those hard peas and they hurt his feet dreadfully. Then he fell on the horns of the cow and she tossed him to the dog, who ate him up immediately, and the little cats came out from behind their door and had their supper in peace.

Footnotes

^128:1 Told to me by little Lora MacLeod, now age six, who had been out of Tibet for about eight months.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 131]

  

THIRTY-TWO

  

Story of a Juggler's Tricks

If you fight in the morning do not talk about it in the evening.
                                   Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time, in a great city, lived a king who ruled over many, many people. In this city dwelt a powerful juggler who could make them cry or laugh, at his will. The king sent for him one day and said, "I have heard you can do wonderful things, that there is nothing beyond your ability [though he doubted it], and I want you to change my heart."

"Oh," said the juggler, "I have done this to the people, but I don't dare do this to you."

The king said, "You need not fear, just so you do not make me poor for the rest of my life. I will give you a paper agreeing not to punish you if you so wish." So he gave the paper to the juggler, returned to his home and forgot he had given such a promise.

One day the king heard that in his big hay field on the side of the mountain were a lot of people with horses and cattle, that there were all classes of men cutting his grass, and he had not given them permission to do so.

He called one of his head-men and said, "There

[p. 132]

are a lot of people cutting my grass and I want you to go and see who it is and what they are doing it for, without my consent." The head-man went, and when he arrived at the field saw a golden throne, a silver throne, servants and men and so much grandeur that he was afraid to ask the ones in command what it all meant, so slipped around and asked a servant who these grand people were and what they were doing. The servant said that they were the king and his son of the lower regions, and the reason he was there now was because he was on his way up to heaven and had just stopped on the road. The head-man returned and reported to the king, who said, "Well, if this is the king of the lower regions I must go and take him some gifts." So he got his presents ready, went and presented them and asked, "If you are the king of the lower regions, why are you come to earth?" The king of the lower regions answered, "I am dwelling in the dark and live where the roots of the fig trees grow; the top is in the light where the gods par-take of the fruit, while I am the owner of the trees and tend to the roots and make the trees produce the fruit, but I never get any of it. So I am going up to ask the gods about it."

The king of men on earth said, "I am glad you have come, we used to be neighbors and exchange gifts; in fact, we are somewhat related. I have a very nice daughter and you have your son, let me have him as a husband for my daughter."

The king of the lower regions answered, "I

[p. 133]

have only three sons and this is the youngest, and I am much pleased with him and love him very much, but if you want him for your daughter, I will give him to you, as heretofore there has been a custom of this kind between kings such as we."

So he gave him his son and said, "I am going up to heaven now to see what the gods are going to do about all this fruit, and you watch the heavens and see whether we have any trouble or not."

The king of men took the son and returned to his palace, and in two or three days began to watch the skies. The heavens in a little while became as black as iron, dead men and hands and arms and legs and heads began to fall. He exclaimed, "Ah, I guess they are fighting sure enough."

One day a head that looked exactly like the king of the lower regions fell down, so he was quite sure that it was the king's head, and he thought he had better take it and burn it before his son-in-law found it, because he would be grieved. So he went off to burn it and his son-in-law saw the fire, and, calling one of the servants, who was a half-witted girl, asked what the big fire meant and all that smoke. She said, "Oh, you know your father's head fell down from heaven some time ago and they are burning it now."

When the son heard this, he gave a great cry and tried to rush to the fire, but they held him, though he finally broke away and ran and threw himself in the flames and perished.

[p. 134]

In a few days here came the king himself down from heaven, for it had not been his head at all that had fallen. He went to camp in the same place in the hay field, where the king of men went to see him again and asked how the fight had ended. He answered, "We fought a little while, but one of the older gods intervened and fixed it up between us. They have acknowledged my right to part of the fruit, as the roots of the trees are in my kingdom. Why did not you bring my son out with you to see me?"

And the king of men said, "Well, dead men and a lot of things fell down from the sky and a head just like yours fell on top of my palace, and we took it and burned it. When your son found it out he ran and jumped in the fire and killed himself."

When the king of the lower regions heard this his face grew black as thunder and he said fear-fully, "I am not dead, my body is here, and you are responsible for my son, and your life must pay for his life." The king of earth fell on his knees and began to beg for his life, saying, "I will give my kingdom, all my land and gold and all I have, if you do not ask me to pay my life for your son's life." So he yielded up all his goods until he had nothing left and kotowed over and over again.

"Well," said the king of the lower regions, "you need not kotow any more, just look up." When he looked, nothing was there but the old juggler sitting on a bench smiling at him.

The king was as angry as he could be when he

[p. 135]

saw him, knowing he had been the victim of a trick, but remembered he had given the juggler a letter promising not to punish him for anything he would do. He swallowed his anger as best he could, took his servants and went back into his palace.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

  

THIRTY-THREE

  

How the Wolf, the Fox and the Rabbit Committed a Crime

When an evil man gets mad at his enemy he beats his horse on the head.
                                Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time a wolf, a fox and a rabbit were walking along the road together when they met a wizard carrying a pack on his back. The rabbit said to the rest of them, "I'll go limping along in front of this fellow and he will put his load down and try to catch me, and you two slip around behind him, and when he puts his things down, you get them."

Sure enough, the man put his pack down, picked up some rocks and started after the rabbit in hot haste, while the wolf and the fox got his load and ran off with it. He came back pretty soon, when he found he couldn't catch the rabbit, and found his things were all gone. In great grief he started down the road, wondering what he would do and how he was going to live.

Meanwhile the wolf, the fox and the rabbit met in a chosen place and opened the pack to see what was in it. There were a pair of Tibetan boots with many layers in the soles, which made them very heavy, a cymbal with a tongue or clapper, an idol

[p. 137]

of tsamba and some bread. The rabbit acted as divider and said to the wolf, "You have to walk a lot, so you take the heavy boots." And the wolf took the boots. To the fox he said, "You have a lot of children, you take the bell for them to play with, and I'll take the food." The wolf put on the boots and started out to hunt a sheep. The boots were so heavy he fell on the ice and couldn't get up, and the shepherd found him and killed him. The fox took the bell and went in to his children ringing it, Da lang, da lang, da lang, and thought it would please them, but instead it scared them all to death. So the rabbit ate up the idol of tsamba and all the bread and got the best of that bargain.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 138]

  

THIRTY-FOUR

  

The Pewter Vase

If good words come--listen. If good food--eat.
                                 Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time there were two men who were friends. They went out one day for a fine time together, and as they were walking around on the top of the mountain, they found a golden vase. One of them began to scheme in his heart how he could get it away from the other; but the other chap, who was a good fellow, proposed (as it did not cost anything) that they take and divide it and use the money for charitable purposes, giving it to the poor and to the lamas.

The first one said he didn't believe it was a real vase, that it was only an imaginary one, and that the gods had made it appear real to them. It was only an illusion. If they attempted to do anything with it, it would vanish entirely. They discussed the matter for a while and finally went down to the home of the man who desired it all for himself.

After a while he said to his friend, "You leave this vase here with me for a while; you want to go home now, and when you return we will divide it, each take his half and use it as he desires."

So the man went on to his home, remaining

[p. 139]

there for three or four days. When he came back he met the man who had taken care of the vase and he was crying and beating his breast and tearing his hair. He exclaimed, "What is the matter with you and why are you carrying on in this manner?"

He replied, "Oh, I dare not tell you, it is too dreadful." But his friend said, "Tell me what it is, perhaps I can help you." For a long time he refused, but was finally persuaded and told him the trouble. "You know that golden vase we found, well, when I cut it it was only pewter." His friend replied, "That does not matter, we did not pay anything for it, we only found it, so we have lost nothing." Then the man stopped crying and felt wonderfully well satisfied with himself, thinking his friend had given up very easily and now he could keep the vase all for himself.

So the good man started home, but as he was leaving he said, "Your place here on the mountain is not a very pleasant spot, here it is cold and damp, while my place is fresh and green and warm, with plenty of grass for the cattle and fruit in abundance. You have two sons, let them take your cattle, go home with me and stay for a while." The man agreed and said it would be a nice trip for the boys, so they were allowed to accompany the good man. On the road as they were going home they saw two monkeys and caught them, taking them along. The man began to teach the monkeys tricks, taught them to dance when he sang for them, to come when he called

[p. 140]

them by name, and gave to them the names of his friend's two sons.

In a month or two he got a letter from his friend saying he was coming down for his boys. When he arrived he found the man crying and beating his breast and going on in a terrible manner. (Just before the arrival of the boy's father, he had taken the two boys and tied them up tight in a cave on the mountain.) As his friend came in he said, "What is the matter?" "Oh, I don't dare tell you," he answered, and went on crying and beating his breast. But his friend insisted and said, "It does not matter, perhaps I can help you." He finally consented and told him, "Well, you know, those two boys of yours that came home with me have changed into monkeys. If you don't believe it, call them and see." He called his sons' names and the monkeys came to him at once. The father looked at them for a little while and remarked, "Well, you are a smarter man than I, that vase is gold all right. You bring out the boys and I will divide the vase with you." So their trouble was peacefully settled and they were friends forever afterward.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 141]

  

THIRTY-FIVE

  

A Rabbit Story

The voice of the wolf is a sign to the sheep.
                                   Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time there were two neighbor families, one family composed of an old mother bear and her son and the other of an old mother rabbit and her son. The children kept the house while the two mothers went out to dig roots. The rabbit's claws were sharp and quick and she got the most. This made the old bear mad so she killed the rabbit and took the dead body and roots home, although she couldn't dig very many, as her claws were dull. The little rabbit waited and waited and could not understand why his mother didn't come home. Finally he slipped over to the old bear's house to see what he could discover. He peeped in and saw that the old bear was cooking his mother, and she and her son sat down and ate her all up. He felt dreadfully bad and began to think of revenge, and said to himself: "Some day I will get even with them."

One day the old mother bear went out to carry water, and while she was gone the little rabbit heated an arrow red hot and shot the little bear in the ear and killed him. Then he took his mother's sack which the old bear had stolen with

[p. 142]

the roots in it and carried it away with him. As he went up the mountain he met a tiger and said to him, "There is a bear coming after me, Mr. Tiger, won't you save me and find a place for me to hide?" "All right, you crawl in my ear and that bear will never find you."

The old mother bear returned, bringing her kang of water, and found her son dead. She said, "The young rabbit has done this. I shall follow him and kill him." So, going after the rabbit, she came upon the tiger and asked, "Have you seen a fellow with gray fur and long ears any-where? If you don't tell me the truth I will kill you." The tiger answered, "Don't talk to me that way, for I could kill you without very much trouble." And the old bear went on. The rabbit sat there in the tiger's ear eating some of the roots he had in his sack and the tiger could hear him munching away, and asked: "What are you eating?" "My own eye-ball," he answered. The tiger said, "Give me one, they seem very good." The rabbit handed him a root, the tiger ate and said, "That's very good. Let's take my eye-balls out and eat them, and if I am blind, since I saved you from this bear, you will take care of me and lead me around, will you not?" The rabbit said, "I will do that all right." So he dug out the tiger's two eye-balls and handed him some roots to eat in place of them. Then he went on leading the tiger, who now was blind, right up to the side of a big steep cliff, where he told him to lie down and go to sleep. Then he built a big fire on the other side

[p. 143]

of the tiger, who got so hot that when he moved away he fell over the cliff and killed himself.

The rabbit now went to a shepherd and told him, "There is a dead tiger up there, you can go and cut him up." Then he went to the wolf and said, "The shepherd is gone and you can go kill some sheep." Then he went to the raven and said, "You can go and pick the little wolves' eyes out, as their mother is gone to kill a sheep." Now the rabbit had done so much harm he thought he had better run away. He went into a far country and I expect he still dwells there.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 144]

  

THIRTY-SIX

  

The Story of a Juggler

The traveler is delayed by the men who stop--to the incurable medicine is of no use.
                                 Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time, in a mountainous country, there was located a big city, in which dwelt a king. He had under him in different parts of his kingdom several ministers. One day he sent word to them that they were to come to the city, so they left their homes and came at his bid-ding. As one of the head-men was returning home, a juggler who was his exact counterpart, passed along before him; he was dressed the same, his speech was the same, and in every particular he was as near his double as could be found. When he arrived at home all the servants thought their master had returned and showed him to his bedroom.

When the true master returned after finishing his business with the king and found this stranger in his rooms, he asked his servants who this was who had taken possession of his house. The juggler heard him say this and called out, "Who is that fellow or beggar out there claiming this is his house? Put him outside." Then the true man

[p. 145]

exclaimed, "Don't you know me? This is a juggler that has come into my home, and you are putting me, the real owner, out."

"What is the matter with you all?" the juggler said. "You get out of here, this house and servants are all mine. Put him outside, you know these things belong to me."

They quarreled and quarreled, but finally the true man was put outside and ran and told the king what had happened to him. They were both called before the king and there they were standing before him, alike as two peas. "Well," he said, "I can not tell one from the other. I can't tell who is the right man, but both of you sit down and write a list of things that are in the house." The true man sat down and began to write, but would stop and think and make additions, so that his list might be complete. In the meantime, the juggler created a third man whom he sent back to the house, and this third one was just like the two men, and he brought back a list written from the house as he saw it.

The king now said, "I'll now see who is the true man." In fact, the true man had forgotten to write some things, while the list made by the other man was much more complete. So the king said to the juggler, "Well, I think you are the right man;" and gave him the house and land. The true man was very angry and said, "Well, here I am a beggar with nothing at all." In a few days the juggler got tired of being a big man, went to the king and said, "I hope you won't be angry,

[p. 146]

but the other man is the right fellow. I took his place by juggling, and it is really all his."

The king was not angry, but was much pleased to meet him, as he had heard of such men but had never seen one before. He showed him many honors, while the other man was restored to his rightful property and home.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 147]

  

THIRTY-SEVEN

  

The Story of a Turquoise

Whether you love or hate him a dumb man cannot tell --whether a thing is dirty or clean a blind man cannot tell.
                                                     Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time, away in the midst of some high, high mountains, there was a mud house. In it dwelt an old father and mother and a son and daughter. As the custom is in that country they gave their daughter to a man for a wife and the son took two wives, bringing them both into the home, making five in the family. The son's wives were called the little and the big wife, the one he married first being the big one with the most authority.

Suddenly one day the mother and her son died, so the two daughters-in-law took things into their own hands and proceeded to make a slave of the old father, sending him out on the mountain every day to tend the cattle, and giving him nothing to eat but a little sour cheese and blood. They got this blood by tying a yak so he couldn't move and sticking a needle into the jugular vein, letting him bleed a few bowls full, then turning him loose, and the next day bleeding another. The blood coagulated and became jelly-like, so they sliced it,

[p. 148]

warmed, cooked and ate it. The poor old man was very bad off and was about to starve to death, when he decided he would send to his daughter and see if she would give him some food. So he went down to the road to see if he could find any one going to her home, and as he sat waiting he fell asleep.

A big caravan of merchants came along and called out, "Old man, why are you sleeping here in the road?" He wakened and asked where they were going and when they named the place where his daughter lived he asked them to take a message to her. "Tell her that her mother and brother are both dead, that I am very happy, for I am a shepherd with great power, and have cheese and dried blood to eat; that there is no other man so powerful as a shepherd. Sometimes I have a little wine to drink, but in making the wine I don't need to beat up any barley, as there are no bubbles on top." (His wine was only water.) The mer-chants traveled on, found his daughter and delivered the message. She asked what time they were going back, as she wanted to send a message to her father. When they were ready to return they went for her message. She had a very valu-able turquoise, and she made a brick of mud, put the stone in its center and said, "Tell him if he wants to live well to keep this brick, that he mustn't sell it, but may use it to gain influence."

The old man watched eagerly every day for the return of the caravan. At last it came and delivered the message and the brick. He understood

[p. 149]

at once, and took the brick up on the mountain, broke it open and got the stone, then he went down to the home where his daughters-in-law ruled supreme and showed it to the big wife, saying, "See what my daughter sent me. I'm not going to sell it, and when I die I will give it to you." So she decided to feed him and clothe him well, for she thought, "He won't live long and I'll soon get it."

One day when the big wife was not there he showed it to the second wife and said, "Look what I have; now I don't want to give it to the big wife and I don't want to sell it, but when I die I want to give it to you." So she was greatly pleased and thought, "Well, the old man won't live long, I'll be good to him and feed him well." So they both vied with each other to see who could treat him the best, but neither knew why the other was doing it. One day he became very ill and thought he was about to die, so he hid the stone on a cross beam of the house, just above a big water tank. His daughters-in-law were not home. He called the servants and told one of them to go to his daughter with this message, "Tell her to come to see me, and if she has no horse to ride, tell her to ride a donkey, and if I am dead when she arrives there is a great treasure on the neck of a big dragon and its image appears in the sea."

Soon he died and his daughters-in-law looked through everything he had, but could not find the stone. So the big wife said they must have a lot of lamas and read prayers for his soul. One day

[p. 150]

his daughter came and asked if there was any last message from her father and they told her "Yes." He said, "Tell her that there is a treasure on the back of the dragon's neck and its image appears in the sea." She understood at once, and looking in the water tank saw the image of the turquoise, climbed up on the beam and got it, tucked it in her bosom and went home.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 151]

  

THIRTY-EIGHT

  

A Wise Idiot

If shortsighted you cannot see far, but with sharp ears you can hear far.
                             Tibetan Proverb.

A LONG time ago there lived a family of good lineage that had been very rich, but had grown poor. In the same place also was a family who had been very poor but now was rich. Two women, one the wife of the former rich man and the other the wife of the present rich man, met one day in a temple where they had gone to worship. The rich woman said to the poor one, "Yes, we are rich, but everybody says our ancestors are bad or that we have none at all. Now you are poor, but your ancestors are fine, so let me have your son for my daughter." The poor woman said, "All right, you can have him." Her son had been very bright, but now he was going crazy. The rich people found out about the son's condition and without telling the poor family, secured a son from another family, whom their daughter married.

When the poor people saw this they were very angry with their son and said, "If you had any sense you would have gone to that rich family, but now, half idiot as you are, nobody wants you."

[p. 152]

The son said, "Do not blame me, for if my ancestors had been all right, I would have been all right. It is their sins being visited upon me."

His father and mother gave him four gold pieces and told him to go away to a distant city and see if he could not improve.

As he journeyed along the road a shepherd was walking before him, and before the shepherd tripped a little bird, singing very sweetly. As soon as the shepherd came close to him he stopped singing and the shepherd said to him, "Your voice is very sweet, but why do you stop singing when I come near?"

The half idiot walking behind the shepherd now came up and said, "Teach me to say what you said to that bird and I will give you a gold piece." So he taught him, and the boy gave him one of his gold pieces and went on. Soon he heard a hunter say to a fox, "You have nice fur, and some day I will kill you and get it." So the idiot said to the hunter, "You teach me to say what you said to the fox and I will give you a gold piece." They talked a while and he taught him how to say it, and the boy gave up another of his gold pieces to the hunter.

Now this fool went on until he came to a place where there were two bridges, one made of one log, the other of two logs, and here were two men talking. One said to the other, "Let's run a race over these bridges. I'll run over the one log, as it is shorter, and will be quicker, you run over the other built of two logs."

[p. 153]

The silly fellow heard them, came up and said, "Teach me what you have been saying and I will give you a gold piece." So they taught him and he parted with another piece of his money.

He went on and saw two fellows fighting, and one of them said, "If you don't behave I'll send you to the official." The fool asked to be taught that, and parted with his last gold piece.

Now, since his money was all gone, he decided to return to his own country. When he reached home, they were celebrating the wedding of the rich girl and her husband and the fool mixed with the crowd. The girl saw him and said, "It won't do for me to go out, it will make him sad to see me." But he saw her anyway, and as he had learned only four sentences he began to say the first one to her thus: "You're a nice bird and your voice is beautiful. Why did you stop singing when I came near?"

She went into the house and said to her parents, "You know that half-witted fellow to whom you were going to marry me? Well, he is pretty sharp, I can tell you." So they told her to bring him up to the top of the house and they would at least give him something good to eat.

Then he said his next sentence, "You she-fox, you've got mighty nice hair, and some day you will fall into my hands." The bride ran and told her father and mother, "Oh, he was awfully fierce, you should have heard what he said to me."

After a while, when they were all eating, there were not enough chopsticks to go round, so this

[p. 154]

fool got only one, but he ate his food quickly and said his third sentence, "When there are two bridges, one of one log and one of two logs, go over the one-log bridge, it is always the quickest." The girl told her father and mother this and they concluded he wasn't a fool at all. So when the guests were all gone and this man still remained, he said his last sentence, "If you treat me like this, I am going to take you to the official." "This will never do, to have him take you to the official. He hasn't said much to-day, but it has all been mighty smart; so we will give this other man a lot of money and send him back home, and keep this man for your husband."

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 155]

  

THIRTY-NINE

  

The Man and the Monkeys

The male deer from the top of the hill can see afar off. But the goose on her nest thinks only of the egg she covers.
                                   Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time when the garden of Eden was in the world, a man traveling around the country found the garden and went in through the gateway. He thought it a very beautiful place. There was everything good to eat, cakes and candies and fruits of all kinds. He said to himself, "Here I'll stay. I won't have to work any more, for everything I need is here, so here I'll remain." He thought he would take a nap, and crawled up one of the big trees and went to sleep among the branches. But he slept too soundly and forgot he was up the tree, and went to turn over and tumbled into a lake. One of the monkeys in the forest saw him fall into the water and tried in every way to help him out, and finally said, "I'm too little. I can't pull you out, but if I can grow big and strong I'll be able to help you out." So he began to exercise every day by picking up small stones, and then every day a little larger one, until finally he grew strong enough to lift a big stone, and so was able to get the man out of

[p. 156]

the water. After the man was rescued he didn't feel very well and the monkey proposed that he exercise a while with the stones. He threw the stones about a while until he felt quite warm, then thought he'd go to sleep again, but this time he'd lie down on the ground. The monkeys were all in the trees talking and chattering, so he didn't sleep very soundly. When he roused up he thought, "This is a beautiful place if there just wasn't so many monkeys." (I guess he forgot how much one of them had just helped him.) "If these monkeys would all die, I'd go home and get my family and stay here, because we wouldn't have to work at all."

By this time it was evening and the monkeys were all asleep in the trees. So he shook all the trees until the monkeys fell out on the ground and were killed by the fall. Then, quite well satisfied with himself, he started home to bring his family back to the garden to live. But on the way the monkey god, who looks after monkeys, good and bad, and knew the man had been mean to the monkeys when they had been kind to him, turned himself into a big snake, met him on the path and swallowed him.

[p. 157]

 

Click to enlarge
ONE OF THE MONKEYS SAW HIM FALL INTO THE WATER AND HASTENED TO HELP HIM OUT.

 

[p. 158]

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 159]

  

FORTY

  

The Story of the Tree of Life

If you do not quarrel you are safe--if you have no debts you will be rich.
                                    Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time there was an old beggar dressed in rags and tatters, with wisps of gray hair about his face. He was so very old that it seemed he could have never been young, and never in all his life had he had a bath. This old beggar traveled everywhere asking for rice and tsamba and receiving more rice than he could eat he spread it out in the sun to dry and went on begging.

One day as his rice was drying a hundred parrots came along and ate it all up. When he came home he was angry and said, "Here I work every day, begging for a little food, and these old parrots come along and eat it all up." So he planned to be revenged and made one hundred snares of bamboo, put them all around in the reeds and went off to beg again. When he returned, sure enough, he had caught the whole hundred in his snares. Among them happened to be the king of the parrots, who, before the old man came home, spoke to his companions, saying: "We are

[p. 160]

in a bad fix. He has caught us all and he'll kill us every one. When we see him coming let us all hang down as though we are dead, then he will take us out of the snares and pitch us away. But the first one thrown must keep count, and as soon as one hundred are thrown he shall call out and we will all fly away. We must all lie perfectly still until the last one is thrown."

Finally the old man came home with some rocks in the front of his gown to throw at the parrots, for he didn't think they would all be dead, but when he saw them all hanging perfectly still he climbed up and began to throw them down. He had pitched down ninety-nine and was untying the string off the king's leg when the rocks in his gown got in his way and he threw one of them down. As soon as it lit, away flew the ninety-nine.

"Huh, they were all fooling me, but I have one left and I'll take a rock and kill him." The parrot suddenly came to life and sticking up his thumb said, "Please don't kill me, it is true we were very bad and did eat up your rice, but you are a good man, so don't kill me, take me and sell me and you can get more than your price of the rice."

So he tied a string around the parrot's leg, took him to town and tried to sell him to a merchant. The beggar said he was a fine parrot and could talk, but he didn't know what he was worth, so the merchant had better ask the parrot himself. The parrot answered that he was worth a lot of money and the merchant must pay the old man fifty taels of silver for him. The merchant gave the money

[p. 161]

to the old man, who almost died of joy to have so much money.

After the parrot had been with the merchant for two or three years he asked permission to visit his home and parents, as they were getting old. He said, "You treat me very nicely here and I love you, and I will soon come back again and bring you some nice fruit."

The merchant took the chain off the parrot's leg and let him go. He was gone two or three months, when one day he came, carrying some seeds in his mouth, and said, "Plant these seeds, and when you are old and eat of the fruit of this tree you will be young again. Plant the seed care-fully, and in three years you will have plenty of fruit." The merchant planted the seeds and at the end of three years, sure enough, there was much fruit. One day he was in his garden and one of the fruits had fallen to the ground, but he was afraid to eat it lest the parrot had thought of this as a scheme to kill him. That night a poisonous snake coiled around the fruit and slept. The next morning the merchant called his dog and showed him the fruit, which he ate, and which killed him immediately. The merchant knew now that the parrot had schemed to kill him, and poured hot water on him and scalded him to death.

Now in this country were two old people, very frail and too feeble to go out and beg, so they were about to starve to death. So the old man said one day, "Let's eat some of this fruit; if it makes us young it's all right, if it poisons and kills us, it

[p. 162]

doesn't matter, as we are about to die anyway." So they got their walking sticks and went slowly to the merchant and asked him for some of the fruit. He said, "You can't eat that, for it will kill you at once." They told him it didn't matter, for they were about to starve to death anyway, and it was easier to take poison and die quickly. He finally gave them one each, they ate it and grew young at once. They were much pleased and almost worshiped the man. Then the merchant knew that something must have poisoned the fruit as it lay on the ground and he was grieved to think that he had killed his parrot.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 163]

  

FORTY-ONE

  

The Story of the Man with the Goitre

A man without wickedness needs no punishment--without an ax no tree can be cut down.
                                               Tibetan Proverb.

A LONG time ago, in a lonely country among the mountains, there lived a man with a big goitre on his neck, and he owned a cow. One day the cow wandered away. The man went out to find her, but had to go so far from home that he could not get back that night. Looking around he found two caves, one big one and one little one, and decided to spend the night in the little one.

As he went in and sat down cross-legged on the ground, he began talking the affair over with himself, saying, "My cow is lost and I can not find her, and I have nothing to eat. I am far away from home and can't get back, and I have to stay out here, and I am very much afraid."

Now the big cave was the place where all the ghosts met, but in the small cave only one ghost had his home. This ghost went over to the big cave to the assembly of ghosts and told them there was a man in his cave. They told him to go back and bring him over to them and they would eat him, but he pleaded with them and said, "Please don't kill the man, for I am his landlord, and it

[p. 164]

wouldn't be good for me if you did so." He told them, too, that the man had a big goitre on his throat. Then they said to him, "Go and cut that goitre off his neck and bring it over here, and we will eat that."

"All right, that will do," he said, and slipped back into his own cave. He cut the goitre off and took it to them, but when they saw it they said it was too big, it wasn't fit to eat, and they left it in the cave. When the man wakened in the morning he had no goitre and was pleased as could be. He soon found his cow and started down the mountain.

When he got home without his goitre, another man who had one came and asked him how he got rid of his. He told all of his adventures and the mysterious disappearance of the thing. The other man thought he would do the same and get rid of his. He drove his cow up on the mountain and then went to find her, hid in a cave and talked to himself about the cow that was lost, saying that he could not find her and that he would have to stay there all night. The ghosts assembled again in the big cave and the one who dwelt in the small cave told them again he had a guest, and they of course wanted to eat him. But he begged them not to, saying that he would cut off the goitre and bring that over. "Pouf, who wants to eat goitre; we have already got one we don't like. Take that and stick it on the back of his neck." When the man wakened in the morning he thought something nice had happened to him, but when he

[p. 165]

felt his neck there was his goitre just the same; then the back of his neck felt queer and he put his hand there and found another one. Then he was very angry and took his cow and went home and never came out again where people could see him.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 166]

  

FORTY-TWO

  

The Story of the Beggar

An old man and a bat never grow old. But an old woman has to find comfort in the Juniper. ( Juniper is burned to the gods.)
                                                Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time there was a beggar, with hair in twisted wisps, dirty, dirty face and hands and a few rags for clothing, who begged from the people of the village for his living. On one lucky day he had succeeded in begging about a bushel of barley. He took it home with him, put it in a sack and tied it up to the ceiling to the cross poles of his little hut, so the rats couldn't get it, and then lay down upon his bundle of rags to sleep. He began to count how rich he would be if he got a bushel of barley every day. He could afford him a wife. When he got a wife he would have a son, and he wondered and wondered what he should name his boy. Toward morning the light from the moon fell upon his bed and wakened him and gave him a brilliant thought. He would name his son Dawa Draba, which means the light of the moon; he was so pleased he jumped up from his bed, dancing around the room, flourishing his beggar's staff in his glee. But alas, he flourished it a bit too fiercely, for it struck his big bag of barley, which fell on him and killed him, and the father of Dawa Draba was dead.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 167]

  

FORTY-THREE

  

The Wily Poor Man

When the man is gone--the woman has no leader--when the rooster is dead the donkey has to bray.
                                  Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time, in the center of a great wide plain in a mountainous country, was a Hlakang in which was a statue of Chenrezik, the god with a thousand arms. Near the temple was a small house, and in this house lived two old people who had a daughter whose name was "Ceering Droma," which meant Golden Goddess of Mercy. The parents thought it was about time that the girl should marry, so they said to each other, "To-morrow we will go to the Hlakang, take some gifts for the god, kotow before him and cast lots as we ask about her marriage."

About a half-day's journey away there lived a poor man who brought up peaches and walnuts to sell. He happened to be near the window and heard these old people talking about going to the temple; so the next day as soon as the doors were open, he slipped in and hid in the great god. The old people came, worshiping the god, and saying, "Great and merciful Chenrezik, we have many things and only one daughter, and as we are very old and may die and leave them, it's for you to tell

[p. 168]

us what is best to do. We leave it all in your hands. Is it better for our daughter to become a nun or to be married? When we lie down to-night to sleep will you speak to us in a dream or will you speak to us here, now? Help us to think aright and know your meaning."

The fellow that was hiding in the god spoke through his nostrils and said, "There will be a man come to you in the morning, you must give her to him."

The old people thought this was very wonderful that the god had really spoken and they could be in no doubt as to what he meant. After they were gone the man slipped out of the temple, and on the next morning early, there he was kneeling at the old people's door. The woman saw him and called to her husband, "Here he is, the god told us he would come." So she led him in, had him sit in the place of honor and put fine food before him. They gave him the daughter for his wife, gave him a handful of turquoise stones and asked him to be very kind to her. He said he would, and took his wife and his peach box and started home. As he neared home he began to think of the lies he had told the old people, saying he was rich and had a fine house and plenty to eat, and he knew there would be nothing to eat at all. So he thought he would go on ahead and see what could be done. He took his box off of his back, put his wife and the turquoises in it and set it down in the sand and covered it all up, then went home and borrowed all the things he could, good food,

[p. 169]

good cushions and rugs. He told his neighbors they must not tell he was poor, because that day he had gotten him a wife and she wasn't to know it. It took him about four or five days to get this done, and all this time his wife sat there in the box in the sand.

One day there were three kings going along the road with their servants, their bows and arrows and a tiger, all out for a good time. They thought they would stop and shoot at the mark. They aimed at the pile of sand, and, ping! the arrow hit the box. They dug the thing out and found the girl and the turquoises all covered up in the sand.

The king said, "Who are you?"

She answered, "I'm the daughter of the king of the lower regions."

The king said, "Will you be my wife?"

She said that she wouldn't mind, only somebody would have to sit in the box. He said that the tiger would do, so they put him in the box and covered it all with sand as she had been covered.

After her husband had fixed his house he stole down to where he had buried his box, dug it out and carried it home on his back. He thought, "This woman will be afraid of me by now. I'll open the box and see if she is ready to be obedient." (He had already told his neighbors that if they heard them fighting a little they needn't come over and interfere.) He fixed the bed ready for his wife, opened the box and the tiger jumped out at him, tore his clothes and nearly frightened him to death. He began to yell for his neighbors

[p. 170]

in a loud voice, but he had shut and locked the outside gate so that his wife couldn't get out if she tried to. His neighbors heard the noise and laughed saying he had just got a wife and they were already fighting. So they waited until the next morning to go over, and when they went in there sat a big tiger with his mouth all covered with blood. As soon as he saw them, he ran away into the forest, and all they could find was a few little bones.

In the meantime the girl had married a king and had much gold and riches. But the people in the kingdom and the head-men of the cities did not approve, and said, "This woman came out of the ground and has no lineage, and this, her son, who will be our king and rule over us, will have no ancestors." When the queen heard this murmuring she thought the best thing she could do was to go back to her father and mother and stay there, but decided to wait till the fifteenth, when the moon was full. So she ran away, and as she neared her home, or where her home used to be, she found in its place a palace, and where the old building had stood there was a great temple covered with golden minarets with bells everywhere, which rang sweetly when the wind blew. There was a man in her father's house, and she asked him whose house this was. He spoke her father's and mother's name, so she went into the house to rest. She found the lower story full of horses, mules and cows, and she knew these people must be very wealthy. When she got into

[p. 171]

the guest room there sat her father and mother on cushions and fine rugs. She bowed down before them and said, "I have come home. I'm so glad you are here and not dead, for all my husband's people say that I have no lineage and am not fit to be the mother of the future king. Now, if only they could come to see you and find out how rich and great you are they might change their minds."

Her father and mother said, "Tell them to come over and see us, if they don't believe you have parents and a rich home."

So they invited the king, who came with fifty of his head-men. They stayed about three days and were treated royally by the old couple, and changed their opinion when they saw her family and their wealth. The king and his men returned, and she said she would stay a few days longer with her father and mother. That night as she lay down to sleep she was cold and couldn't get warm, and as she had always had plenty of rugs and things, she couldn't understand it, and got up to see what was the matter. She was sleeping on the ground and her pillow was a rock, and she found when she got up that she had dreamed all of this, for she found her father and mother were nothing but bones. She had started to run away again, and falling asleep by the wayside dreamed all this about them. So she thought the best thing she could do was to go back to the king.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 172]

  

FORTY-FOUR

  

The Quarrel of the Five Friends

The mouth is the door of quarrels. To open it is easy--to close it difficult. The tongue is the foundation of quarrels--it is easy to use--difficult to keep it still.
                         Tibetan Proverb.

 

ONCE upon a time, when the world was young, there lived in a city the son of a rich man, the son of a painter, the son of a fortune teller, the son of a carpenter, the son of a doctor and the son of a silversmith. These six men were all close friends, so close that they planned they would run away together. They left their parents and traveled to another place, where they agreed they would separate for six years, each man going his own way, seeking adventure. At the end of that time they would all meet in the city of their birth. Before they separated each planted a soul tree, a tree that knew things. If one of the men was dead or was not prospering, his soul tree would tell of it. It was a custom in that land for each home to have a soul tree and to care for it and water it and protect it with a wall, if need be. When all was well the tree grew and flourished, if ill, it withered away or died. After six years, when they assembled, they were all to look at the trees and see if any were

[p. 173]

dying or withered, and if the man who owned the withered tree wasn't present, they would know he was not doing well and must hunt for him; or if the tree was dead they would know that the man was dead.

The son of the rich man went far away to a little house in a valley. He went to the door and asked for entrance and it was opened by a little old man and a little old woman, who lived there, who asked, "Son, who are you, whence have you come and where are you going?" He told them, "I have come from a far country and have come to see if you can give me something to eat."

The old people answered, "Well, we like the looks of you, and if you will stay and become the husband of our daughter, who is very handsome, we will be much pleased." He went in and sat down, and soon the daughter entered, and she was pretty, indeed. He sat thinking about his native land, how far he was from home, but finally concluded it would be the best thing he could do to marry the girl and stay there. She was glad to see him and asked about his home and his adventures, and fell in love with him at once; so they were married immediately.

Down below this little place there lived a king who had many servants. One afternoon, soon after the bride had been to bathe, the women all went down to the river to have a bath and found a beautiful ring which the bride had lost in the water. They took it to the king, who thought to himself, "No one but a fine woman would own

[p. 174]

such an exquisite ring as this." So he called a servant and told him to find the owner. The man went out, walked up the river until he came to the little house, where he saw the woman, saw how pretty she was and said, "This must be she." He wanted to take her at once to the king, but she re-fused to go, saying she had a husband. So the servant took them both before the king, as kings' laws must be obeyed. When he saw how beautiful she was he said she must be the daughter of a god. He became displeased with his wives, saying they were only dogs and hogs compared with her. He gave her gifts of gowns and jewels and wanted her to stay with him, but the girl was afraid and didn't want to stay, for she loved her husband. Knowing this the king decided he must get rid of him, so he called his servants and had them take the husband down to the river, dig a hole, kill him, put him in it, and cover the place with a rock.

Six years passed and the five men returned to look at their trees. All were there except one, and all the trees were flourishing except one, the tree of the son of the rich man being dead. They decided to find him, but though they hunted in every city in the world they could find no trace of him at all. One day the son of the fortune teller said, "Perhaps I had better tell his fortune and see what has become of him," and then he told this: "We will find his body in a hole on the bank of a river." They hunted and hunted many days and finally found the place, but the rock was so

[p. 175]

big that all five of them could not move or lift it. So the son of the silversmith chiseled it off and made it smaller until they could get it off the hole and they found him; then the son of the doctor gave him some medicine that brought him to life and he could talk.

They decided they would get his wife back for him, but it wouldn't do to go and demand her, as the king would kill all six of them at once; so the son of the carpenter said he had a scheme, he would make a flying machine. He made an affair with wings and a tail, which he called a wooden bird. This would go up and down and any place he wished. The son of the painter colored it with many beautiful colors. When it was all finished the son of the rich man got in it and sailed up toward heaven. He flew around and around and finally stood right over the king's palace. The people were all looking at the wonderful and beautiful bird sailing up above them, and the king said to his wife, "Take some nice food up there on the roof and maybe he will come down." So she took the food and went to the roof and the bird came closer and closer, down to the place where she stood. Finally the bird landed on the flat roof beside her and a man stepped out. She was pleased, knew him and said, "I thought you were dead, and I never expected to see you again."

"Are you really pleased," he asked her, "or would you rather stay with the king? Choose for yourself. Either go with me, getting into this wooden bird, or stay here. You need not fear the

[p. 176]

king if you go with me, for he never can catch us in this bird."

So she stepped into the machine and away they flew to where the five friends awaited them. They alighted, and when they saw her they, too, thought she was beautiful. The son of the rich man said, "I have been dead and brought to life again and now have my wife, and all this I owe to you."

He thanked them over and over, for all they had done. Then he said, "We will be so happy to live as man and wife again," and this made his friends very angry. The son of the fortune teller said, "Well, nobody would have known where you were if it had not been for me, and the girl by rights belongs to me." The son of the silversmith said, "Your business just telling where he was did not amount to anything, it was I that broke the rock away, and the girl should be mine." The son of the doctor said, "What's the use of all your work, just to find the corpse was nothing; it was I that brought him to life, and she should be mine." The son of the carpenter said, "It didn't do any good to bring him to life, it was I who made the wooden bird to get her in, and she belongs to me." The son of the painter said, "The machine was no good until I painted it to look like a bird, and the king sent his wife up, instead of a slave to feed it, so the woman should be my wife."

So they stood quarreling and quarreling until they saw a man coming along the road, and called him in to settle it. They told him about what each

[p. 177]

had done. He knew not how to answer, but told them this story,

"One time a lot of men owned a fine chorten, [*1] and as they couldn't decide to whom it belonged they cut it into pieces and divided it." So these six men drew their knives and slew the girl.

Footnotes

^177:1 A chorten is a stupa, or pagoda, sometimes of gold, more often made of clay, of religious significance.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 178]

  

FORTY-FIVE

  

The Frugal Woman

If the yak is blind he will tumble off the road.
                                  Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time, a long, long time ago, in a little mud village, lost somewhere now in the mountains of Tibet, lived a group of people. A tiny stream of water from underground, perhaps from a magic horse's head or a magic cow's head, flowed and never went dry. This stream gave them all the water they needed.

Ruling over this village was a chief whom they called the head-man of the village. He settled all their small quarrels, punished offenders and his word was law up to the matter of life and death. He had a very handsome son, who had no wife. The middleman had made a marriage, all sides agreeing, between this son and the daughter of a prince who ruled over a slightly bigger territory. This prince, with a hundred men and their musical instruments, dancers and singers, gifts for the family, milk money for the mother and wedding gifts of jewels to the bride, went down to claim his wife. The head-man feasted and kept them exchanging gifts for about three days, then they started to return, taking the bride with them.

[p. 179]

[paragraph continues] The mother followed her to the door, as she was leaving, and said, "Do not grieve because you are leaving home. In one month you can come back and visit us."

Her father and big brother and little sister all said, "Don't be sorry, for now you are the wife of this big prince, and will have plenty to eat and nice clothes to wear," and her mother said, "You must keep as clean as if you were looking in a mirror all the time. You must be good to your own servants and kind to your husband's parents, and also be charitable and give to the poor. You mustn't say bad things, as that's just as silly as a billy-goat trying to butt down a stone wall with his horns."

So they tried to comfort her as she went away weeping, and told her to be happy and contented.

Now the greater part of the caravan had gone on before and only she and a few of the maid servants were left behind. Those in advance went on and on and when night came, they stopped in a fine valley and prepared to camp for the night.

By and by when she came up to them she said, "This won't do. This is a bad place, for if it should rain everything, including ourselves, would be washed away."

She went on a little bit farther, found another spot and sent back word to them to come up there where she had stopped. As the loads were already off the yak and all was prepared for the night they were very angry because all the loads had to be tied on again, the ponies gathered in from

[p. 180]

where they were grazing, and only to go such a little distance!

They said to one another, "This woman is unspeakable. She comes from a very common home, but now she is the wife of this prince she thinks she can make us do as she likes." So grumbling a great deal, they unloaded and made camp again for the night. But sure enough that night a big rain came and washed everything out of the valley where they had first stopped. When they saw that they said, "If we had been there everything would have been lost and we would have been dead. She is a prophetess and knows all things. We owe our lives to her."

So they journeyed on and came to her husband's home, where they feasted again for three days. Now it was time for the servants her father had sent with her to return. She gave them all gifts, told them good-by and sent them back to her father's house.

Now some of her husband's servants had heard her mother tell her she was to keep as clean as if she were looking in a mirror all the time. So they went to the prince and asked him what it meant, that they didn't understand that saying at all. When she got up in the morning, she swept the house and combed her hair and saw that every-body had food before she would eat anything. One day her husband said to her, "What did your mother mean by that saying?"

She answered, "My mother's meaning was this: that I wasn't to be greedy and eat good things all

[p. 181]

 

Click to enlarge
ONE DAY A BIG CRANE FLYING OVER THE PALACE, CARRYING A FEW HEADS OF RICE FOR HIS OWN FOOD, DROPPED SOME GRAINS INTO THE PALACE GARDEN.

 

[p. 182] [p. 183]

the time, but if I waited on others I'd be hungry and things would taste good to me. And looking in the looking glass meant I was to keep myself clean and the house clean so I'd never be ashamed of it."

One day a big crane coming from near the sea was carrying a few heads of rice for his own food; as he flew over the palace, he dropped a few of the grains, which the servants gathered up and took to the mistress of the house. She said to them, "We must plant a few of these seeds and be careful with them, for they make fine medicine for fevers."

They divided the grains among the different families, who took them home and planted them. After a while the king's wife took sick with the fever and he called all his chief head-men of the surrounding villages and all the lamas, who told him that if she didn't have some rice from near the sea she would die. Then he sent out to all the people he knew, asking if they had any rice, but none of them had a grain. Finally he sent to this woman, the wife of the prince, and asked if she had any rice, and she said, "Of course I have. Not only for her but for all the sick people in the country."

So she sent some to the king's wife, who got well, and she gave it also to all the other sick folks, and from this time on the people worshiped her and always went to her in times of trouble.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 184]

  

FORTY-SIX

  

The Story of Yugpacan, the Brahman.

  

From Jaschke

In a narrow road it is difficult to stop and talk. Call upon the gods--on the plains is the time to sing and be happy.
                                              Tibetan Proverb.

ONCE upon a time there was a farmer. One day one of his neighbors named Yugpacan borrowed his bull. He took the animal and in a few days returned it and left it loose in the owner's yard while the owner was eating, and the bull ran away. When the owner had finished his meal he went to his neighbor and asked for the bull. Yugpacan replied, "I turned him into your yard." The owner said, "You have lost my bull." So they had a quarrel and both started for the official to have the matter settled.

As they went along they met a man whose horse had gotten loose and was running away, and he called to these two to head him off and catch him. Yugpacan picked up a stone and threw it at the horse and killed him. Then the owner said, "Now you have slain my horse, come with me to the official and he will settle the matter." They all started on and came to a wall and Yugpacan jumped over the wall and fell on top of a gardener

[p. 185]

who was digging in his yard and killed him. His wife came running up and said, "You have murdered my husband and must make good." Yugpacan answered, "I can't pay you for your husband." "Well," she said, "come with me to the official and he will make you pay."

They all started along again and came to the bank of a river where they saw a carpenter swimming across holding a small ax in his mouth. Yugpacan ran to the brink of the river and asked him a question, whereupon the swimmer opened his mouth to answer it and straightway dropped the ax into the water. The carpenter was angry and said, "You must pay me for my ax." Yugpacan said, "I won't pay you." "All right then, come with me to the official and we will see about that."

The whole crowd in due time came to the great man who was to decide their cases. He asked, "What is the matter that you have come to me?" The farmer and Yugpacan proceeded at once to tell their case; then the official said to Yugpacan, "You returned the bull, but the owner didn't see it, and as you didn't say anything I will cut off your tongue." Then he said to the owner, "Because you didn't see it, I will take out one of your eyes." So he settled the first case, saying, "The man who has a tongue should be able to talk, and the man with eyes should be able to see."

The man whose horse had been killed now stated his case. The official turned to Yugpacan and asked how he had killed the horse. "Well,"

[p. 186]

he answered, "he asked me to help catch his horse and I picked up a rock and threw it at the horse." Then he asked the owner of the horse, "Why did you ask him to head off your horse? My decision is this, because you, Yugpacan, threw and killed the animal, I will cut off one of your hands." Then to the owner of the horse, "Because you told him to help catch your horse I will cut off your tongue." Thus ends the second case.

The woman now presented her case and said that Yugpacan had killed her husband. Yugpacan said he was just on top of the wall and fell off and did not see the gardener and landed on him. The official decided, "Well, you have killed this man, so to make it good you must be this woman's husband."

The carpenter now said, "Yugpacan, while I was in the water, asked me a question, and as I opened my mouth to answer my ax dropped and was lost in the water." The official said, "Be-cause you carried your ax in your mouth instead of your hand I will knock out two of your teeth, and Yugpacan, because he asked you a question while you were swimming, I will cut off another slice of his tongue."

Each one then begged the official to forgive Yugpacan for all his wickedness, and forgive each of them and leave them each as they were in the first place, which he very obligingly did.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 187]

  

FORTY-SEVEN

  

The Story of Da Jang. From Amundsen

In life there are just two things--happiness and misery. One you say and the other you think.
                                       Tibetan Proverb.

IN a large city in a distant land called Nyen Yo lived a man, Da Jang, who was a very skillful juggler. He had a friend named Pelzang, who had a wife and daughter. One day Da Jang said to Pelzang, "You should learn to be a juggler; it might be of use to you some time." Pelzang answered, "What is the use of that, a horse would mean much more to me." Da Jang, displeased with the reply, went away muttering that some day he would prove to his friend that juggling was useful.

A few days later, after Pelzang had eaten breakfast and was outside the cottage spinning yarn, while his wife was washing up the wooden bowls on the inside of the house, Da Jang arrived riding on a phantom horse.

"Friend Pelzang," he said, "buy this horse." Pelzang replied, "I have nothing to buy it with, I do not want it."

But Da Jang said, "It is a fine horse with a fine trot, and if you will buy it I will let it go cheaply. Mount and try it," he urged.

[p. 188]

"Well," Pelzang said, "if you will let it go cheap enough I will take it," and he got on the horse, which set off in a wild gallop beyond control. By sunset he had arrived in an unknown place, and he looked all around and finally saw a house from which smoke was rising, and went to the door and knocked. An old lady came out. She might be a demon, thought the man, but there was no place else to go. He asked for lodging and bed from the old lady. "Come in," she said. He entered and found she had three daughters. Having given him delicious food and drink, the old lady inquired, "Who brought you here?" He explained that his horse had run away and landed him in this strange place. She then proceeded to say, "Now, you have nowhere to go, and more-over, this is a small place without a ruler, so say no more, stay with me and be husband to one of the girls and landlord to this place. Even if you leave here you will not get anywhere." He thought there was nothing else to do, as his horse had entirely disappeared, so he decided to remain, and took one of the daughters for his wife, and in a few years had two sons and one daughter.

One day, the mother having gone to get some wood, the children were playing by the river. It was evening and the moon shone into the water. One boy, trying to catch it, fell in and was carried off by the current. As the father tried to rescue him, the other boy fell into the river in his excitement, and both slipped away and were gone. While thus fruitlessly occupied a tiger came and

[p. 189]

carried off the girl from the bank. The father uttered a cry and fell down almost dead with terror and grief. His wife, in the meantime, finding out what had happened, jumped into the river also.

"What an unfortunate creature I am." Tearing out the hair of his head, behold, it had turned white. He thought it would be better for him to die too, so he sprang into the water. He could not sink, but, strange to say, seemed to be lying on the ground, and as he looked up, behold he was back at his own house door. He went in and heard his wife singing, and then he told her what had happened to him and she said, "Are you demented or bewitched? Something has happened to you; I have just finished washing the bowls."

He went outside and, sure enough, there was the yarn in its place just as he had had it, and looking at his wife she was no older in appearance nor was the baby any bigger, and looking at himself in the mirror, his hair was as black as before. As nothing was changed he understood that the juggler had played a trick on him.

 

Moral: The affairs of this world are like the delusions of the juggler.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 190]

  

FORTY-EIGHT

  

Like unto Solomon. From Jaschke

          Women have 6   faults--1st, when her legs are long she will fall down; 2nd, when they are   short she will stand up; 3rd, when she is fat she will run; 4th, when her face   is red she will cry; 5th, when her face is black she will get angry; 6th,   when her mouth is big she will laugh.
                                                        Tibetan Proverb.

     
   ONCE upon a time two women were quarreling over one boy, trying to decide to which one he belonged. They could not settle the case, so they took it before the king of the land, who, being wise and of great understanding, thus ordered: "One of you take hold of the right hand of the boy and the other of the left hand and pull, the one who gets him may carry him off."

When he had so spoken, she, who was not the boy's mother, because she had no love for him, and not caring whether she hurt him or not, pulled with all the force she had. She, who in truth was the boy's mother, because she loved him, and fearing she might hurt him, though she was the stronger of the two, did not pull very hard. Then the king said to her who had pulled very hard, "He is not your son, but belongs to the other woman," to whom he gave the boy, who at once happily carried him away.

     
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 191]

  

FORTY-NINE

  

Tibetan Song

  

TRANSLATED FROM TIBETAN BY

  

A. L. SHELTON, M.D.

  

I.

In the middle of the sea is a high mountain.
 The sun is shining on the mountain, on a great plain
 The flowers are blooming.
 When the sun is shining on the yellow flowers
 All men are pleased.
 On the mountain are grass and water.
 The cows are resting in the grass, water and sun.
 On this mountain the evergreens grow always.
 The cuckoos are resting in the trees.
 The trees are blue, cuckoos are blue, all men are happy.

  

2.

The snows are everlasting.
 There are small and large black tents.
 All the lions are tied.
 Milk is as the waters of the sea.
 The tents are like cliffs.
 All the eagles are tied.
 Milk is like the sea.
 On the plain are the tents great and small.
 The deer are all tied.
 Their milk is as the sea.

[p. 192]

  

3.

At the head of this great plain
 Are ninety-nine hundred fine horses.
 Their saddles are all of gold.
 The name of this is beautiful. (All immortals live here.)
 In the middle of this plain
 Are many herds of cattle.
 They all eat from golden stalls.
 They are immortal.
 At the lower end of this plain, the sheep are herded.
 They are all happy and immortal.

 

    
Tibetan Folk Tales, by A.L. Shelton, [1925], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 193]

  

TIBETAN MUSIC

Recorded by Ray Howard Crittenden as played by Dorothy Shelton with the Tibetan instrument, the "Fuchin." First recorded notes of these tunes, 1921.

  

1.

"Rigung du tsuk"

  

2.

"A-ru-leh"

  

3.

"Dorgiling ba"

 

    


===== BOOK: tgr.txt =====


    
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

  

THINK and

  

GROW RICH

  

Teaching, for the first time, the famous Andrew Carnegie formula for money-making, based upon the THIRTEEN PROVEN STEPS TO RICHES.

  

Organized through 25 years of research, in collaboration with more than 500 distinguished men of great wealth, who proved by their own achievements that this philosophy is practical.

  

BY

  

NAPOLEON HILL

  

Author of

  

THE LAW OF SUCCESS

  

Philosophy

[ copyright 1937, published 1938, currently public domain in US (see below)]

  

Published by THE RALSTON SOCIETY, Meriden, Conn.

scanned at sacred-texts.com, July 2006. Proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States by the terms of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act because it was published between 1923 and 1964 inclusive, and not renewed at the US Copyright office in a timely fashion. This electronic edition is not sponsored or endorsed by, or otherwise affiliated with Napoleon Hill, his family and heirs, the Napoleon Hill Foundation, the Ralston Society, or any past or present publishers of this book.

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Verso

Click to enlarge
Independent report on the lack of copyright renewal of this book by the law firm of Thomson Compumark

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

WHAT DO YOU WANT MOST?

Is It Money, Fame, Power, Contentment, Personality, Peace of Mind, Happiness?

The Thirteen Steps to Riches described in this book offer the shortest dependable philosophy of individual achievement ever presented for the benefit of the man or woman who is searching for a definite goal in life.

Before beginning the book you will profit greatly if you recognize the fact that the book was not written to entertain. You cannot digest the contents properly in a week or a month.

After reading the book thoroughly, Dr. Miller Reese Hutchison, nationally known Consulting Engineer and long-time associate of Thomas A. Edison, said--

"This is not a novel. It is a textbook on individual achievement that came directly from the experiences of hundreds of America's most successful men. It should be studied, digested, and meditated upon. No more than one chapter should be read in a single night. The reader should underline the sentences which impress him most. Later, he should go back to these marked lines and read them again. A real student will not merely read this book, he will absorb its contents and make them his own. This book should be adopted by all high schools and no boy or girl should be permitted to graduate without having satisfactorily passed an examination on it. This philosophy will not take the place of the subjects taught in schools, but it will enable one to organize and apply the knowledge acquired, and convert it into useful service and adequate compensation without waste of time."

Dr. John R. Turner, Dean of the College of The City of New York, after having read the book, said--

"The very best example of the soundness of this philosophy is your own son, Blair, whose dramatic story you have outlined in the chapter on Desire."

Dr. Turner had reference to the author's son, who, born without normal hearing capacity, not only avoided becoming a deaf mute, but actually converted his handicap into a priceless asset by applying the philosophy here described. After

[p. 2]

reading the story (starting on page <page 52>), you will realize that you are about to come into possession of a philosophy which can be transmuted into material wealth, or serve as readily to bring you peace of mind, understanding, spiritual harmony, and in some instances, as in the case of the author's son, it can help you master physical affliction.

The author discovered, through personally analyzing hundreds of successful men, that all of them followed the habit of exchanging ideas, through what is commonly called conferences. When they had problems to be solved they sat down together and talked freely until they discovered, from their joint contribution of ideas, a plan that would serve their purpose.

You, who read this book, will get most out of it by putting into practice the Master Mind principle described in the book. This you can do (as others are doing so successfully) by forming a study club, consisting of any desired number of people who are friendly and harmonious. The club should have a meeting at regular periods, as often as once each week. The procedure should consist of reading one chapter of the book at each meeting, after which the contents of the chapter should be freely discussed by all members. Each member should make notes, putting down ALL IDEAS OF HIS OWN inspired by the discussion. Each member should carefully read and analyze each chapter several days prior to its open reading and joint discussion in the club. The reading at the club should be done by someone who reads well and understands how to put color and feeling into the lines.

By following this plan every reader will get from its pages, not only the sum total of the best knowledge organized from the experiences of hundreds of successful men, but more important by far, he will tap new sources of knowledge in his own mind as well as acquire knowledge of priceless value FROM EVERY OTHER PERSON PRESENT.

If you follow this plan persistently you will be almost certain to uncover and appropriate the secret formula by which Andrew Carnegie acquired his huge fortune, as referred to in the author's introduction.

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 3]

  

TRIBUTES TO THE AUTHOR

  

From Great American Leaders

"THINK AND GROW RICH" was 25 years in the making. It is Napoleon Hill's newest book, based upon his famous Law of Success Philosophy. His work and writings have been praised by great leaders in Finance, Education, Politics, Government.

Dear Mr. Hill:--

I have now had an opportunity to finish reading your Law of Success textbooks and I wish to express my appreciation of the splendid work you have done in the organization of this philosophy.

It would be helpful if every politician in the country would assimilate and apply the 17 principles upon which your lessons are based. It contains some very fine material which every leader in every walk of life should understand.

I am happy to have had the privilege of rendering you some slight measure of help in the. organization of this splendid course of "common sense" philosophy.

Sincerely yours

(Former President and former Chief Justice of the United States)

[p. 4]

KING OF THE 5 AND 10 CENT STORES

"By applying many of the 17 fundamentals of the Law of Success philosophy we have built a great chain of successful stores. I presume it would be no exaggeration of fact if I said that the Woolworth Building might properly be called a monument to the soundness of these principles."

F. W. WOOLWORTH

A GREAT STEAMSHIP MAGNATE

"I feel greatly indebted for the privilege of reading your Law of Success. If I had had this philosophy fifty years ago, I suppose I could have accomplished all that I have done in less than half the time. I sincerely hope the world will discover and reward you."

ROBERT DOLLAR

FAMOUS AMERICAN LABOR LEADER

"Mastery of the Law of Success philosophy is the equivalent of an insurance policy against failure."

SAMUEL GOMPERS

A FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES

"May I not congratulate you on your persistence. Any man who devotes that much time . . . must of necessity make discoveries of great value to others. I am deeply impressed by your interpretation of the 'Master Mind' principles which you have so clearly described."

WOODROW WILSON

A MERCHANT PRINCE

"I know that your 17 fundamentals of success are sound because I have been applying them in my business for more than 30 years."

JOHN WANAMAKER

WORLD'S LARGEST MAKER OF CAMERAS

"I know that you are doing a world of good with your Law of Success.

I would not care to set a monetary value on this training because it brings to the student qualities which cannot be measured by money, alone."

GEORGE EASTMAN

A NATIONALLY KNOWN BUSINESS CHIEF

"Whatever success I may have attained I owe, entirely, to the application of your 17 fundamental principles of the Law of Success. I believe I have the honor of being your first student."

WM. WRIGLEY, JR.

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

CONTENTS

        CHAPTER

       PAGE

     
       

       PUBLISHER'S   PREFACE

       <page 6>

     
       

       AUTHOR'S   INTRODUCTION

       <page 8>

     
      1.

       GENERAL   INTRODUCTION

       <page 17>

     
      2.

       DESIRE (The   First Step to Riches)

       <page 38>

     
      3.

       FAITH (The   Second Step to Riches)

       <page 66>

     
      4.

       AUTO-SUGGESTION   (The . Third Step to Riches)

       <page 95>

     
      5.

       SPECIALIZED   KNOWLEDGE (The Fourth Step to Riches)

       <page 105>

     
      6.

       IMAGINATION   (The Fifth Step to Riches)

       <page 126>

     
      7.

       ORGANIZED   PLANNING (The Sixth Step to Riches)

       <page 147>

     
      8.

       DECISION (The   Seventh Step to Riches)

       <page 208>

     
      9.

       PERSISTENCE   (The Eighth Step to Riches)

       <page 225>

     
      10.

       POWER OF THE   MASTER MIND (The Ninth Step to Riches)

       <page 249>

     
      11.

       THE MYSTERY OF   SEX TRANSMUTATION (The Tenth Step to Riches)

       <page 260>

     
      12.

       THE SUB-CONSCIOUS   MIND (The Eleventh Step to Riches)

       <page 291>

     
      13.

       THE BRAIN (The   Twelfth Step to Riches)

       <page 302>

     
      14.

       THE SIXTH SENSE   (The Thirteenth Step to Riches)

       <page 312>

     
      15.

       HOW TO OUTWIT THE   SIX GHOSTS OF FEAR (Clearing the Brain for Riches)

       <page 327>

     
  

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

  

PUBLISHER'S PREFACE

THIS book conveys the experience of more than 500 men of great wealth, who began at scratch, with nothing to give in return for riches except THOUGHTS, IDEAS and ORGANIZED PLANS.

Here you have the entire philosophy of moneymaking, just as it was organized from the actual achievements of the most successful men known to the American people during the past fifty years. It describes WHAT TO DO, also, HOW TO DO IT!

It presents complete instructions on HOW TO SELL YOUR PERSONAL SERVICES.

It provides you with a perfect system of self-analysis that will readily disclose what has been standing between you and "the big money" in the past.

It describes the famous Andrew Carnegie formula of personal achievement by which he accumulated hundreds of millions of dollars for himself and made no fewer than a score of millionaires of men to whom he taught his secret.

Perhaps you do not need all that is to be found in the book--no one of the 500 men from whose experiences it was written did--but you may need ONE IDEA, PLAN OR SUGGESTION to start you toward your goal. Somewhere in the book you will find this needed stimulus.

The book was inspired by Andrew Carnegie, after he had made his millions and retired. It was written by the man to whom Carnegie disclosed the astounding secret of his riches--the same man to whom the 500 wealthy men revealed the source of their riches.

In this volume will be found the thirteen principles of money-making essential to every person who

[p. 7]

accumulates sufficient money to guarantee financial independence. It is estimated that the research which went into the preparation, before the book was written, or could be written--research covering more than twenty-five years of continuous effort--could not be duplicated at a cost of less than $100,000.00.

Moreover, the knowledge contained in the book never can be duplicated, at any cost, for the reason that more than half of the 500 men who supplied the information it brings have passed on.

Riches cannot always be measured in money!

Money and material things are essential for freedom of body and mind, but there are some who will feel that the greatest of all riches can be evaluated only in terms of lasting friendships, harmonious family relationships, sympathy and understanding between business associates, and introspective harmony which brings one peace of mind measurable only in spiritual values!

All who read, understand and apply this philosophy will be better prepared to attract and enjoy these higher estates which always have been and always will be denied to all except those who are ready for them.

Be prepared, therefore, when you expose yourself to the influence of this philosophy, to experience a CHANGED LIFE which may help you not only to negotiate your way through life with harmony and understanding, but also to prepare you for the accumulation of material riches in abundance.

THE PUBLISHER.

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 8]

  

AUTHOR'S PREFACE

IN EVERY chapter of this book, mention has been made of the money-making secret which has made fortunes for more than five hundred exceedingly wealthy men whom I have carefully analyzed over a long period of years.

The secret was brought to my attention by Andrew Carnegie, more than a quarter of a century ago. The canny, lovable old Scotsman carelessly tossed it into my mind, when I was but a boy. Then he sat back in his chair, with a merry twinkle in his eyes, and watched carefully to see if I had brains enough to understand the full significance of what he had said to me.

When he saw that I had grasped the idea, he asked if I would be willing to spend twenty years or more, preparing myself to take it to the world, to men and women who, without the secret, might go through life as failures. I said I would, and with Mr. Carnegie's cooperation, I have kept my promise.

This book contains the secret, after having been put to a practical test by thousands of people, in almost every walk of life. It was Mr. Carnegie's idea that the magic formula, which gave him a stupendous fortune, ought to be placed within reach of people who do not have time to investigate how men make money, and it was his hope that I might test and demonstrate the soundness of the formula through the experience of men and women in every calling. He believed the formula should be taught in all public schools and colleges, and expressed the

[p. 9]

opinion that if it were properly taught it would so revolutionize the entire educational system that the time spent in school could be reduced to less than half.

His experience with Charles M. Schwab, and other young men of Mr. Schwab's type, convinced Mr. Carnegie that much of that which is taught in the schools is of no value whatsoever in connection with the business of earning a living or accumulating riches. He had arrived at this decision, because he had taken into his business one young man after another, many of them with but little schooling, and by coaching them in the use of this formula, developed in them rare leadership. Moreover, his coaching made fortunes for everyone of them who followed his instructions.

In the chapter on Faith, you will read the astounding story of the organization of the giant United States Steel Corporation, as it was conceived and carried out by one of the young men through whom Mr. Carnegie proved that his formula will work for all who are ready for it. This single application of the secret, by that young man--Charles M. Schwab--made him a huge fortune in both money and OPPORTUNITY. Roughly speaking, this particular application of the formula was worth six hundred million dollars.

These facts--and they are facts well known to almost everyone who knew Mr. Carnegie--give you a fair idea of what the reading of this book may bring to you, provided you KNOW WHAT IT IS THAT YOU WANT.

Even before it had undergone twenty years of

[p. 10]

practical testing, the secret was passed on to more than one hundred thousand men and women who have used it for their personal benefit, as Mr. Carnegie planned that they should. Some have made fortunes with it. Others have used it successfully in creating harmony in their homes. A clergyman used it so effectively that it brought him an income of upwards of $75,000.00 a year.

Arthur Nash, a Cincinnati tailor, used his near-bankrupt business as a "guinea pig" on which to test the formula. The business came to life and made a fortune for its owners. It is still thriving, although Mr. Nash has gone. The experiment was so unique that newspapers and magazines, gave it more than a million dollars' worth of laudatory publicity.

The secret was passed on to Stuart Austin Wier, of Dallas, Texas. He was ready for it--so ready that he gave up his profession and studied law. Did he succeed? That story is told too.

I gave the secret to Jennings Randolph, the day he graduated from College, and he has used it so successfully that he is now serving his third term as a Member of Congress, with an excellent opportunity to keep on using it until it carries him to the White House.

While serving as Advertising Manager of the LaSalle Extension University, when it was little more than a name, I had the privilege of seeing J. G. Chapline, President of the University, use the formula so effectively that he has since made the LaSalle one of the great extension schools of the country.

[p. 11]

The secret to which I refer has been mentioned no fewer than a hundred times, throughout this book. It has not been directly named, for it seems to work more successfully when it is merely uncovered and left in sight, where THOSE WHO ARE READY, and SEARCHING FOR IT, may pick it up. That is why Mr. Carnegie tossed it to me so quietly, without giving me its specific name.

If you are READY to put it to use, you will recognize this secret at least once in every chapter. I wish I might feel privileged to tell you how you will know if you are ready, but that would deprive you of much of the benefit you will receive when you make the discovery in your own way.

While this book was being written, my own son, who was then finishing the last year of his college work, picked up the manuscript of chapter two, read it, and discovered the secret for himself. He used the information so effectively that he went directly into a responsible position at a beginning salary greater than the average man ever earns. His story has been briefly described in chapter two. When you read it, perhaps you will dismiss any feeling you may have had, at the beginning of the book, that it promised too much. And, too, if you have ever been discouraged, if you have had difficulties to surmount which took the very soul out of you, if you have tried and failed, if you were ever handicapped by illness or physical affliction, this story of my son's discovery and use of the Carnegie formula may prove to be the oasis in the Desert of Lost Hope, for which you have been searching.

This secret was extensively used by President

[p. 12]

[paragraph continues] Woodrow Wilson, during the World War. It was passed on to every soldier who fought in the war, carefully wrapped in the training received before going to the front. President Wilson told me it was a strong factor in raising the funds needed for the war.

More than twenty years ago, Hon. Manuel L. Quezon (then Resident Commissioner of the Philippine Islands), was inspired by the secret to gain freedom for his people. He has gained freedom for the Philippines, and is the first President of the free state.

A peculiar thing about this secret is that those who once acquire it and use it, find themselves literally swept on to success, with but little effort, and they never again submit to failure! If you doubt this, study the names of those who have used it, wherever they have been mentioned, check their records for yourself, and be convinced.

There is no such thing as SOMETHING FOR NOTHING!

The secret to which I refer cannot be had without a price, although the price is far less than its value. It cannot be had at any price by those who are not intentionally searching for it. It cannot be given away, it cannot be purchased for money, for the reason that it comes in two parts. One part is already in possession of those who are ready for it.

The secret serves equally well, all who are ready for it. Education has nothing to do with it. Long before I was born, the secret had found its way into the possession of Thomas A. Edison, and he used it so intelligently that he became the world's leading

[p. 13]

inventor, although he had but three months of schooling.

The secret was passed on to a business associate of Mr. Edison. He used it so effectively that, although he was then making only $12,000 a year, he accumulated a great fortune, and retired from active business while still a young man. You will find his story at the beginning of the first chapter. It should convince you that riches are not beyond your reach, that you can still be what you wish to be, that money, fame, recognition and happiness can be had by all who are ready and determined to have these blessings.

How do I know these things? You should have the answer before you finish this book. You may find it in the very first chapter, or on the last page.

While I was performing the twenty year task of research, which I had undertaken at Mr. Carnegie's request, I analyzed hundreds of well known men, many of whom admitted that they had accumulated their vast fortunes through the aid of the Carnegie secret; among these men were:--

        HENRY FORD
   WILLIAM WRIGLEY JR.
   JOHN WANAMAKER
   JAMES J. HILL
   GEORGE S. PARKER
   E. M. STATLER
   HENRY L. DOHERTY
   CYRUS H. K. CURTIS
   GEORGE EASTMAN
   
   

       THEODORE   ROOSEVELT
   JOHN W. DAVIS
   ELBERT HUBBARD
   WILBUR WRIGHT
   WILLIAM JENNINGS BRYAN
   DR. DAVID STARR JORDAN
   J. ODGEN ARMOUR

 

     
 [p. 14]

        CHARLES M.   SCHWAB
   HARRIS F. WILLIAMS
   DR. FRANK GUNSAULUS
   DANIEL WILLARD
   KING GILLETTE
   RALPH A. WEEKS
   JUDGE DANIEL T. WRIGHT
   JOHN D. ROCKEFELLER
   THOMAS A. EDISON
   FRANK A. VANDERLIP
   F. W. WOOLWORTH
   COL. ROBERT A. DOLLAR
   EDWARD A. FILENE
   EDWIN C. BARNES

       ARTHUR BRISBANE
   WOODROW WILSON
   WM. HOWARD TAFT
   LUTHER BURBANK
   EDWARD W. BOK
   FRANK A. MUNSEY
   ELBERT H. GARY
   DR. ALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL
   JOHN H. PATTERSON
   JULIUS ROSENWALD
   STUART AUSTIN WIER
   DR. FRANK CRANE
   GEORGE M. ALEXANDER
   J. G. CHAPLINE
   HON. JENNINGS RANDOLPH
   ARTHUR NASH

     
      CLARENCE DARROW

     
  

These names represent but a small fraction of the hundreds of well known Americans whose achievements, financially and otherwise, prove that those who understand and apply the Carnegie secret, reach high stations in life. I have never known anyone who was inspired to use the secret, who did not achieve noteworthy success in his chosen calling. I have never known any person to distinguish himself, or to accumulate riches of any consequence, without possession of the secret. From these two

[p. 15]

facts I draw the conclusion that the secret is more important, as a part of the knowledge essential for self-determination, than any which one receives through what is popularly known as "education." What is EDUCATION, anyway? This has been answered in full detail.

As far as schooling is concerned, many of these men had very little. John Wanamaker once told me that what little schooling he had, he acquired in very much the same manner as a modern locomotive takes on water, by "scooping it up as it runs." Henry Ford never reached high school, let alone college. I am not attempting to minimize the value of schooling, but I am trying to express my earnest belief that those who master and apply the secret will reach high stations, accumulate riches, and bargain with life on their own terms, even if their schooling has been meager.

Somewhere, as you read, the secret to which I refer will jump from the page and stand boldly before you, IF YOU ARE READY FOR IT! When it appears, you will recognize it. Whether you receive the sign in the first or the last chapter, stop for a moment when it presents itself, and turn down a glass, for that occasion will mark the most important turning-point of your life.

We pass now, to Chapter One, and to the story of my very dear friend, who has generously acknowledged having seen the mystic sign, and whose business achievements are evidence enough that he turned down a glass. As you read his story, and the others, remember that they deal with the important problems of life, such as all men experience.

[p. 16]

[paragraph continues] The problems arising from one's endeavor to earn a living, to find hope, courage, contentment and peace of mind; to accumulate riches and to enjoy freedom of body and spirit.

Remember, too, as you go through the book, that it deals with facts and not with fiction, its purpose being to convey a great universal truth through which all who are READY may learn, not only WHAT TO DO, BUT ALSO HOW TO DO IT! and receive, as well, THE NEEDED STIMULUS TO MAKE A START.

As a final word of preparation, before you begin the first chapter, may I offer one brief suggestion which may provide a clue by which the Carnegie secret may be recognized? It is this--ALL ACHIEVEMENT, ALL EARNED RICHES, HAVE THEIR BEGINNING IN AN IDEA! If you are ready for the secret, you already possess one half of it, therefore, you will readily recognize the other half the moment it reaches your mind.

THE AUTHOR

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 17]

          

          

CHAPTER 1

   

INTRODUCTION

THE MAN WHO "THOUGHT" HIS WAY INTO PARTNERSHIP   WITH THOMAS A. EDISON

       

     
    

TRULY, "thoughts are things," and powerful things at that, when they are mixed with definiteness of purpose, persistence, and a BURNING DESIRE for their translation into riches, or other material objects.

A little more than thirty years ago, Edwin C. Barnes discovered how true it is that men really do THINK AND GROW RICH. His discovery did not come about at one sitting. It came little by little, beginning with a BURNING DESIRE to become a business associate of the great Edison.

One of the chief characteristics of Barnes' Desire was that it was definite. He wanted to work with Edison, not for him. Observe, carefully, the description of how he went about translating his DESIRE into reality, and you will have a better understanding of the thirteen principles which lead to riches.

When this DESIRE, or impulse of thought, first flashed into his mind he was in no position to act upon it. Two difficulties stood in his way. He did not know Mr. Edison, and he did not have enough money to pay his railroad fare to Orange, New Jersey.

These difficulties were sufficient to have discouraged

[p. 18]

the majority of men from making any attempt to carry out the desire. But his was no ordinary desire! He was so determined to find a way to carry out his desire that he finally decided to travel by "blind baggage," rather than be defeated. (To the uninitiated, this means that he went to East Orange on a freight train).

He presented himself at Mr. Edison's laboratory, and announced he had come to go into business with the inventor. In speaking of the first meeting between Barnes and Edison, years later, Mr. Edison said, "He stood there before me, looking like an ordinary tramp, but there was something in the expression of his face which conveyed the impression that he was determined to get what he had come after. I had learned, from years of experience with men, that when a man really DESIRES a thing so deeply that he is willing to stake his entire future on a single turn of the wheel in order to get it, he is sure to win. I gave him the opportunity he asked for, because I saw he had made up his mind to stand by until he succeeded. Subsequent events proved that no mistake was made."

Just what young Barnes said to Mr. Edison on that occasion was far less important than that which he thought. Edison, himself, said so! It could not have been the young man's appearance which got him his start in the Edison office, for that was definitely against him. It was what he THOUGHT that counted.

If the significance of this statement could be conveyed to every person who reads it, there would be no need for the remainder of this book.

[p. 19]

Barnes did not get his partnership with Edison on his first interview. He did get a chance to work in the Edison offices, at a very nominal wage, doing work that was unimportant to Edison, but most important to Barnes, because it gave him an opportunity to display his "merchandise" where his intended "partner" could see it.

Months went by. Apparently nothing happened to bring the coveted goal which Barnes had set up in his mind as his DEFINITE MAJOR PURPOSE. But something important was happening in Barnes' mind. He was constantly intensifying his DESIRE to become the business associate of Edison.

Psychologists have correctly said that "when one is truly ready for a thing, it puts in its appearance." Barnes was ready for a business association with Edison, moreover, he was DETERMINED TO REMAIN READY UNTIL HE GOT THAT WHICH HE WAS SEEKING.

He did not say to himself, "Ah well, what's the use? I guess I'll change my mind and try for a salesman's job." But, he did say, "I came here to go into business with Edison, and I'll accomplish this end if it takes the remainder of my life." He meant it! What a different story men would have to tell if only they would adopt a DEFINITE PURPOSE, and stand by that purpose until it had time to become an all-consuming obsession!

Maybe young Barnes did not know it at the time, but his bulldog determination, his persistence in standing back of a single DESIRE, was destined to mow down all opposition, and bring him the opportunity he was seeking.

[p. 20]

When the opportunity came, it appeared in a different form, and from a different direction than Barnes had expected. That is one of the tricks of opportunity. It has a sly habit of slipping in by the back door, and often it comes disguised in the form of misfortune, or temporary defeat. Perhaps this is why so many fail to recognize opportunity.

Mr. Edison had just perfected a new office device, known at that time, as the Edison Dictating Machine (now the Ediphone). His salesmen were not enthusiastic over the machine. They did not believe it could be sold without great effort. Barnes saw his opportunity. It had crawled in quietly, hidden in a queer looking machine which interested no one but Barnes and the inventor.

Barnes knew he could sell the Edison Dictating Machine. He suggested this to Edison, and promptly got his chance. He did sell the machine. In fact, he sold it so successfully that Edison gave him a contract to distribute and market it all over the nation. Out of that business association grew the slogan, "Made by Edison and installed by Barnes."

The business alliance has been in operation for more than thirty years. Out of it Barnes has made himself rich in money, but he has done something infinitely greater, he has proved that one really may "Think and Grow Rich."

How much actual cash that original DESIRE of Barnes' has been worth to him, I have no way of knowing. Perhaps it has brought him two or three million dollars, but the amount, whatever it is, becomes insignificant when compared with the greater

[p. 21]

asset he acquired in the form of definite knowledge that an intangible impulse of thought can be transmuted into its physical counterpart by the application of known principles.

Barnes literally thought himself into a partnership with the great Edison! He thought himself into a fortune. He had nothing to start with, except the capacity to KNOW WHAT HE WANTED, AND THE DETERMINATION TO STAND BY THAT DESIRE UNTIL HE REALIZED IT.

He had no money to begin with. He had but little education. He had no influence. But he did have initiative, faith, and the will to win. With these intangible forces he made himself number one man with the greatest inventor who ever lived.

Now, let us look at a different situation, and study a man who had plenty of tangible evidence of riches, but lost it, because he stopped three feet short of the goal he was seeking.

THREE FEET FROM GOLD

One of the most common causes of failure is the habit of quitting when one is overtaken by temporary defeat. Every person is guilty of this mistake at one time or another.

An uncle of R. U. Darby was caught by the "gold fever" in the gold-rush days, and went west to DIG AND GROW RICH. He had never heard that more gold has been mined from the brains of men than has ever been taken from the earth. He staked a claim and went to work with pick and shovel. The going was hard, but his lust for gold was definite.

After weeks of labor, he was rewarded by the

[p. 22]

discovery of the shining ore. He needed machinery to bring the ore to the surface. Quietly, he covered up the mine, retraced his footsteps to his home in Williamsburg, Maryland, told his relatives and a few neighbors of the "strike." They got together money for the needed machinery, had it shipped. The uncle and Darby went back to work the mine.

The first car of ore was mined, and shipped to a smelter. The returns proved they had one of the richest mines in Colorado! A few more cars of that ore would clear the debts. Then would come the big killing in profits.

Down went the drills! Up went the hopes of Darby and Uncle! Then something happened! The vein of gold ore disappeared! They had come to the end of the rainbow, and the pot of gold was no longer there! They drilled on, desperately trying to pick up the vein again--all to no avail.

Finally, they decided to QUIT.

They sold the machinery to a junk man for a few hundred dollars, and took the train back home. Some "junk" men are dumb, but not this one! He called in a mining engineer to look at the mine and do a little calculating. The engineer advised that the project had failed, because the owners were not familiar with "fault lines." His calculations showed that the vein would be found JUST THREE FEET FROM WHERE THE DARBYS HAD STOPPED DRILLING! That is exactly where it was found!

The "Junk" man took millions of dollars in ore from the mine, because he knew enough to seek expert counsel before giving up.

Most of the money which went into the machinery

[p. 23]

was procured through the efforts of R. U. Darby, who was then a very young man. The money came from his relatives and neighbors, because of their faith in him. He paid back every dollar of it, although he was years in doing so.

Long afterward, Mr. Darby recouped his loss many times over, when he made the discovery that DESIRE can be transmuted into gold. The discovery came after he went into the business of selling life insurance.

Remembering that he lost a huge fortune, because he STOPPED three feet from gold, Darby profited by the experience in his chosen work, by the simple method of saying to himself, "I stopped three feet from gold, but I will never stop because men say 'no' when I ask them to buy insurance."

Darby is one of a small group of fewer than fifty men who sell more than a million dollars in life insurance annually. He owes his "stickability" to the lesson he learned from his "quitability" in the gold mining business.

Before success comes in any man's life, he is sure to meet with much temporary defeat, and, perhaps, some failure. When defeat overtakes a man, the easiest and most logical thing to do is to QUIT. That is exactly what the majority of men do.

More than five hundred of the most successful men this country has ever known, told the author their greatest success came just one step beyond the point at which defeat had overtaken them. Failure is a trickster with a keen sense of irony and cunning. It takes great delight in tripping one when success is almost within reach.

[p. 24]

A FIFTY CENT LESSON IN PERSISTENCE

Shortly after Mr. Darby received his degree from the "University of Hard Knocks," and had decided to profit by his experience in the gold mining business, he had the good fortune to be present on an occasion that proved to him that "No" does not necessarily mean no.

One afternoon he was helping his uncle grind wheat in an old fashioned mill. The uncle operated a large farm on which a number of colored sharecrop farmers lived. Quietly, the door was opened, and a small colored child, the daughter of a tenant, walked in and took her place near the door.

The uncle looked up, saw the child, and barked at her roughly, "what do you want?"

Meekly, the child replied, "My mammy say send her fifty cents."

"I'll not do it," the uncle retorted, "Now you run on home."

"Yas sah," the child replied. But she did not move.

The uncle went ahead with his work, so busily engaged that he did not pay enough attention to the child to observe that she did not leave. When he looked up and saw her still standing there, he yelled at her, "I told you to go on home! Now go, or I'll take a switch to you."

The little girl said "yas sah," but she did not budge an inch.

The uncle dropped a sack of grain he was about to pour into the mill hopper, picked up a barrel stave, and started toward the child with an expression on his face that indicated trouble.

[p. 25]

Darby held his breath. He was certain he was about to witness a murder. He knew his uncle had a fierce temper. He knew that colored children were not supposed to defy white people in that part of the country.

When the uncle reached the spot where the child was standing, she quickly stepped forward one step, looked up into his eyes, and screamed at the top of her shrill voice, "MY MAMMY'S GOTTA HAVE THAT FIFTY CENTS!"

The uncle stopped, looked at her for a minute, then slowly laid the barrel stave on the floor, put his hand in his pocket, took out half a dollar, and gave it to her.

The child took the money and slowly backed toward the door, never taking her eyes off the man whom she had just conquered. After she had gone, the uncle sat down on a box and looked out the window into space for more than ten minutes. He was pondering, with awe, over the whipping he had just taken.

Mr. Darby, too, was doing some thinking. That was the first time in all his experience that he had seen a colored child deliberately master an adult white person. How did she do it. What happened to his uncle that caused him to lose his fierceness and become as docile as a lamb? What strange power did this child use that made her master over her superior? These and other similar questions flashed into Darby's mind, but he did not find the answer until years later, when he told me the story.

Strangely, the story of this unusual experience was told to the author in the old mill, on the very

[p. 26]

spot where the uncle took his whipping. Strangely, too, I had devoted nearly a quarter of a century to the study of the power which enabled an ignorant, illiterate colored child to conquer an intelligent man.

As we stood there in that musty old mill, Mr. Darby repeated the story of the unusual conquest, and finished by asking, "What can you make of it? What strange power did that child use, that so completely whipped my uncle?"

The answer to his question will be found in the principles described in this book. The answer is full and complete. It contains details and instructions sufficient to enable anyone to understand, and apply the same force which the little child accidentally stumbled upon.

Keep your mind alert, and you will observe exactly what strange power came to the rescue of the child, you will catch a glimpse of this power in the next chapter. Somewhere in the book you will find an idea that will quicken your receptive powers, and place at your command, for your own benefit, this same irresistible power. The awareness of this power may come to you in the first chapter, or it may flash into your mind in some subsequent chapter. It may come in the form of a single idea. Or, it may come in the nature of a plan, or a purpose. Again, it may cause you to go back into your past experiences of failure or defeat, and bring to the surface some lesson by which you can regain all that you lost through defeat.

After I had described to Mr. Darby the power unwittingly used by the little colored child, he quickly retraced his thirty years of experience as a

[p. 27]

life insurance salesman, and frankly acknowledged that his success in that field was due, in no small degree, to the lesson he had learned from the child.

Mr. Darby pointed out: "every time a prospect tried to bow me out, without buying, I saw that child standing there in the old mill, her big eyes glaring in defiance, and I said to myself, 'I've gotta make this sale.' The better portion of all sales I have made, were made after people had said 'NO'."

He recalled, too, his mistake in having stopped only three feet from gold, "but," he said, "that experience was a blessing in disguise. It taught me to keep on keeping on, no matter how hard the going may be, a lesson I needed to learn before I could succeed in anything."

This story of Mr. Darby and his uncle, the colored child and the gold mine, doubtless will be read by hundreds of men who make their living by selling life insurance, and to all of these, the author wishes to offer the suggestion that Darby owes to these two experiences his ability to sell more than a million dollars of life insurance every year.

Life is strange, and often imponderable! Both the successes and the failures have their roots in simple experiences. Mr. Darby's experiences were common-place and simple enough, yet they held the answer to his destiny in life, therefore they were as important (to him) as life itself. He profited by these two dramatic experiences, because he analyzed them, and found the lesson they taught. But what of the man who has neither the time, nor the inclination to study failure in search of knowledge that may lead to success? Where, and how is he to learn the

[p. 28]

art of converting defeat into stepping stones to opportunity?

In answer to these questions, this book was written.

The answer called for a description of thirteen principles, but remember, as you read, the answer you may be seeking, to the questions which have caused you to ponder over the strangeness of life, may be found in your own mind, through some idea, plan, or purpose which may spring into your mind as you read.

One sound idea is all that one needs to achieve success. The principles described in this book, contain the best, and the most practical of all that is known, concerning ways and means of creating useful ideas.

Before we go any further in our approach to the description of these principles, we believe you are entitled to receive this important suggestion. . . . WHEN RICHES BEGIN TO COME THEY COME SO QUICKLY, IN SUCH GREAT ABUNDANCE, THAT ONE WONDERS WHERE THEY HAVE BEEN HIDING DURING ALL THOSE LEAN YEARS. This is an astounding statement, and all the more so, when we take into consideration the popular belief, that riches come only to those who work hard and long.

When you begin to THINK AND GROW RICH, you will observe that riches begin with a state of mind, with definiteness of purpose, with little or no hard work. You, and every other person, ought to be interested in knowing how to acquire that state of mind which will attract riches. I spent

[p. 29]

twenty-five years in research, analyzing more than 25,000 people, because I, too, wanted to know "how wealthy men become that way."

Without that research, this book could not have been written.

Here take notice of a very significant truth, viz: The business depression started in 1929, and continued on to an all time record of destruction, until sometime after President Roosevelt entered office. Then the depression began to fade into nothingness. Just as an electrician in a theatre raises the lights so gradually that darkness is transmuted into light before you realize it, so did the spell of fear in the minds of the people gradually fade away and become faith.

Observe very closely, as soon as you master the principles of this philosophy, and begin to follow the instructions for applying those principles, your financial status will begin to improve, and everything you touch will begin to transmute itself into an asset for your benefit. Impossible? Not at all!

One of the main weaknesses of mankind is the average man's familiarity with the word "impossible." He knows all the rules which will NOT work. He knows all the things which CANNOT be done. This book was written for those who seek the rules which have made others successful, and are willing to stake everything on those rules.

A great many years ago I purchased a fine dictionary. The first thing I did with it was to turn to the word "impossible," and neatly clip it out of the book. That would not be an unwise thing for you to do.

[p. 30]

Success comes to those who become SUCCESS CONSCIOUS.

Failure comes to those who indifferently allow themselves to become FAILURE CONSCIOUS.

The object of this book is to help all who seek it, to learn the art of changing their minds from FAILURE CONSCIOUSNESS to SUCCESS CONSCIOUSNESS.

Another weakness found in altogether too many people, is the habit of measuring everything, and everyone, by their own impressions and beliefs. Some who will read this, will believe that no one can THINK AND GROW RICH. They cannot think in terms of riches, because their thought habits have been steeped in poverty, want, misery, failure, and defeat.

These unfortunate people remind me of a prominent Chinese, who came to America to be educated in American ways. He attended the University of Chicago. One day President Harper met this young Oriental on the campus, stopped to chat with him for a few minutes, and asked what had impressed him as being the most noticeable characteristic of the American people.

"Why," the Chinaman exclaimed, "the queer slant of your eyes. Your eyes are off slant!"

What do we say about the Chinese?

We refuse to believe that which we do not understand. We foolishly believe that our own limitations are the proper measure of limitations. Sure, the other fellow's eyes are "off slant," BECAUSE THEY ARE NOT THE SAME AS OUR OWN.

Millions of people look at the achievements of

[p. 31]

[paragraph continues] Henry Ford, after he has arrived, and envy him, because of his good fortune, or luck, or genius, or whatever it is that they credit for Ford's fortune. Perhaps one person in every hundred thousand knows the secret of Ford's success, and those who do know are too modest, or too reluctant, to speak of it, because of its simplicity. A single transaction will illustrate the "secret" perfectly.

A few years back, Ford decided to produce his now famous V-8 motor. He chose to build an engine with the entire eight cylinders cast in one block, and instructed his engineers to produce a design for the engine. The design was placed on paper, but the engineers agreed, to a man, that it was simply impossible to cast an eight cylinder gas engine block in one piece.

Ford said, "Produce it anyway."

"But," they replied, "it's impossible!"

"Go ahead," Ford commanded, "and stay on the job until you succeed no matter how much time is required."

The engineers went ahead. There was nothing else for them to do, if they were to remain on the Ford staff. Six months went by, nothing happened. Another six months passed, and still nothing happened. The engineers tried every conceivable plan to carry out the orders, but the thing seemed out of the question; "impossible!"

At the end of the year Ford checked with his engineers, and again they informed him they had found no way to carry out his orders.

"Go right ahead," said Ford, "I want it, and I'll have it."

[p. 32]

They went ahead, and then, as if by a stroke of magic, the secret was discovered.

The Ford DETERMINATION had won once more!

This story may not be described with minute accuracy, but the sum and substance of it is correct. Deduce from it, you who wish to THINK AND GROW RICH, the secret of the Ford millions, if you can. You'll not have to look very far.

Henry Ford is a success, because he understands, and applies the principles of success. One of these is DESIRE: knowing what one wants. Remember this Ford story as you read, and pick out the lines in which the secret of his stupendous achievement have been described. If you can do this, if you can lay your finger on the particular group of principles which made Henry Ford rich, you can equal his achievements in almost any calling for which you are suited.

YOU ARE "THE MASTER OF YOUR FATE, THE CAPTAIN OF YOUR SOUL," BECAUSE . . .

When Henley wrote the prophetic lines, "I am the Master of my Fate, I am the Captain of my Soul," he should have informed us that we are the Masters of our Fate, the Captains of our Souls, because we have the power to control our thoughts.

He should have told us that the ether in which this little earth floats, in which we move and have our being, is a form of energy moving at an inconceivably high rate of vibration, and that the ether is filled with a form of universal power which ADAPTS itself to the nature of the thoughts we

[p. 33]

hold in our minds; and INFLUENCES us, in natural ways, to transmute our thoughts into their physical equivalent.

If the poet had told us of this great truth, we would know WHY IT IS that we are the Masters of our Fate, the Captains of our Souls. He should have told us, with great emphasis, that this power makes no attempt to discriminate between destructive thoughts and constructive thoughts, that it will urge us to translate into physical reality thoughts of poverty, just as quickly as it will influence us to act upon thoughts of riches.

He should have told us, too, that our brains become magnetized with the dominating thoughts which we hold in our minds, and, by means with which no man is familiar, these "magnets" attract to us the forces, the people, the circumstances of life which harmonize with the nature of our dominating thoughts.

He should have told us, that before we can accumulate riches in great abundance, we must magnetize our minds with intense DESIRE for riches, that we must become "money conscious" until the DESIRE for money drives us to create definite plans for acquiring it.

But, being a poet, and not a philosopher, Henley contented himself by stating a great truth in poetic form, leaving those who followed him to interpret the philosophical meaning of his lines.

Little by little, the truth has unfolded itself, until it now appears certain that the principles described in this book, hold the secret of mastery over our economic fate.

[p. 34]

We are now ready to examine the first of these principles. Maintain a spirit of open-mindedness, and remember as you read, they are the invention of no one man. The principles were gathered from the life experiences of more than 500 men who actually accumulated riches in huge amounts; men who began in poverty, with but little education, without influence. The principles worked for these men. You can put them to work for your own enduring benefit.

You will find it easy, not hard, to do.

Before you read the next chapter, I want you to know that it conveys factual information which might easily change your entire financial destiny, as it has so definitely brought changes of stupendous proportions to two people described.

I want you to know, also, that the relationship between these two men and myself, is such that I could have taken no liberties with the facts, even if I had wished to do so. One of them has been my closest personal friend for almost twenty-five years, the other is my own son. The unusual success of these two men, success which they generously accredit to the principle described in the next chapter, more than justifies this personal reference as a means of emphasizing the far-flung power of this principle.

Almost fifteen years ago, I delivered the Commencement Address at Salem College, Salem, West Virginia. I emphasized the principle described in the next chapter, with so much intensity that one of the members of the graduating class definitely appropriated it, and made it a part of his own philosophy. The young man is now a Member of Congress,

[p. 35]

and an important factor in the present administration. Just before this book went to the publisher, he wrote me a letter in which he so clearly stated his opinion of the principle outlined in the next chapter, that I have chosen to publish his letter as an introduction to that chapter.

It gives you an idea of the rewards to come.

"My dear Napoleon:

"My service as a Member of Congress having given me an insight into the problems of men and women, I am writing to offer a suggestion which may become helpful to thousands of worthy people.

"With apologies, I must state that the suggestion, if acted upon, will mean several years of labor and responsibility for you, but I am en-heartened to make the suggestion, because I know your great love for rendering useful service.

"In 1922, you delivered the Commencement address at Salem College, when I was a member of the graduating class. In that address, you planted in my mind an idea which has been responsible for the opportunity I now have to serve the people of my State, and will be responsible, in a very large measure, for whatever success I may have in the future.

"The suggestion I have in mind is, that you put into a book the sum and substance of the address you delivered at Salem College, and in that way give the people of America an opportunity to profit by your many years of experience

[p. 36]

and association with the men who, by their greatness, have made America the richest nation on earth.

"I recall, as though it were yesterday, the marvelous description you gave of the method by which Henry Ford, with but little schooling, without a dollar, with no influential friends, rose to great heights. I made up my mind then, even before you had finished your speech, that I would make a place for myself, no matter how many difficulties I had to surmount.

"Thousands of young people will finish their schooling this year, and within the next few years. Every one of them will be seeking just such a message of practical encouragement as the one I received from you. They will want to know where to turn, what to do, to get started in life. You can tell them, because you have helped to solve the problems of so many, many people.

"If there is any possible way that you can afford to render so great a service, may I offer the suggestion that you include with every book, one of your Personal Analysis Charts, in order that the purchaser of the book may have the benefit of a complete self-inventory, indicating, as you indicated to me years ago, exactly what is standing in the way of success.

"Such a service as this, providing the readers of your book with a complete, unbiased picture of their faults and their virtues, would mean to them the difference between success and failure. The service would be priceless.

[p. 37]

"Millions of people are now facing the problem of staging a come-back, because of the depression, and I speak from personal experience when I say, I know these earnest people would welcome the opportunity to tell you their problems, and to receive your suggestions for the solution.

"You know the problems of those who face the necessity of beginning all over again. There are thousands of people in America today who would like to know how they can convert ideas into money, people who must start at scratch, without finances, and recoup their losses. If anyone can help them, you can.

"If you publish the book, I would like to own the first copy that comes from the press, personally autographed by you.

"With best wishes, believe me,

"Cordially yours,

"JENNINGS RANDOLPH"

 

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38]

          

          

CHAPTER 2

   

DESIRE

THE STARTING POINT OF ALL ACHIEVEMENT

The First Step   toward Riches

       

     
    

WHEN Edwin C. Barnes climbed down from the freight train in Orange, N. J., more than thirty years ago, he may have resembled a tramp, but his thoughts were those of a king!

As he made his way from the railroad tracks to Thomas A. Edison's office, his mind was at work. He saw himself standing in Edison's presence. He heard himself asking Mr. Edison for an opportunity to carry out the one CONSUMING OBSESSION OF HIS LIFE, a BURNING DESIRE to become the business associate of the great inventor.

Barnes' desire was not a hope! It was not a wish! It was a keen, pulsating DESIRE, which transcended everything else. It was DEFINITE.

The desire was not new when he approached Edison. It had been Barnes' dominating desire for a long time. In the beginning, when the desire first appeared in his mind, it may have been, probably was, only a wish, but it was no mere wish when he appeared before Edison with it.

A few years later, Edwin C. Barnes again stood before Edison, in the same office where he first met the inventor. This time his DESIRE had been translated into reality. He was in business with Edison. The dominating DREAM OF HIS LIFE had become a reality. Today, people who know

[p. 39]

[paragraph continues] Barnes envy him, because of the "break" life yielded him. They see him in the days of his triumph, without taking the trouble to investigate the cause of his success.

Barnes succeeded because he chose a definite goal, placed all his energy, all his will power, all his effort, everything back of that goal. He did not become the partner of Edison the day he arrived. He was content to start in the most menial work, as long as it provided an opportunity to take even one step toward his cherished goal.

Five years passed before the chance he had been seeking made its appearance. During all those years not one ray of hope, not one promise of attainment of his DESIRE had been held out to him. To everyone, except himself, he appeared only another cog in the Edison business wheel, but in his own mind, HE WAS THE PARTNER OF EDISON EVERY MINUTE OF THE TIME, from the very day that he first went to work there.

It is a remarkable illustration of the power of a DEFINITE DESIRE. Barnes won his goal, because he wanted to be a business associate of Mr. Edison, more than he wanted anything else. He created a plan by which to attain that purpose. But he BURNED ALL BRIDGES BEHIND HIM. He stood by his DESIRE until it became the dominating obsession of his life--and--finally, a fact.

When he went to Orange, he did not say to himself, "I will try to induce Edison to give me a job of some sort." He said, "I will see Edison, and put him on notice that I have come to go into business with him."

[p. 40]

He did not say, "I will work there for a few months, and if I get no encouragement, I will quit and get a job somewhere else." He did say, "I will start anywhere. I will do anything Edison tells me to do, but before I am through, I will be his associate."

He did not say, "I will keep my eyes open for another opportunity, in case I fail to get what I want in the Edison organization." He said, "There is but ONE thing in this world that I am determined to have, and that is a business association with Thomas A. Edison. I will burn all bridges behind me, and stake my ENTIRE FUTURE on my ability to get what I want."

He left himself no possible way of retreat. He had to win or perish!

That is all there is to the Barnes story of success!

A long while ago, a great warrior faced a situation which made it necessary for him to make a decision which insured his success on the battlefield. He was about to send his armies against a powerful foe, whose men outnumbered his own. He loaded his soldiers into boats, sailed to the enemy's country, unloaded soldiers and equipment, then gave the order to burn the ships that had carried them. Addressing his men before the first battle, he said, "You see the boats going up in smoke. That means that we cannot leave these shores alive unless we win! We now have no choice--we win--or we perish! They won.

Every person who wins in any undertaking must be willing to burn his ships and cut all sources of retreat. Only by so doing can one be sure of main-

[p. 41]

taming that state of mind known as a BURNING DESIRE TO WIN, essential to success.

The morning after the great Chicago fire, a group of merchants stood on State Street, looking at the smoking remains of what had been their stores. They went into a conference to decide if they would try to rebuild, or leave Chicago and start over in a more promising section of the country. They reached a decision--all except one--to leave Chicago.

The merchant who decided to stay and rebuild pointed a finger at the remains of his store, and said, "Gentlemen, on that very spot I will build the world's greatest store, no matter how many times it may burn down."

That was more than fifty years ago. The store was built. It stands there today, a towering monument to the power of that state of mind known as a BURNING DESIRE. The easy thing for Marshal Field to have done, would have been exactly what his fellow merchants did. When the going was hard, and the future looked dismal, they pulled up and went where the going seemed easier.

Mark well this difference between Marshal Field and the other merchants, because it is the same difference which distinguishes Edwin C. Barnes from thousands of other young men who have worked in the Edison organization. It is the same difference which distinguishes practically all who succeed from those who fail.

Every human being who reaches the age of understanding of the purpose of money, wishes for it. Wishing will not bring riches. But desiring riches with a state of mind that becomes an obsession, then

[p. 42]

planning definite ways and means to acquire riches, and backing those plans with persistence which does not recognize failure, will bring riches.

The method by which DESIRE for riches can be transmuted into its financial equivalent, consists of six definite, practical steps, viz:

        First.

       Fix in your   mind the exact amount of money you   desire. It is not sufficient merely to say "I want plenty of money."   Be definite as to the amount. (There is a psychological reason for   definiteness which will be described in a subsequent chapter).

     
      Second.

       Determine   exactly what you intend to give in return for the money you desire. (There is   no such reality as "something for nothing.)

     
      Third.

       Establish a   definite date when you intend to possess   the money you desire.

     
      Fourth.

       Create a   definite plan for carrying out your desire, and begin at once, whether you are ready or not, to put this plan into action.

     
      Fifth.

       Write out a   clear, concise statement of the amount of money you intend to acquire, name   the time limit for its acquisition, state what you intend to give in return   for the money, and describe clearly the plan through which you intend to   accumulate it.

     
      Sixth.

       Read your   written statement aloud, twice daily, once just before retiring at night, and   once after arising in the morning. AS YOU

     
       

       [p. 43]

     
       

       [paragraph continues] READ--SEE   AND FEEL AND BELIEVE YOURSELF ALREADY IN POSSESSION OF THE MONEY.

     
 It is important that you follow the instructions described in these six steps. It is especially important that you observe, and follow the instructions in the sixth paragraph. You may complain that it is impossible for you to "see yourself in possession of money" before you actually have it. Here is where a BURNING DESIRE will come to your aid. If you truly DESIRE money so keenly that your desire is an obsession, you will have no difficulty in convincing yourself that you will acquire it. The object is to want money, and to become so determined to have it that you CONVINCE yourself you will have it.

Only those who become "money conscious" ever accumulate great riches. "Money consciousness" means that the mind has become so thoroughly saturated with the DESIRE for money, that one can see one's self already in possession of it.

To the uninitiated, who has not been schooled in the working principles of the human mind, these instructions may appear impractical. It may be helpful, to all who fail to recognize the soundness of the six steps, to know that the information they convey, was received from Andrew Carnegie, who began as an ordinary laborer in the steel mills, but managed, despite his humble beginning, to make these principles yield him a fortune of considerably more than one hundred million dollars.

It may be of further help to know that the six

[p. 44]

steps here recommended were carefully scrutinized by the late Thomas A. Edison, who placed his stamp of approval upon them as being, not only the steps essential for the accumulation of money, but necessary for the attainment of any definite goal.

The steps call for no "hard labor." They call for no sacrifice. They do not require one to become ridiculous, or credulous. To apply them calls for no great amount of education. But the successful application of these six steps does call for sufficient imagination to enable one to see, and to understand, that accumulation of money cannot be left to chance, good fortune, and luck. One must realize that all who have accumulated great fortunes, first did a certain amount of dreaming, hoping, wishing, DESIRING, and PLANNING before they acquired money.

You may as well know, right here, that you can never have riches in great quantities, UNLESS you can work yourself into a white heat of DESIRE for money, and actually BELIEVE you will possess it.

You may as well know, also that every great leader, from the dawn of civilization down to the present, was a dreamer. Christianity is the greatest potential power in the world today, because its founder was an intense dreamer who had the vision and the imagination to see realities in their mental and spiritual form before they had been transmuted into physical form.

If you do not see great riches in your imagination, you will never see them in your bank balance.

Never, in the history of America has there been

[p. 45]

so great an opportunity for practical dreamers as now exists. The six year economic collapse has reduced all men, substantially, to the same level. A new race is about to be run. The stakes represent huge fortunes which will be accumulated within the next ten years. The rules of the race have changed, because we now live in a CHANGED WORLD that definitely favors the masses, those who had but little or no opportunity to win under the conditions existing during the depression, when fear paralyzed growth and development.

We who are in this race for riches, should be encouraged to know that this changed world in which we live is demanding new ideas, new ways of doing things, new leaders, new inventions, new methods of teaching, new methods of marketing, new books, new literature, new features for the radio, new ideas for moving pictures. Back of all this demand for new and better things, there is one quality which one must possess to win, and that is DEFINITENESS OF PURPOSE, the knowledge of what one wants, and a burning DESIRE to possess it.

The business depression marked the death of one age, and the birth of another. This changed world requires practical dreamers who can, and will put their dreams into action. The practical dreamers have always been, and always will be the pattern-makers of civilization.

We who desire to accumulate riches, should remember the real leaders of the world always have been men who harnessed, and put into practical use, the intangible, unseen forces of unborn opportunity, and have converted those forces, (or impulses

[p. 46]

of thought), into sky-scrapers, cities, factories, airplanes, automobiles, and every form of convenience that makes life more pleasant.

Tolerance, and an open mind are practical necessities of the dreamer of today. Those who are afraid of new ideas are doomed before they start. Never has there been a time more favorable to pioneers than the present. True, there is no wild and woolly west to be conquered, as in the days of the Covered Wagon; but there is a vast business, financial, and industrial world to be remoulded and redirected along new and better lines.

In planning to acquire your share of the riches, let no one influence you to scorn the dreamer. To win the big stakes in this changed world, you must catch the spirit of the great pioneers of the past, whose dreams have given to civilization all that it has of value, the spirit which serves as the life-blood of our own country--your opportunity and mine, to develop and market our talents.

Let us not forget, Columbus dreamed of an Unknown world, staked his life on the existence of such a world, and discovered it!

Copernicus, the great astronomer, dreamed of a multiplicity of worlds, and revealed them! No one denounced him as "impractical" after he had triumphed. Instead, the world worshipped at his shrine, thus proving once more that "SUCCESS REQUIRES NO APOLOGIES, FAILURE PERMITS NO ALIBIS."

If the thing you wish to do is right, and you believe in it, go ahead and do it! Put your dream across, and never mind what "they" say if you meet

[p. 47]

with temporary defeat, for "they," perhaps, do not know that EVERY FAILURE BRINGS WITH IT THE SEED OF AN EQUIVALENT SUCCESS.

Henry Ford, poor and uneducated, dreamed of a horseless carriage, went to work with what tools he possessed, without waiting for opportunity to favor him, and now evidence of his dream belts the entire earth. He has put more wheels into operation than any man who ever lived, because he was not afraid to back his dreams.

Thomas Edison dreamed of a lamp that could be operated by electricity, began where he stood to put his dream into action, and despite more than ten thousand failures, he stood by that dream until he made it a physical reality. Practical dreamers DO NOT QUIT!

Whelan dreamed of a chain of cigar stores, transformed his dream into action, and now the United Cigar Stores occupy the best corners in America.

Lincoln dreamed of freedom for the black slaves, put his dream into action, and barely missed living to see a united North and South translate his dream into reality.

The Wright brothers dreamed of a machine that would fly through the air. Now one may see evidence all over the world, that they dreamed soundly.

Marconi dreamed of a system for harnessing the intangible forces of the ether. Evidence that he did not dream in vain, may be found in every wireless and radio in the world. Moreover, Marconi's dream brought the humblest cabin, and the most stately manor house side by side. It made the

[p. 48]

people of every nation on earth back-door neighbors. It gave the President of the United States a medium by which he may talk to all the people of America at one time, and on short notice. It may interest you to know that Marconi's "friends" had him taken into custody, and examined in a psychopathic hospital, when he announced he had discovered a principle through which he could send messages through the air, without the aid of wires, or other direct physical means of communication. The dreamers of today fare better.

The world has become accustomed to new discoveries. Nay, it has shown a willingness to reward the dreamer who gives the world a new idea.

"The greatest achievement was, at first, and for a time, but a dream."

"The oak sleeps in the acorn. The bird waits in the egg, and in the highest vision of the soul, a waking angel stirs. DREAMS ARE THE SEEDLINGS OF REALITY."

Awake, arise, and assert yourself, you dreamers of the world. Your star is now in the ascendency. The world depression brought the opportunity you have been waiting for. It taught people humility, tolerance, and open-mindedness.

The world is filled with an abundance of OPPORTUNITY which the dreamers of the past never knew.

A BURNING DESIRE TO BE, AND TO DO is the starting point from which the dreamer must take off. Dreams are not born of indifference, laziness, or lack of ambition.

The world no longer scoffs at the dreamer, nor

[p. 49]

calls him impractical. If you think it does, take a trip to Tennessee, and witness what a dreamer President has done in the way of harnessing, and using the great water power of America. A score of years ago, such a dream would have seemed like madness.

You have been disappointed, you have undergone defeat during the depression, you have felt the great heart within you crushed until it bled. Take courage, for these experiences have tempered the spiritual metal of which you are made--they are assets of incomparable value.

Remember, too, that all who succeed in life get off to a bad start, and pass through many heartbreaking struggles before they "arrive." The turning point in the lives of those who succeed, usually comes at the moment of some crisis, through which they are introduced to their "other selves."

John Bunyan wrote the Pilgrim's Progress, which is among the finest of all English literature, after he had been confined in prison and sorely punished, because of his views on the subject of religion.

O. Henry discovered the genius which slept within his brain, after he had met with great misfortune, and was confined in a prison cell, in Columbus, Ohio. Being FORCED, through misfortune, to become acquainted with his "other self," and to use his IMAGINATION, he discovered himself to be a great author instead of a miserable criminal and outcast. Strange and varied are the ways of life, and stranger still are the ways of Infinite Intelligence, through which men are sometimes forced to undergo all sorts of punishment before discovering their

[p. 50]

own brains, and their own capacity to create useful ideas through imagination.

Edison, the world's greatest inventor and scientist, was a "tramp" telegraph operator, he failed innumerable times before he was driven, finally, to the discovery of the genius which slept within his brain.

Charles Dickens began by pasting labels on blacking pots. The tragedy of his first love penetrated the depths of his soul, and converted him into one of the world's truly great authors. That tragedy produced, first, David Copperfield, then a succession of other works that made this a richer and better world for all who read his books. Disappointment over love affairs, generally has the effect of driving men to drink, and women to ruin; and this, because most people never learn the art of transmuting their strongest emotions into dreams of a constructive nature.

Helen Keller became deaf, dumb, and blind shortly after birth. Despite her greatest misfortune, she has written her name indelibly in the pages of the history of the great. Her entire life has served as evidence that no one ever is defeated until defeat has been accepted as a reality.

Robert Burns was an illiterate country lad, he was cursed by poverty, and grew up to be a drunkard in the bargain. The world was made better for his having lived, because he clothed beautiful thoughts in poetry, and thereby plucked a thorn and planted a rose in its place.

Booker T. Washington was born in slavery, handicapped by race and color. Because he was tolerant, had an open mind at all times, on all subjects, and

[p. 51]

was a DREAMER, he left his impress for good on an entire race.

Beethoven was deaf, Milton was blind, but their names will last as long as time endures, because they dreamed and translated their dreams into organized thought.

Before passing to the next chapter, kindle anew in your mind the fire of hope, faith, courage, and tolerance. If you have these states of mind, and a working knowledge of the principles described, all else that you need will come to you, when you are READY for it. Let Emerson state the thought in these words, "Every proverb, every book, every byword that belongs to thee for aid and comfort shall surely come home through open or winding passages. Every friend whom not thy fantastic will, but the great and tender soul in thee craveth, shall lock thee in his embrace."

There is a difference between WISHING for a thing and being READY to receive it. No one is ready for a thing, until he believes he can acquire it. The state of mind must be BELIEF, not mere hope or wish. Open-mindedness is essential for belief. Closed minds do not inspire faith, courage, and belief.

Remember, no more effort is required to aim high in life, to demand abundance and prosperity, than is required to accept misery and poverty. A great poet has correctly stated this universal truth through these lines:

"I bargained with Life for a penny,
   And Life would pay no more, [p. 52]
 However I begged at evening
   When I counted my scanty store.

"For Life is a just employer,
   He gives you what you ask,
 But once you have set the wages,
   Why, you must bear the task.

"I worked for a menial's hire,
   Only to learn, dismayed,
 That any wage I had asked of Life,
   Life would have willingly paid."

DESIRE OUTWITS MOTHER NATURE

As a fitting climax to this chapter, I wish to introduce one of the most unusual persons I have ever known. I first saw him twenty-four years ago, a few minutes after he was born. He came into the world without any physical sign of ears, and the doctor admitted, when pressed for an opinion, that the child might be deaf, and mute for life.

I challenged the doctor's opinion. I had the right to do so, I was the child's father. I, too, reached a decision, and rendered an opinion, but I expressed the opinion silently, in the secrecy of my own heart. I decided that my son would hear and speak. Nature could send me a child without ears, but Nature could not induce me to accept the reality of the affliction.

In my own mind I knew that my son would hear and speak. How? I was sure there must be a way, and I knew I would find it. I thought of the words of the immortal Emerson, "The whole course of things goes to teach us faith. We need only obey.

[p. 53]

[paragraph continues] There is guidance for each of us, and by lowly listening, we shall hear the right word."

The right word? DESIRE! More than anything else, I DESIRED that my son should not be a deaf mute. From that desire I never receded, not for a second.

Many years previously, I had written, "Our only limitations are those we set up in our own minds." For the first time, I wondered if that statement were true. Lying on the bed in front of me was a newly born child, without the natural equipment of hearing. Even though he might hear and speak, he was obviously disfigured for life. Surely, this was a limitation which that child had not set up in his own mind.

What could I do about it? Somehow I would find a way to transplant into that child's mind my own BURNING DESIRE for ways and means of conveying sound to his brain without the aid of ears.

As soon as the child was old enough to cooperate, I would fill his mind so completely with a BURNING DESIRE to hear, that Nature would, by methods of her own, translate it into physical reality.

All this thinking took place in my own mind, but I spoke of it to no one. Every day I renewed the pledge I had made to myself, not to accept a deaf mute for a son.

As he grew older, and began to take notice of things around him, we observed that he had a slight degree of hearing. When he reached the age when children usually begin talking, he made no attempt to speak, but we could tell by his actions that he could hear certain sounds slightly. That was all I

[p. 54]

wanted to know! I was convinced that if he could hear, even slightly, he might develop still greater hearing capacity. Then something happened which gave me hope. It came from an entirely unexpected source.

We bought a victrola. When the child heard the music for the first time, he went into ecstasies, and promptly appropriated the machine. He soon showed a preference for certain records, among them, "It's a Long Way to Tipperary." On one occasion, he played that piece over and over, for almost two hours, standing in front of the victrola, with his teeth clamped on the edge of the case. The significance of this self-formed habit of his did not become clear to us until years afterward, for we had never heard of the principle of "bone conduction" of sound at that time.

Shortly after he appropriated the victrola, I discovered that he could hear me quite clearly when I spoke with my lips touching his mastoid bone, or at the base of the brain. These discoveries placed in my possession the necessary media by which I began to translate into reality my Burning Desire to help my son develop hearing and speech. By that time he was making stabs at speaking certain words. The outlook was far from encouraging, but DESIRE BACKED BY FAITH knows no such word as impossible.

Having determined that he could hear the sound of my voice plainly, I began, immediately, to transfer to his mind the desire to hear and speak. I soon discovered that the child enjoyed bedtime stories, so I went to work, creating stories designed to develop

[p. 55]

in him self-reliance, imagination, and a keen desire to hear and to be normal.

There was one story in particular, which I emphasized by giving it some new and dramatic coloring each time it was told. It was designed to plant in his mind the thought that his affliction was not a liability, but an asset of great value. Despite the fact that all the philosophy I had examined clearly indicated that EVERY ADVERSITY BRINGS WITH IT THE SEED OF AN EQUIVALENT ADVANTAGE, I must confess that I had not the slightest idea how this affliction could ever become an asset. However, I continued my practice of wrapping that philosophy in bedtime stories, hoping the time would come when he would find some plan by which his handicap could be made to serve some useful purpose.

Reason told me plainly, that there was no adequate compensation for the lack of ears and natural hearing equipment. DESIRE backed by FAITH, pushed reason aside, and inspired me to carry on.

As I analyze the experience in retrospect, I can see now, that my son's faith in me had much to do with the astounding results. He did not question anything I told him. I sold him the idea that he had a distinct advantage over his older brother, and that this advantage would reflect itself in many ways. For example, the teachers in school would observe that he had no ears, and, because of this, they would show him special attention and treat him with extraordinary kindness. They always did. His mother saw to that, by visiting the teachers and arranging with them to give the child the extra attention

[p. 56]

necessary. I sold him the idea, too, that when he became old enough to sell newspapers, (his older brother had already become a newspaper merchant), he would have a big advantage over his brother, for the reason that people would pay him extra money for his wares, because they could see that he was a bright, industrious boy, despite the fact he had no ears.

We could notice that, gradually, the child's hearing was improving. Moreover, he had not the slightest tendency to be self-conscious, because of his affliction. When he was about seven, he showed the first evidence that our method of servicing his mind was bearing fruit. For several months he begged for the privilege of selling newspapers, but his mother would not give her consent. She was afraid that his deafness made it unsafe for him to go on the street alone.

Finally, he took matters in his own hands. One afternoon, when he was left at home with the servants, he climbed through the kitchen window, shinnied to the ground, and set out on his own. He borrowed six cents in capital from the neighborhood shoemaker, invested it in papers, sold out, reinvested, and kept repeating until late in the evening. After balancing his accounts, and paying back the six cents he had borrowed from his banker, he had a net profit of forty-two cents. When we got home that night, we found him in bed asleep, with the money tightly clenched in his hand.

His mother opened his hand, removed the coins, and cried. Of all things! Crying over her son's first victory seemed so inappropriate. My reaction was

[p. 57]

the reverse. I laughed heartily, for I knew that my endeavor to plant in the child's mind an attitude of faith in himself had been successful.

His mother saw, in his first business venture, a little deaf boy who had gone out in the streets and risked his life to earn money. I saw a brave, ambitious, self-reliant little business man whose stock in himself had been increased a hundred percent, because he had gone into business on his own initiative, and had won. The transaction pleased me, because I knew that he had given evidence of a trait of resourcefulness that would go with him all through life. Later events proved this to be true. When his older brother wanted something, he would lie down on the floor, kick his feet in the air, cry for it--and get it. When the "little deaf boy" wanted something, he would plan a way to earn the money, then buy it for himself. He still follows that plan!

Truly, my own son has taught me that handicaps can be converted into stepping stones on which one may climb toward some worthy goal, unless they are accepted as obstacles, and used as alibis.

The little deaf boy went through the grades, high school, and college without being able to hear his teachers, excepting when they shouted loudly, at close range. He did not go to a school for the deaf. WE WOULD NOT PERMIT HIM TO LEARN THE SIGN LANGUAGE. We were determined that he should live a normal life, and associate with normal children, and we stood by that decision, although it cost us many heated debates with school officials.

[p. 58]

While he was in high school, he tried an electrical hearing aid, but it was of no value to him; due, we believed, to a condition that was disclosed when the child was six, by Dr. J. Gordon Wilson, of Chicago, when he operated on one side of the boy's head, and discovered that there was no sign of natural hearing equipment.

During his last week in college, (eighteen years after the operation), something happened which marked the most important turning-point of his life. Through what seemed to be mere chance, he came into possession of another electrical hearing device, which was sent to him on trial. He was slow about testing it, due to his disappointment with a similar device. Finally he picked the instrument up, and more or less carelessly, placed it on his head, hooked up the battery, and lo! as if by a stroke of magic, his lifelong DESIRE FOR NORMAL HEARING BECAME A REALITY! For the first time in his life he heard practically as well as any person with normal hearing. "God moves in mysterious ways, His wonders to perform."

Overjoyed because of the Changed World which had been brought to him through his hearing device, he rushed to the telephone, called his mother, and heard her voice perfectly. The next day he plainly heard the voices of his professors in class, for the first time in his life! Previously he could hear them only when they shouted, at short range. He heard the radio. He heard the talking pictures. For the first time in his life, he could converse freely with other people, without the necessity of their having to speak loudly. Truly, he had come into possession

[p. 59]

of a Changed World. We had refused to accept Nature's error, and, by PERSISTENT DESIRE, we had induced Nature to correct that error, through the only practical means available.

DESIRE had commenced to pay dividends, but the victory was not yet complete. The boy still had to find a definite and practical way to convert his handicap into an equivalent asset.

Hardly realizing the significance of what had already been accomplished, but intoxicated with the joy of his newly discovered world of sound, he wrote a letter to the manufacturer of the hearing-aid, enthusiastically describing his experience. Something in his letter; something, perhaps which was not written on the lines, but back of them; caused the company to invite him to New York. When he arrived, he was escorted through the factory, and while talking with the Chief Engineer, telling him about his changed world, a hunch, an idea, or an inspiration--call it what you wish--flashed into his mind. It was this impulse of thought which converted his affliction into an asset, destined to pay dividends in both money and happiness to thousands for all time to come.

The sum and substance of that impulse of thought was this: It occurred to him that he might be of help to the millions of deafened people who go through life without the benefit of hearing devices, if he could find a way to tell them the story of his Changed World. Then and there, he reached a decision to devote the remainder of his life to rendering useful service to the hard of hearing.

For an entire month, he carried on an intensive

[p. 60]

research, during which he analyzed the entire marketing system of the manufacturer of the hearing device, and created ways and means of communicating with the hard of hearing all over the world for the purpose of sharing with them his newly discovered "Changed World." When this was done, he put in writing a two-year plan, based upon his findings. When he presented the plan to the company, he was instantly given a position, for the purpose of carrying out his ambition.

Little did he dream, when he went to work, that he was destined to bring hope and practical relief to thousands of deafened people who, without his help, would have been doomed forever to deaf mutism.

Shortly after he became associated with the manufacturer of his hearing aid, he invited me to attend a class conducted by his company, for the purpose of teaching deaf mutes to hear, and to speak. I had never heard of such a form of education, therefore I visited the class, skeptical but hopeful that my time would not be entirely wasted. Here I saw a demonstration which gave me a greatly enlarged vision of what I had done to arouse and keep alive in my son's mind the DESIRE for normal hearing. I saw deaf mutes actually being taught to hear and to speak, through application of the self-same principle I had used, more than twenty years previously, in saving my son from deaf mutism.

Thus, through some strange turn of the Wheel of Fate, my son, Blair, and I have been destined to aid in correcting deaf mutism for those as yet unborn,

[p. 61]

because we are the only living human beings, as far as I know, who have established definitely the fact that deaf mutism can be corrected to the extent of restoring to normal life those who suffer with this affliction. It has been done for one; it will be done for others.

There is no doubt in my mind that Blair would have been a deaf mute all his life, if his mother and I had not managed to shape his mind as we did. The doctor who attended at his birth told us, confidentially, the child might never hear or speak. A few weeks ago, Dr. Irving Voorhees, a noted specialist on such cases, examined Blair very thoroughly. He was astounded when he learned how well my son now hears, and speaks, and said his examination indicated that "theoretically, the boy should not be able to hear at all." But the lad does hear, despite the fact that X-ray pictures show there is no opening in the skull, whatsoever, from where his ears should be to the brain.

When I planted in his mind the DESIRE to hear and talk, and live as a normal person, there went with that impulse some strange influence which caused Nature to become bridge-builder, and span the gulf of silence between his brain and the outer world, by some means which the keenest medical specialists have not been able to interpret. It would be sacrilege for me to even conjecture as to how Nature performed this miracle. It would be unforgivable if I neglected to tell the world as much as I know of the humble part I assumed in the strange experience. It is my duty, and a privilege to say I believe, and not without reason, that nothing

[p. 62]

is impossible to the person who backs DESIRE with enduring FAITH.

Verily, a BURNING DESIRE has devious ways of transmuting itself into its physical equivalent. Blair DESIRED normal hearing; now he has it! He was born with a handicap which might easily have sent one with a less defined DESIRE to the street with a bundle of pencils and a tin cup. That handicap now promises to serve as the medium by which he will render useful service to many millions of hard of hearing, also, to give him useful employment at adequate financial compensation the remainder of his life.

The little "white lies" I planted in his mind when he was a child, by leading him to BELIEVE his affliction would become a great asset, which he could capitalize, has justified itself. Verily, there is nothing, right or wrong, which BELIEF, plus BURNING DESIRE, cannot make real. These qualities are free to everyone.

In all my experience in dealing with men and women who had personal problems, I never handled a single case which more definitely demonstrates the power of DESIRE. Authors sometimes make the mistake of writing of subjects of which they have but superficial, or very elementary knowledge. It has been my good fortune to have had the privilege of testing the soundness of the POWER OF DESIRE, through the affliction of my own son. Perhaps it was providential that the experience came as it did, for surely no one is better prepared than he, to serve as an example of what happens when DESIRE is put to the test. If Mother Nature bends to 

[p. 63]

the will of desire, is it logical that mere men can defeat a burning desire?

Strange and imponderable is the power of the human mind! We do not understand the method by which it uses every circumstance, every individual, every physical thing within its reach, as a means of transmuting DESIRE into its physical counterpart. Perhaps science will uncover this secret.

I planted in my son's mind the DESIRE to hear and to speak as any normal person hears and speaks. That DESIRE has now become a reality. I planted in his mind the DESIRE to convert his greatest handicap into his greatest asset. That DESIRE has been realized. The modus operandi by which this astounding result was achieved is not hard to describe. It consisted of three very definite facts; first, I MIXED FAITH with the DESIRE for normal hearing, which I passed on to my son. Second, I communicated my desire to him in every conceivable way available, through persistent, continuous effort, over a period of years. Third, HE BELIEVED ME!

As this chapter was being completed, news came of the death of Mme. Schuman-Heink. One short paragraph in the news dispatch gives the clue to this unusual woman's stupendous success as a singer. I quote the paragraph, because the clue it contains is none other than DESIRE.

Early in her career, Mme. Schuman-Heink visited the director of the Vienna Court Opera, to have him test her voice. But, he did not test it. After taking one look at the awkward and poorly dressed

[p. 64]

girl, he exclaimed, none too gently, "With such a face, and with no personality at all, how can you ever expect to succeed in opera? My good child, give up the idea. Buy a sewing machine, and go to work. YOU CAN NEVER BE A SINGER."

Never is a long time! The director of the Vienna Court Opera knew much about the technique of singing. He knew little about the power of desire, when it assumes the proportion of an obsession. If he had known more of that power, he would not have made the mistake of condemning genius without giving it an opportunity.

Several years ago, one of my business associates became ill. He became worse as time went on, and finally was taken to the hospital for an operation. Just before he was wheeled into the operating room, I took a look at him, and wondered how anyone as thin and emaciated as he, could possibly go through a major operation successfully. The doctor warned me that there was little if any chance of my ever seeing him alive again. But that was the DOCTOR'S OPINION. It was not the opinion of the patient. Just before he was wheeled away, he whispered feebly, "Do not be disturbed, Chief, I will be out of here in a few days." The attending nurse looked at me with pity. But the patient did come through safely. After it was all over, his physician said, "Nothing but his own desire to live saved him. He never would have pulled through if he had not refused to accept the possibility of death."

I believe in the power of DESIRE backed by FAITH, because I have seen this power lift men

[p. 65]

from lowly beginnings to places of power and wealth; I have seen it rob the grave of its victims; I have seen it serve as the medium by which men staged a comeback after having been defeated in a hundred different ways; I have seen it provide my own son with a normal, happy, successful life, despite Nature's having sent him into the world without ears.

How can one harness and use the power of DESIRE? This has been answered through this, and the subsequent chapters of this book. This message is going out to the world at the end of the longest, and perhaps, the most devastating depression America has ever known. It is reasonable to presume that the message may come to the attention of many who have been wounded by the depression, those who have lost their fortunes, others who have lost their positions, and great numbers who must reorganize their plans and stage a comeback. To all these I wish to convey the thought that all achievement, no matter what may be its nature, or its purpose, must begin with an intense, BURNING DESIRE for something definite.

Through some strange and powerful principle of "mental chemistry" which she has never divulged, Nature wraps up in the impulse of STRONG DESIRE "that something" which recognizes no such word as impossible, and accepts no such reality as failure.

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 66]

          

          

CHAPTER 3

   

FAITH

VISUALIZATION OF, AND BELIEF IN ATTAINMENT OF DESIRE

The Second Step   toward Riches

       

     
    

FAITH is the head chemist of the mind. When FAITH is blended with the vibration of thought, the subconscious mind instantly picks up the vibration, translates it into its spiritual equivalent, and transmits it to Infinite Intelligence, as in the case of prayer.

The emotions of FAITH, LOVE, and SEX are the most powerful of all the major positive emotions. When the three are blended, they have the effect of "coloring" the vibration of thought in such a way that it instantly reaches the subconscious mind, where it is changed into its spiritual equivalent, the only form that induces a response from Infinite Intelligence.

Love and faith are psychic; related to the spiritual side of man. Sex is purely biological, and related only to the physical. The mixing, or blending, of these three emotions has the effect of opening a direct line of communication between the finite, thinking mind of man, and Infinite Intelligence.

HOW TO DEVELOP FAITH

There comes, now, a statement which will give a better understanding of the importance the principle of auto-suggestion assumes in the transmutation of desire into its physical, or monetary equivalent;

[p. 67]

namely: FAITH is a state of mind which may be induced, or created, by affirmation or repeated instructions to the subconscious mind, through the principle of auto-suggestion.

As an illustration, consider the purpose for which you are, presumably, reading this book. The object is, naturally, to acquire the ability to transmute the intangible thought impulse of DESIRE into its physical counterpart, money. By following the instructions laid down in the chapters on auto-suggestion, and the subconscious mind, as summarized in the chapter on auto-suggestion, you may CONVINCE the subconscious mind that you believe you will receive that for which you ask, and it will act upon that belief, which your subconscious mind passes back to you in the form of "FAITH," followed by definite plans for procuring that which you desire.

The method by which one develops FAITH, where it does not already exist, is extremely difficult to describe, almost as difficult, in fact, as it would be to describe the color of red to a blind man who has never seen color, and has nothing with which to compare what you describe to him. Faith is a state of mind which you may develop at will, after you have mastered the thirteen principles, because it is a state of mind which develops voluntarily, through application and use of these principles.

Repetition of affirmation of orders to your subconscious mind is the only known method of voluntary development of the emotion of faith.

Perhaps the meaning may be made clearer

[p. 68]

through the following explanation as to the way men sometimes become criminals. Stated in the words of a famous criminologist, "When men first come into contact with crime, they abhor it. If they remain in contact with crime for a time, they become accustomed to it, and endure it. If they remain in contact with it long enough, they finally embrace it, and become influenced by it."

This is the equivalent of saying that any impulse of thought which is repeatedly passed on to the subconscious mind is, finally, accepted and acted upon by the subconscious mind, which proceeds to translate that impulse into its physical equivalent, by the most practical procedure available.

In connection with this, consider again the statement, ALL THOUGHTS WHICH HAVE BEEN EMOTIONALIZED, (given feeling) AND MIXED WITH FAITH, begin immediately to translate themselves into their physical equivalent or counterpart.

The emotions, or the "feeling" portion of thoughts, are the factors which give thoughts vitality, life, and action. The emotions of Faith, Love, and Sex, when mixed with any thought impulse, give it greater action than any of these emotions can do singly.

Not only thought impulses which have been mixed with FAITH, but those which have been mixed with any of the positive emotions, or any of the negative emotions, may reach, and influence the subconscious mind.

From this statement, you will understand that the subconscious mind will translate into its physical

[p. 69]

equivalent, a thought impulse of a negative or destructive nature, just as readily as it will act upon thought impulses of a positive or constructive nature. This accounts for the strange phenomenon which so many millions of people experience, referred to as "misfortune," or "bad luck."

There are millions of people who BELIEVE themselves "doomed" to poverty and failure, because of some strange force over which they BELIEVE they have no control. They are the creators of their own "misfortunes," because of this negative BELIEF, which is picked up by the subconscious mind, and translated into its physical equivalent.

This is an appropriate place at which to suggest again that you may benefit, by passing on to your subconscious mind, any DESIRE which you wish translated into its physical, or monetary equivalent, in a state of expectancy or BELIEF that the transmutation will actually take place. Your BELIEF, or FAITH, is the element which determines the action of your subconscious mind. There is nothing to hinder you from "deceiving" your subconscious mind when giving it instructions through autosuggestion, as I deceived my son's subconscious mind.

To make this "deceit" more realistic, conduct yourself just as you would, if you were ALREADY IN POSSESSION OF THE MATERIAL THING WHICH YOU ARE DEMANDING, when you call upon your subconscious mind.

The subconscious mind will transmute into its physical equivalent, by the most direct and practical

[p. 70]

media available, any order which is given to it in a state of BELIEF, or FAITH that the order will be carried out.

Surely, enough has been stated to give a starting point from which one may, through experiment and practice, acquire the ability to mix FAITH with any order given to the subconscious mind. Perfection will come through practice. It cannot come by merely reading instructions.

If it be true that one may become a criminal by association with crime, (and this is a known fact), it is equally true that one may develop faith by voluntarily suggesting to the subconscious mind that one has faith. The mind comes, finally, to take on the nature of the influences which dominate it. Understand this truth, and you will know why it is essential for you to encourage the positive emotions as dominating forces of your mind, and discourage--and eliminate negative emotions.

A mind dominated by positive emotions, becomes a favorable abode for the state of mind known as faith. A mind so dominated may, at will, give the subconscious mind instructions, which it will accept and act upon immediately.

FAITH IS A STATE OF MIND WHICH MAY BE INDUCED BY AUTO-SUGGESTION

All down the ages, the religionists have admonished struggling humanity to "have faith" in this, that, and the other dogma or creed, but they have failed to tell people HOW to have faith. They have not stated that "faith is a state of mind, and that it may be induced by self-suggestion."

[p. 71]

In language which any normal human being can understand, we will describe all that is known about the principle through which FAITH may be developed, where it does not already exist.

Have Faith in yourself; Faith in the Infinite. Before we begin, you should be reminded again that:

FAITH is the "eternal elixir" which gives life, power, and action to the impulse of thought!

The foregoing sentence is worth reading a second time, and a third, and a fourth. It is worth reading aloud!

FAITH is the starting point of all accumulation of riches!

FAITH is the basis of all "miracles," and all mysteries which cannot be analyzed by the rules of science!

FAITH is the only known antidote for FAILURE!

FAITH is the element, the "chemical" which, when mixed with prayer, gives one direct communication with Infinite Intelligence.

FAITH is the element which transforms the ordinary vibration of thought, created by the finite mind of man, into the spiritual equivalent.

FAITH is the only agency through which the cosmic force of Infinite Intelligence can be harnessed and used by man.

EVERY ONE OF THE FOREGOING STATEMENTS IS CAPABLE OF PROOF!

The proof is simple and easily demonstrated. It is wrapped up in the principle of auto-suggestion. Let us center our attention, therefore, upon the subject

[p. 72]

of self-suggestion, and find out what it is, and what it is capable of achieving.

It is a well known fact that one comes, finally, to BELIEVE whatever one repeats to one's self, whether the statement be true or false. If a man repeats a lie over and over, he will eventually accept the lie as truth. Moreover, he will BELIEVE it to be the truth. Every man is what he is, because of the DOMINATING THOUGHTS which he permits to occupy his mind. Thoughts which a man deliberately places in his own mind, and encourages with sympathy, and with which he mixes any one or more of the emotions, constitute the motivating forces, which direct and control his every movement, act, and deed!

Comes, now, a very significant statement of truth:

THOUGHTS WHICH ARE MIXED WITH ANY OF THE FEELINGS OF EMOTIONS, CONSTITUTE A "MAGNETIC" FORCE WHICH ATTRACTS, FROM THE VIBRATIONS OF THE ETHER, OTHER SIMILAR, OR RELATED THOUGHTS. A thought thus "magnetized" with emotion may be compared to a seed which, when planted in fertile soil, germinates, grows, and multiplies itself over and over again, until that which was originally one small seed, becomes countless millions of seeds of the SAME BRAND!

The ether is a great cosmic mass of eternal forces of vibration. It is made up of both destructive vibrations and constructive vibrations. It carries, at all times, vibrations of fear, poverty, disease,

[p. 73]

failure, misery; and vibrations of prosperity, health, success, and happiness, just as surely as it carries the sound of hundreds of orchestrations of music, and hundreds of human voices, all of which maintain their own individuality, and means of identification, through the medium of radio.

From the great storehouse of the ether, the human mind is constantly attracting vibrations which harmonize with that which DOMINATES the human mind. Any thought, idea, plan, or purpose which one holds in one's mind attracts, from the vibrations of the ether, a host of its relatives, adds these "relatives" to its own force, and grows until it becomes the dominating, MOTIVATING MASTER of the individual in whose mind it has been housed.

Now, let us go back to the starting point, and become informed as to how the original seed of an idea, plan, or purpose may be planted in the mind. The information is easily conveyed: any idea, plan, or purpose may be placed in the mind through repetition of thought. This is why you are asked to write out a statement of your major purpose, or Definite Chief Aim, commit it to memory, and repeat it, in audible words, day after day, until these vibrations of sound have reached your subconscious mind.

We are what we are, because of the vibrations of thought which we pick up and register, through the stimuli of our daily environment.

Resolve to throw off the influences of any unfortunate environment, and to build your own life to ORDER. Taking inventory of mental assets and

[p. 74]

liabilities, you will discover that your greatest weakness is lack of self-confidence. This handicap can be surmounted, and timidity translated into courage, through the aid of the principle of autosuggestion. The application of this principle may be made through a simple arrangement of positive thought impulses stated in writing, memorized, and repeated, until they become a part of the working equipment of the subconscious faculty of your mind.

SELF-CONFIDENCE FORMULA

        First.

       I know that I   have the ability to achieve the object of my Definite Purpose in life,   therefore, I DEMAND of myself persistent, continuous action toward its   attainment, and I here and now promise to render such action.

     
      Second.

       I realize the   dominating thoughts of my mind will eventually reproduce themselves in outward,   physical action, and gradually transform themselves into physical reality,   therefore, I will concentrate my thoughts for thirty minutes daily, upon the   task of thinking of the person I intend to become, thereby creating in my   mind a clear mental picture of that person.

     
      Third.

       I know through   the principle of auto-suggestion, any desire that I persistently hold in my   mind will eventually seek expression through some practical means of attaining   the object back of it, therefore, I will devote ten minutes daily to   demanding of myself the development of SELF-CONFIDENCE.

     
       

       [p. 75]

     
      Fourth.

       I have clearly   written down a description of my DEFINITE CHIEF AIM in life, and I will never   stop trying, until I shall have developed sufficient self-confidence for its   attainment.

     
      Fifth.

       I fully realize   that no wealth or position can long endure, unless built upon truth and   justice, therefore, I will engage in no transaction which does not benefit   all whom it affects. I will succeed by attracting to myself the forces I wish   to use, and the cooperation of other people. I will induce others to serve   me, because of my willingness to serve others. I will eliminate hatred, envy,   jealousy, selfishness, and cynicism, by developing love for all humanity,   because I know that a negative attitude toward others can never bring me   success. I will cause others to believe in me, because I will believe in   them, and in myself.

I will sign my   name to this formula, commit it to memory, and repeat it aloud once a day,   with full FAITH that it will gradually influence my THOUGHTS and ACTIONS so   that I will become a self-reliant, and successful person.

     
 Back of this formula is a law of Nature which no man has yet been able to explain. It has baffled the scientists of all ages. The psychologists have named this law "auto-suggestion," and let it go at that.

The name by which one calls this law is of little importance. The important fact about it is--it

[p. 76]

[paragraph continues] WORKS for the glory and success of mankind, IF it is used constructively. On the other hand, if used destructively, it will destroy just as readily. In this statement may be found a very significant truth, namely; that those who go down in defeat, and end their lives in poverty, misery, and distress, do so because of negative application of the principle of auto-suggestion. The cause may be found in the fact that ALL IMPULSES OF THOUGHT HAVE A TENDENCY TO CLOTHE THEMSELVES IN THEIR PHYSICAL EQUIVALENT.

The subconscious mind, (the chemical laboratory in which all thought impulses are combined, and made ready for translation into physical reality), makes no distinction between constructive and destructive thought impulses. It works with the material we feed it, through our thought impulses. The subconscious mind will translate into reality a thought driven by FEAR just as readily as it will translate into reality a thought driven by COURAGE, or FAITH.

The pages of medical history are rich with illustrations of cases of "suggestive suicide." A man may commit suicide through negative suggestion, just as effectively as by any other means. In a midwestern city, a man by the name of Joseph Grant, a bank official, "borrowed" a large sum of the bank's money, without the consent of the directors. He lost the money through gambling. One afternoon, the Bank Examiner came and began to check the accounts. Grant left the bank, took a room in a local hotel, and when they found him, three days later, he was lying in bed, wailing and

[p. 77]

moaning, repeating over and over these words, "My God, this will kill me! I cannot stand the disgrace." In a short time he was dead. The doctors pronounced the case one of "mental suicide."

Just as electricity will turn the wheels of industry, and render useful service if used constructively; or snuff out life if wrongly used, so will the law of auto-suggestion lead you to peace and prosperity, or down into the valley of misery, failure, and death, according to your degree of understanding and application of it.

If you fill your mind with FEAR, doubt and unbelief in your ability to connect with, and use the forces of Infinite Intelligence, the law of auto-suggestion will take this spirit of unbelief and use it as a pattern by which your subconscious mind will translate it into its physical equivalent.

THIS STATEMENT IS AS TRUE AS THE STATEMENT THAT TWO AND TWO ARE FOUR!

Like the wind which carries one ship East, and another West, the law of auto-suggestion will lift you up or pull you down, according to the way you set your sails of THOUGHT.

The law of auto-suggestion, through which any person may rise to altitudes of achievement which stagger the imagination, is well described in the following verse:

"If you think you are beaten, you are,
   If you think you dare not, you don't
 If you like to win, but you think you can't,
   It is almost certain you won't. [p. 78]

"If you think you'll lose, you're lost
   For out of the world we find,
 Success begins with a fellow's will--
   It's all in the state of mind.

"If you think you are outclassed, you are,
   You've got to think high to rise,
 You've got to be sure of yourself before
   You can ever win a prize.

"Life's battles don't always go
   To the stronger or faster man,
 But soon or late the man who wins
   Is the man WHO THINKS HE CAN!"

Observe the words which have been emphasized, and you will catch the deep meaning which the poet had in mind.

Somewhere in your make-up (perhaps in the cells of your brain) there lies sleeping, the seed of achievement which, if aroused and put into action, would carry you to heights, such as you may never have hoped to attain.

Just as a master musician may cause the most beautiful strains of music to pour forth from the strings of a violin, so may you arouse the genius which lies asleep in your brain, and cause it to drive you upward to whatever goal you may wish to achieve.

Abraham Lincoln was a failure at everything he tried, until he was well past the age of forty. He was a Mr. Nobody from Nowhere, until a great experience came into his life, aroused the sleeping genius within his heart and brain, and gave the

[p. 79]

world one of its really great men. That "experience" was mixed with the emotions of sorrow and LOVE. It came to him through Anne Rutledge, the only woman whom he ever truly loved.

It is a known fact that the emotion of LOVE is closely akin to the state of mind known as FAITH, and this for the reason that Love comes very near to translating one's thought impulses into their spiritual equivalent. During his work of research, the author discovered, from the analysis of the lifework and achievements of hundreds of men of outstanding accomplishment, that there was the influence of a woman's love back of nearly EVERY ONE OF THEM. The emotion of love, in the human heart and brain, creates a favorable field of magnetic attraction, which causes an influx of the higher and finer vibrations which are afloat in the ether.

If you wish evidence of the power of FAITH, study the achievements of men and women who have employed it. At the head of the list comes the Nazarene. Christianity is the greatest single force which influences the minds of men. The basis of Christianity is FAITH, no matter how many people may have perverted, or misinterpreted the meaning of this great force, and no matter how many dogmas and creeds have been created in its name, which do not reflect its tenets.

The sum and substance of the teachings and the achievements of Christ, which may have been interpreted as "miracles," were nothing more nor less than FAITH. If there are any such phenomena as "miracles" they are produced only through the state

[p. 80]

of mind known as FAITH! Some teachers of religion, and many who call themselves Christians, neither understand nor practice FAITH.

Let us consider the power of FAITH, as it is now being demonstrated, by a man who is well known to all of civilization, Mahatma Gandhi, of India. In this man the world has one of the most astounding examples known to civilization, of the possibilities of FAITH. Gandhi wields more potential power than any man living at this time, and this, despite the fact that he has none of the orthodox tools of power, such as money, battle ships, soldiers, and materials of warfare. Gandhi has no money, he has no home, he does not own a suit of clothes, but HE DOES HAVE POWER. How does he come by that power?

HE CREATED IT OUT OF HIS UNDERSTANDING OF THE PRINCIPLE OF FAITH, AND THROUGH HIS ABILITY TO TRANSPLANT THAT FAITH INTO THE MINDS OF TWO HUNDRED MILLION PEOPLE.

Gandhi has accomplished, through the influence of FAITH, that which the strongest military power on earth could not, and never will accomplish through soldiers and military equipment. He has accomplished the astounding feat of INFLUENCING two hundred million minds to COALESCE AND MOVE IN UNISON, AS A SINGLE MIND.

What other force on earth, except FAITH could do as much?

There will come a day when employees as well as employers will discover the possibilities of FAITH. That day is dawning. The whole world

[p. 81]

has had ample opportunity, during the recent business depression, to witness what the LACK OF FAITH will do to business.

Surely, civilization has produced a sufficient number of intelligent human beings to make use of this great lesson which the depression has taught the world. During this depression, the world had evidence in abundance that widespread FEAR will paralyze the wheels of industry and business. Out of this experience will arise leaders in business and industry who will profit by the example which Gandhi has set for the world, and they will apply to business the same tactics which he has used in building the greatest following known in the history of the world. These leaders will come from the rank and file of the unknown men, who now labor in the steel plants, the coal mines, the automobile factories, and in the small towns and cities of America.

Business is due for a reform, make no mistake about this! The methods of the past, based upon economic combinations of FORCE and FEAR, will be supplanted by the better principles of FAITH and cooperation. Men who labor will receive more than daily wages; they will receive dividends from the business, the same as those who supply the capital for business; but, first they must GIVE MORE TO THEIR EMPLOYERS, and stop this bickering and bargaining by force, at the expense of the public. They must earn, the right to dividends!

Moreover, and this is the most important thing of all--THEY WILL BE LED BY LEADERS WHO WILL UNDERSTAND AND APPLY THE PRINCIPLES EMPLOYED BY MAHATMA

[p. 82]

[paragraph continues] GANDHI. Only in this way may leaders get from their followers the spirit of FULL cooperation which constitutes power in its highest and most enduring form.

This stupendous machine age in which we live, and from which we are just emerging, has taken the soul out of men. Its leaders have driven men as though they were pieces of cold machinery; they were forced to do so by the employees who have bargained, at the expense of all concerned, to get and not to give. The watchword of the future will be HUMAN HAPPINESS AND CONTENTMENT, and when this state of mind shall have been attained, the production will take care of itself, more effectively than anything that has ever been accomplished where men did not, and could not mix FAITH and individual interest with their labor.

Because of the need for faith and cooperation in operating business and industry, it will be both interesting and profitable to analyze an event which provides an excellent understanding of the method by which industrialists and business men accumulate great fortunes, by giving before they try to get.

The event chosen for this illustration dates back to 1900, when the United States Steel Corporation was being formed. As you read the story, keep in mind these fundamental facts and you will understand how IDEAS have been converted into huge fortunes.

First, the huge United States Steel Corporation was born in the mind of Charles M. Schwab, in the form of an IDEA he created through his IMAGINATION! Second, he mixed FAITH with his

[p. 83]

[paragraph continues] IDEA. Third, he formulated a PLAN for the transformation of his IDEA into physical and financial reality. Fourth, he put his plan into action with his famous speech at the University Club. Fifth, he applied, and followed-through on his PLAN with PERSISTENCE, and backed it with firm DECISION until it had been fully carried out. Sixth, he prepared the way for success by a BURNING DESIRE for success.

If you are one of those who have often wondered how great fortunes are accumulated, this story of the creation of the United States Steel Corporation will be enlightening. If you have any doubt that men can THINK AND GROW RICH, this story should dispel that doubt, because you can plainly see in the story of the United States Steel, the application of a major portion of the thirteen principles described in this book.

This astounding description of the power of an IDEA was dramatically told by John Lowell, in the New York World-Telegram, with whose courtesy it is here reprinted.

"A PRETTY AFTER-DINNER SPEECH FOR A BILLION DOLLARS

"When, on the evening of December 12, 1900, some eighty of the nation's financial nobility gathered in the banquet hall of the University Club on Fifth Avenue to do honor to a young man from out of the West, not half a dozen of the guests realized they were to witness the most significant episode in American industrial history.

"J. Edward Simmons and Charles Stewart Smith,

[p. 84]

their hearts full of gratitude for the lavish hospitality bestowed on them by Charles M. Schwab during a recent visit to Pittsburgh, had arranged the dinner to introduce the thirty-eight-year-old steel man to eastern banking society. But they didn't expect him to stampede the convention. They warned him, in fact, that the bosoms within New York's stuffed shirts would not be responsive to oratory, and that, if he didn't want to bore the Stilimans and Harrimans and Vanderbilts, he had better limit himself to fifteen or twenty minutes of polite vaporings and let it go at that.

"Even John Pierpont Morgan, sitting on the right hand of Schwab as became his imperial dignity, intended to grace the banquet table with his presence only briefly. And so far as the press and public were concerned, the whole affair was of so little moment that no mention of it found its way into print the next day.

"So the two hosts and their distinguished guests ate their way through the usual seven or eight courses. There was little conversation and what there was of it was restrained. Few of the bankers and brokers had met Schwab, whose career had flowered along the banks of the Monongahela, and none knew him well. But before the evening was over, they--and with them Money Master Morgan--were to be swept off their feet, and a billion-dollar baby, the United States Steel Corporation, was to be conceived.

"It is perhaps unfortunate, for the sake of history, that no record of Charlie Schwab's speech at the dinner ever was made. He repeated some parts

[p. 85]

of it at a later date during a similar meeting of Chicago bankers. And still later, when the Government brought suit to dissolve the Steel Trust, he gave his own version, from the witness stand, of the remarks that stimulated Morgan into a frenzy of financial activity.

"It is probable, however, that it was a 'homely' speech, somewhat ungrammatical (for the niceties of language never bothered Schwab), full of epigram and threaded with wit. But aside from that it had a galvanic force and effect upon the five billions of estimated capital that was represented by the diners. After it was over and the gathering was still under its spell, although Schwab had talked for ninety minutes, Morgan led the orator to a recessed window where, dangling their legs from the high, uncomfortable seat, they talked for an hour more.

"The magic of the Schwab personality had been turned on, full force, but what was more important and lasting was the full-fledged, clear-cut program he laid down for the aggrandizement of Steel. Many other men had tried to interest Morgan in slapping together a steel trust after the pattern of the biscuit, wire and hoop, sugar, rubber, whisky, oil or chewing gum combinations. John W. Gates, the gambler, had urged it, but Morgan distrusted him. The Moore boys, Bill and Jim, Chicago stock jobbers who had glued together a match trust and a cracker corporation, had urged it and failed. Elbert H. Gary, the sanctimonious country lawyer, wanted to foster it, but he wasn't big enough to be impressive. Until Schwab's eloquence took J. P.

[p. 86]

[paragraph continues] Morgan to the heights from which he could visualize the solid results of the most daring financial undertaking ever conceived, the project was regarded as a delirious dream of easy-money crackpots.

"The financial magnetism that began, a generation ago, to attract thousands of small and sometimes inefficiently managed companies into large and competition-crushing combinations, had become operative in the steel world through the devices of that jovial business pirate, John W. Gates. Gates already had formed the American Steel and Wire Company out of a chain of small concerns, and together with Morgan had created the Federal Steel Company. The National Tube and American Bridge companies were two more Morgan concerns, and the Moore Brothers had forsaken the match and cookie business to form the 'American' group--Tin Plate, Steel Hoop, Sheet Steel--and the National Steel Company.

"But by the side of Andrew Carnegie's gigantic vertical trust, a trust owned and operated by fifty-three partners, those other combinations were picayune. They might combine to their heart's content but the whole lot of them couldn't make a dent in the Carnegie organization, and Morgan knew it.

"The eccentric old Scot knew it, too. From the magnificent heights of Skibo Castle he had viewed, first with amusement and then with resentment, the attempts of Morgan's smaller companies to cut into his business. When the attempts became too bold, Carnegie's temper was translated into anger and retaliation.

[p. 87]

[paragraph continues] He decided to duplicate every mill owned by his rivals. Hitherto, he hadn't been interested in wire, pipe, hoops, or sheet. Instead, he was content to sell such companies the raw steel and let them work it into whatever shape they wanted. Now, with Schwab as his chief and able lieutenant, he planned to drive his enemies to the wall.

"So it was that in the speech of Charles M. Schwab, Morgan saw the answer to his problem of combination. A trust without Carnegie--giant of them all--would be no trust at all, a plum pudding, as one writer said, without the plums.

"Schwab's speech on the night of December 12, 1900, undoubtedly carried the inference, though not the pledge, that the vast Carnegie enterprise could be brought under the Morgan tent. He talked of the world future for steel, of reorganization for efficiency, of specialization, of the scrapping of unsuccessful mills and concentration of effort on the flourishing properties, of economies in the ore traffic, of economies in overhead and administrative departments, of capturing foreign markets.

"More than that, he told the buccaneers among them wherein lay the errors of their customary piracy. Their purposes, he inferred, had been to create monopolies, raise prices, and pay themselves fat dividends out of privilege. Schwab condemned the system in his heartiest manner. The shortsightedness of such a policy, he told his hearers, lay in the fact that it restricted the market in an era when everything cried for expansion. By cheapening the cost of steel, he argued, an ever-expanding market would be created; more uses for steel would be devised,

[p. 88]

and a goodly portion of the world trade could be captured. Actually, though he did not know it, Schwab was an apostle of modern mass production.

"So the dinner at the University Club came to an end. Morgan went home, to think about Schwab's rosy predictions. Schwab went back to Pittsburgh to run the steel business for 'Wee Andra Carnegie,' while Gary and the rest went back to their stock tickers, to fiddle around in anticipation of the next move.

"It was not long coming. It took Morgan about one week to digest the feast of reason Schwab had placed before him. When he had assured himself that no financial indigestion was to result, he sent for Schwab--and found that young man rather coy. Mr. Carnegie, Schwab indicated, might not like it if he found his trusted company president had been flirting with the Emperor of Wall Street, the Street upon which Carnegie was resolved never to tread. Then it was suggested by John W. Gates the go-between, that if Schwab 'happened' to be in the Bellevue Hotel in Philadelphia, J. P. Morgan might also 'happen' to be there. When Schwab arrived, however, Morgan was inconveniently ill at his New York home, and so, on the elder man's pressing invitation, Schwab went to New York and presented himself at the door of the financier's library.

"Now certain economic historians have professed the belief that from the beginning to the end of the drama, the stage was set by Andrew Carnegie--that the dinner to Schwab, the famous speech, the Sunday night conference between Schwab and the Money King, were events arranged by the canny

[p. 89]

[paragraph continues] Scot. The truth is exactly the opposite. When Schwab was called in to consummate the deal, he didn't even know whether 'the little boss,' as Andrew was called, would so much as listen to an offer to sell, particularly to a group of men whom Andrew regarded as being endowed with something less than holiness. But Schwab did take into the conference with him, in his own handwriting, six sheets of copper-plate figures, representing to his mind the physical worth and the potential earning capacity of every steel company he regarded as an essential star in the new metal firmament.

"Four men pondered over these figures all night. The chief, of course, was Morgan, steadfast in his belief in the Divine Right of Money. With him was his aristocratic partner, Robert Bacon, a scholar and a gentleman. The third was John W. Gates whom Morgan scorned as a gambler and used as a tool. The fourth was Schwab, who knew more about the processes of making and selling steel than any whole group of men then living. Throughout that conference, the Pittsburgher's figures were never questioned. If he said a company was worth so much, then it was worth that much and no more. He was insistent, too, upon including in the combination only those concerns he nominated. He had conceived a corporation in which there would be no duplication, not even to satisfy the greed of friends who wanted to unload their companies upon the broad Morgan shoulders. Thus he left out, by design, a number of the larger concerns upon which the Walruses and Carpenters of Wall Street had cast hungry eyes.

[p. 90]

"When dawn came, Morgan rose and straightened his back. Only one question remained.

"'Do you think you can persuade Andrew Carnegie to sell?' he asked.

"'I can try,' said Schwab.

"'If you can get him to sell, I will undertake the matter,' said Morgan.

"So far so good. But would Carnegie sell? How much would he demand? (Schwab thought about $320,000,000). What would he take payment in? Common or preferred stocks? Bonds? Cash? Nobody could raise a third of a billion dollars in cash.

"There was a golf game in January on the frost-cracking heath of the St. Andrews links in Westchester, with Andrew bundled up in sweaters against the cold, and Charlie talking volubly, as usual, to keep his spirits up. But no word of business was mentioned until the pair sat down in the cozy warmth of the Carnegie cottage hard by. Then, with the same persuasiveness that had hypnotized eighty millionaires at the University Club, Schwab poured out the glittering promises of retirement in comfort, of untold millions to satisfy the old man's social caprices. Carnegie capitulated, wrote a figure on a slip of paper, handed it to Schwab and said, 'all right, that's what we'll sell for.'

"The figure was approximately $400,000,000, and was reached by taking the $320,000,000 mentioned by Schwab as a basic figure, and adding to it $80,000,000 to represent the increased capital value over the previous two years.

"Later, on the deck of a trans-Atlantic liner, the

[p. 91]

Scotsman said ruefully to Morgan, 'I wish I had asked you for $100,000,000 more.'

"'If you had asked for it, you'd have gotten it,' Morgan told him cheerfully.

*     *     *     *     *     *     *

"There was an uproar, of course. A British correspondent cabled that the foreign steel world was 'appalled' by the gigantic combination. President Hadley, of Yale, declared that unless trusts were regulated the country might expect 'an emperor in Washington within the next twenty-five years.' But that able stock manipulator, Keene, went at his work of shoving the new stock at the public so vigorously that all the excess water--estimated by some at nearly $600,000,000--was absorbed in a twinkling. So Carnegie had his millions, and the Morgan syndicate had $62,000,000 for all its 'trouble,' and all the 'boys,' from Gates to Gary, had their millions.

*     *     *     *     *     *     *

"The thirty-eight-year-old Schwab had his reward. He was made president of the new corporation and remained in control until 1930."

The dramatic story of "Big Business" which you have just finished, was included in this book, because it is a perfect illustration of the method by which DESIRE CAN BE TRANSMUTED INTO ITS PHYSICAL EQUIVALENT!

I imagine some readers will question the statement that a mere, intangible DESIRE can be converted into its physical equivalent. Doubtless some will say, "You cannot convert NOTHING into

[p. 92]

[paragraph continues] SOMETHING!" The answer is in the story of United States Steel.

That giant organization was created in the mind of one man. The plan by which the organization was provided with the steel mills that gave it financial stability was created in the mind of the same man. His FAITH, his DESIRE, his IMAGINATION, his PERSISTENCE were the real ingredients that went into United States Steel. The steel mills and mechanical equipment acquired by the corporation, AFTER IT HAD BEEN BROUGHT INTO LEGAL EXISTENCE, were incidental, but careful analysis will disclose the fact that the appraised value of the properties acquired by the corporation increased in value by an estimated SIX HUNDRED MILLION DOLLARS, by the mere transaction which consolidated them under one management.

In other words, Charles M. Schwab's IDEA, plus the FAITH with which he conveyed it to the minds of J. P. Morgan and the others, was marketed for a profit of approximately $600,000,000. Not an insignificant sum for a single IDEA!

What happened to some of the men who took their share of the millions of dollars of profit made by this transaction, is a matter with which we are not now concerned. The important feature of the astounding achievement is that it serves as unquestionable evidence of the soundness of the philosophy described in this book, because this philosophy was the warp and the woof of the entire transaction. Moreover, the practicability of the philosophy has been established by the fact that the

[p. 93]

[paragraph continues] United States Steel Corporation prospered, and became one of the richest and most powerful corporations in America, employing thousands of people, developing new uses for steel, and opening new markets; thus proving that the $600,000,000 in profit which the Schwab IDEA produced was earned. RICHES begin in the form of THOUGHT!

The amount is limited only by the person in whose mind the THOUGHT is put into motion. FAITH removes limitations! Remember this when you are ready to bargain with Life for whatever it is that you ask as your price for having passed this way.

Remember, also, that the man who created the United States Steel Corporation was practically unknown at the time. He was merely Andrew Carnegie's "Man Friday" until he gave birth to his famous IDEA. After that he quickly rose to a position of power, fame, and riches.

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 94]

          THERE ARE NO LIMITATIONS TO THE MIND EXCEPT THOSE WE ACKNOWLEDGE

BOTH POVERTY AND   RICHES ARE THE OFFSPRING OF THOUGHT

     
    

[p. 95]

          

          

CHAPTER 4

   

AUTO-SUGGESTION

THE MEDIUM FOR INFLUENCING THE SUBCONSCIOUS MIND

The Third Step   toward Riches

       

     
    

AUTO-SUGGESTION is a term which applies to all suggestions and all self-administered stimuli which reach one's mind through the five senses. Stated in another way, auto-suggestion is self-suggestion. It is the agency of communication between that part of the mind where conscious thought takes place, and that which serves as the seat of action for the subconscious mind.

Through the dominating thoughts which one permits to remain in the conscious mind, (whether these thoughts be negative or positive, is immaterial), the principle of auto-suggestion voluntarily reaches the subconscious mind and influences it with these thoughts.

NO THOUGHT, whether it be negative or positive, CAN ENTER THE SUBCONSCIOUS MIND WITHOUT THE AID OF THE PRINCIPLE OF AUTO-SUGGESTION, with the exception of thoughts picked up from the ether. Stated differently, all sense impressions which are perceived through the five senses, are stopped by the CONSCIOUS thinking mind, and may be either passed on to the subconscious mind, or rejected, at will. The conscious faculty serves, therefore, as an outer-guard to the approach of the subconscious.

[p. 96]

Nature has so built man that he has ABSOLUTE CONTROL over the material which reaches his subconscious mind, through his five senses, although this is not meant to be construed as a statement that man always EXERCISES this control. In the great majority of instances, he does NOT exercise it, which explains why so many people go through life in poverty.

Recall what has been said about the subconscious mind resembling a fertile garden spot, in which weeds will grow in abundance, if the seeds of more desirable crops are not sown therein. AUTOSUGGESTION is the agency of control through which an individual may voluntarily feed his subconscious mind on thoughts of a creative nature, or, by neglect, permit thoughts of a destructive nature to find their way into this rich garden of the mind.

You were instructed, in the last of the six steps described in the chapter on Desire, to read ALOUD twice daily the WRITTEN statement of your DESIRE FOR MONEY, and to SEE AND FEEL yourself ALREADY in possession of the money! By following these instructions, you communicate the object of your DESIRE directly to your SUBCONSCIOUS mind in a spirit of absolute FAITH. Through repetition of this procedure, you voluntarily create thought habits which are favorable to your efforts to transmute desire into its monetary equivalent.

Go back to these six steps described in chapter two, and read them again, very carefully, before you proceed further. Then (when you come to it), read very carefully the four instructions for the organization

[p. 97]

of your "Master Mind" group, described in the chapter on Organized Planning. By comparing these two sets of instructions with that which has been stated on auto-suggestion, you, of course, will see that the instructions involve the application of the principle of auto-suggestion.

Remember, therefore, when reading aloud the statement of your desire (through which you are endeavoring to develop a "money consciousness"), that the mere reading of the words is of NO CONSEQUENCE--UNLESS you mix emotion, or feeling with your words. If you repeat a million times the famous Emil Coue formula, "Day by day, in every way, I am getting better and better," without mixing emotion and FAITH with your words, you will experience no desirable results. Your subconscious mind recognizes and acts upon ONLY thoughts which have been well-mixed with emotion or feeling.

This is a fact of such importance as to warrant repetition in practically every chapter, because the lack of understanding of this is the main reason the majority of people who try to apply the principle of auto-suggestion get no desirable results.

Plain, unemotional words do not influence the subconscious mind. You will get no appreciable results until you learn to reach your subconscious mind with thoughts, or spoken words which have been well emotionalized with BELIEF.

Do not become discouraged, if you cannot control and direct your emotions the first time you try to do so. Remember, there is no such possibility as SOMETHING FOR NOTHING. Ability to reach,

[p. 98]

and influence your subconscious mind has its price, and you MUST PAY THAT PRICE. You cannot cheat, even if you desire to do so. The price of ability to influence your subconscious mind is everlasting PERSISTENCE in applying the principles described here. You cannot develop the desired ability for a lower price. You, and YOU ALONE, must decide whether or not the reward for which you are striving (the "money consciousness"), is worth the price you must pay for it in effort.

Wisdom and "cleverness" alone, will not attract and retain money except in a few very rare instances, where the law of averages favors the attraction of money through these sources. The method of attracting money described here, does not depend upon the law of averages. Moreover, the method plays no favorites. It will work for one person as effectively as it will for another. Where failure is experienced, it is the individual, not the method, which has failed. If you try and fail, make another effort, and still another, until you succeed.

Your ability to use the principle of auto-suggestion will depend, very largely, upon your capacity to CONCENTRATE upon a given DESIRE until that desire becomes a BURNING OBSESSION.

When you begin to carry out the instructions in connection with the six steps described in the second chapter, it will be necessary for you to make use of the principle of CONCENTRATION.

Let us here offer suggestions for the effective use of concentration. When you begin to carry out the first of the six steps, which instructs you to "fix in

[p. 99]

your own mind the EXACT amount of money you desire," hold your thoughts on that amount of money by CONCENTRATION, or fixation of attention, with your eyes closed, until you can ACTUALLY SEE the physical appearance of the money. Do this at least once each day. As you go through these exercises, follow the instructions given in the chapter on FAITH, and see yourself actually IN POSSESSION OF THE MONEY!

Here is a most significant fact--the subconscious mind takes any orders given it in a spirit of absolute FAITH, and acts upon those orders, although the orders often have to be presented over and over again, through repetition, before they are interpreted by the subconscious mind. Following the preceding statement, consider the possibility of playing a perfectly legitimate "trick" on your subconscious mind, by making it believe, because you believe it, that you must have the amount of money you are visualizing, that this money is already awaiting your claim, that the subconscious mind MUST hand over to you practical plans for acquiring the money which is yours.

Hand over the thought suggested in the preceding paragraph to your IMAGINATION, and see what your imagination can, or will do, to create practical plans for the accumulation of money through transmutation of your desire.

DO NOT WAIT for a definite plan, through which you intend to exchange services or merchandise in return for the money you are visualizing, but begin at once to see yourself in possession of the money, DEMANDING and EXPECTING meanwhile,

[p. 100]

that your subconscious mind will hand over the plan, or plans you need. Be on the alert for these plans, and when they appear, put them into ACTION IMMEDIATELY. When the plans appear, they will probably "flash" into your mind through the sixth sense, in the form of an "inspiration." This inspiration may be considered a direct "telegram," or message from Infinite Intelligence. Treat it with respect, and act upon it as soon as you receive it. Failure to do this will be FATAL to your success.

In the fourth of the six steps, you were instructed to "Create a definite plan for carrying out your desire, and begin at once to put this plan into action." You should follow this instruction in the manner described in the preceding paragraph. Do not trust to your "reason" when creating your plan for accumulating money through the transmutation of desire. Your reason is faulty. Moreover, your reasoning faculty may be lazy, and, if you depend entirely upon it to serve you, it may disappoint you.

When visualizing the money you intend to accumulate, (with closed eyes), see yourself rendering the service, or delivering the merchandise you intend to give in return for this money. This is important!

SUMMARY OF INSTRUCTIONS

The fact that you are reading this book is an indication that you earnestly seek knowledge. It is also an indication that you are a student of this subject. If you are only a student, there is a chance that you may learn much that you did not know, but you will learn only by assuming an attitude of humility.

[p. 101]

[paragraph continues] If you choose to follow some of the instructions but neglect, or refuse to follow others--you will fail! To get satisfactory results, you must follow ALL instructions in a spirit of FAITH.

The instructions given in connection with the six steps in the second chapter will now be summarized, and blended with the principles covered by this chapter, as follows:

        First.

       Go into some   quiet spot (preferably in bed at night) where you will not be disturbed or   interrupted, close your eyes, and repeat aloud, (so you may hear your own   words) the written statement of the amount of money you intend to accumulate,   the time limit for its accumulation, and a description of the service or   merchandise you intend to give in return for the money. As you carry out   these instructions, SEE YOURSELF ALREADY IN POSSESSION OF THE MONEY.

For   example:--Suppose that you intend to accumulate $50,000 by the first of   January, five years hence, that you intend to give personal services in   return for the money, in the capacity of a salesman. Your written statement of   your purpose should be similar to the following:

"By the   first day of January, 19.., I will have in my possession $50,000, which will   come to me in various amounts from time to time during the interim.

"In return   for this money I will give the most efficient service of which I am capable,   rendering

[p. 102]

the fullest   possible quantity, and the best possible quality of service in the capacity   of salesman of . . . . . . . . . . . (describe the service or merchandise you   intend to sell).

"I believe   that I will have this money in my possession. My faith is so strong that I   can now see this money before my eyes. I can touch it with my hands. It is   now awaiting transfer to me at the time, and in the proportion that I deliver   the service I intend to render in return for it. I am awaiting a plan by   which to accumulate this money, and I will follow that plan, when it is   received."

     
      Second.

       Repeat this   program night and morning until you can see, (in your imagination) the money   you intend to accumulate.

     
      Third.

       Place a written   copy of your statement where you can see it night and morning, and read it   just before retiring, and upon arising until it has been memorized.

     
 Remember, as you carry out these instructions, that you are applying the principle of auto-suggestion, for the purpose of giving orders to your subconscious mind. Remember, also, that your subconscious mind will act ONLY upon instructions which are emotionalized, and handed over to it with "feeling." FAITH is the strongest, and most productive of the emotions. Follow the instructions given in the chapter on FAITH.

These instructions may, at first, seem abstract.

Do not let this disturb you. Follow the instructions,

[p. 103]

no matter how abstract or impractical they may, at first, appear to be. The time will soon come, if you do as you have been instructed, in spirit as well as in act, when a whole new universe of power will unfold to you.

Scepticism, in connection with ALL new ideas, is characteristic of all human beings. But if you follow the instructions outlined, your scepticism will soon be replaced by belief, and this, in turn, will soon become crystallized into ABSOLUTE FAITH. Then you will have arrived at the point where you may truly say, "I am the master of my fate, I am the captain of my soul!"

Many philosophers have made the statement, that man is the master of his own earthly destiny, but most of them have failed to say why he is the master. The reason that man may be the master of his own earthly status, and especially his financial status, is thoroughly explained in this chapter. Man may become the master of himself, and of his environment, because he has the POWER TO INFLUENCE HIS OWN SUBCONSCIOUS MIND, and through it, gain the cooperation of Infinite Intelligence.

You are now reading the chapter which represents the keystone to the arch of this philosophy. The instructions contained in this chapter must be understood and APPLIED WITH PERSISTENCE, if you succeed in transmuting desire into money.

The actual performance of transmuting DESIRE into money, involves the use of auto-suggestion as an agency by which one may reach, and influence, the subconscious mind. The other principles are

[p. 104]

simply tools with which to apply auto-suggestion. Keep this thought in mind, and you will, at all times, be conscious of the important part the principle of auto-suggestion is to play in your efforts to accumulate money through the methods described in this book.

Carry out these instructions as though you were a small child. Inject into your efforts something of the FAITH of a child. The author has been most careful, to see that no impractical instructions were included, because of his sincere desire to be helpful.

After you have read the entire book, come back to this chapter, and follow in spirit, and in action, this instruction:

READ THE ENTIRE CHAPTER ALOUD ONCE EVERY NIGHT, UNTIL YOU BECOME THOROUGHLY CONVINCED THAT THE PRINCIPLE OF AUTO-SUGGESTION IS SOUND, THAT IT WILL ACCOMPLISH FOR YOU ALL THAT HAS BEEN CLAIMED FOR IT. AS YOU READ, UNDERSCORE WITH A PENCIL EVERY SENTENCE WHICH IMPRESSES YOU FAVORABLY.

Follow the foregoing instruction to the letter, and it will open the way for a complete understanding, and mastery of the principles of success.

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 105]

          

          

CHAPTER 5

   

SPECIALIZED KNOWLEDGE

SPECIALIZED KNOWLEDGE PERSONAL EXPERIENCES OR OBSERVATIONS

The Fourth Step   toward Riches

       

     
    

THERE are two kinds of knowledge. One is general, the other is specialized. General knowledge, no matter how great in quantity or variety it may be, is of but little use in the accumulation of money. The faculties of the great universities possess, in the aggregate, practically every form of general knowledge known to civilization. Most of the professors have but little or no money. They specialize on teaching knowledge, but they do not specialize on the organization, or the use of knowledge.

KNOWLEDGE will not attract money, unless it is organized, and intelligently directed, through practical PLANS OF ACTION, to the DEFINITE END of accumulation of money. Lack of understanding of this fact has been the source of confusion to millions of people who falsely believe that "knowledge is power." It is nothing of the sort! Knowledge is only potential power. It becomes power only when, and if, it is organized into definite plans of action, and directed to a definite end.

This "missing link" in all systems of education known to civilization today, may be found in the failure of educational institutions to teach their students HOW TO ORGANIZE AND USE KNOWLEDGE AFTER THEY ACQUIRE IT.

Many people make the mistake of assuming that,

[p. 106]

because Henry Ford had but little "schooling," he is not a man of "education." Those who make this mistake do not know Henry Ford, nor do they understand the real meaning of the word "educate." That word is derived from the Latin word "educo," meaning to educe, to draw out, to DEVELOP FROM WITHIN.

An educated man is not, necessarily, one who has an abundance of general or specialized knowledge. An educated man is one who has so developed the faculties of his mind that he may acquire anything he wants, or its equivalent, without violating the rights of others. Henry Ford comes well within the meaning of this definition.

During the world war, a Chicago newspaper published certain editorials in which, among other statements, Henry Ford was called "an ignorant pacifist." Mr. Ford objected to the statements, and brought suit against the paper for libeling him. When the suit was tried in the Courts, the attorneys for the paper pleaded justification, and placed Mr. Ford, himself, on the witness stand, for the purpose of proving to the jury that he was ignorant. The attorneys asked Mr. Ford a great variety of questions, all of them intended to prove, by his own evidence, that, while he might possess considerable specialized knowledge pertaining to the manufacture of automobiles, he was, in the main, ignorant.

Mr. Ford was plied with such questions as the following:

"Who was Benedict Arnold?" and "How many soldiers did the British send over to America to put down the Rebellion of 1776?" In answer to the

[p. 107]

last question, Mr. Ford replied, "I do not know the exact number of soldiers the British sent over, but I have heard that it was a considerably larger number than ever went back."

Finally, Mr. Ford became tired of this line of questioning, and in reply to a particularly offensive question, he leaned over, pointed his finger at the lawyer who had asked the question, and said, "If I should really WANT to answer the foolish question you have just asked, or any of the other questions you have been asking me, let me remind you that I have a row of electric push-buttons on my desk, and by pushing the right button, I can summon to my aid men who can answer ANY question I desire to ask concerning the business to which I am devoting most of my efforts. Now, will you kindly tell me, WHY I should clutter up my mind with general knowledge, for the purpose of being able to answer questions, when I have men around me who can supply any knowledge I require?"

There certainly was good logic to that reply.

That answer floored the lawyer. Every person in the courtroom realized it was the answer, not of an ignorant man, but of a man of EDUCATION. Any man is educated who knows where to get knowledge when he needs it, and how to organize that knowledge into definite plans of action. Through the assistance of his "Master Mind" group, Henry Ford had at his command all the specialized knowledge he needed to enable him to become one of the wealthiest men in America. It was not essential that he have this knowledge in his own mind. Surely no person who has sufficient inclination and intelligence

[p. 108]

to read a book of this nature can possibly miss the significance of this illustration.

Before you can be sure of your ability to transmute DESIRE into its monetary equivalent, you will require SPECIALIZED KNOWLEDGE of the service, merchandise, or profession which you intend to offer in return for fortune. Perhaps you may need much more specialized knowledge than you have the ability or the inclination to acquire, and if this should be true, you may bridge your weakness through the aid of your "Master Mind" group.

Andrew Carnegie stated that he, personally, knew nothing about the technical end of the steel business; moreover, he did not particularly care to know anything about it. The specialized knowledge which he required for the manufacture and marketing of steel, he found available through the individual units of his MASTER MIND GROUP.

The accumulation of great fortunes calls for POWER, and power is acquired through highly organized and intelligently directed specialized knowledge, but that knowledge does not, necessarily, have to be in the possession of the man who accumulates the fortune.

The preceding paragraph should give hope and encouragement to the man with ambition to accumulate a fortune, who has not possessed himself of the necessary "education" to supply such specialized knowledge as he may require. Men sometimes go through life suffering from "inferiority complexes," because they are not men of "education." The man who can organize and direct a "Master Mind" group of men who possess knowledge useful

[p. 109]

in the accumulation of money, is just as much a man of education as any man in the group. REMEMBER THIS, if you suffer from a feeling of inferiority, because your schooling has been limited.

Thomas A. Edison had only three months of "schooling" during his entire life. He did not lack education, neither did he die poor.

Henry Ford had less than a sixth grade "schooling" but he has managed to do pretty well by himself, financially.

SPECIALIZED KNOWLEDGE is among the most plentiful, and the cheapest forms of service which may be had! If you doubt this, consult the payroll of any university.

IT PAYS TO KNOW HOW TO PURCHASE KNOWLEDGE

First of all, decide the sort of specialized knowledge you require, and the purpose for which it is needed. To a large extent your major purpose in life, the goal toward which you are working, will help determine what knowledge you need. With this question settled, your next move requires that you have accurate information concerning dependable sources of knowledge. The more important of these are:

        (a)

       One's own   experience and education

     
      (b)

       Experience and   education available through cooperation of others (Master Mind Alliance)

     
      (c)

       Colleges and   Universities

     
      (d)

       Public   Libraries (Through books and periodicals in which may be found all the   knowledge organized by civilization)

     
       

       [p. 110]

     
      (e)

       Special   Training Courses (Through night schools and home study schools in   particular.)

     
 As knowledge is acquired it must be organized and put into use, for a definite purpose, through practical plans. Knowledge has no value except that which can be gained from its application toward some worthy end. This is one reason why college degrees are not valued more highly. They represent nothing but miscellaneous knowledge.

If you contemplate taking additional schooling, first determine the purpose for which you want the knowledge you are seeking, then learn where this particular sort of knowledge can be obtained, from reliable sources.

Successful men, in all callings, never stop acquiring specialized knowledge related to their major purpose, business, or profession. Those who are not successful usually make the mistake of believing that the knowledge acquiring period ends when one finishes school. The truth is that schooling does but little more than to put one in the way of learning how to acquire practical knowledge.

With this Changed World which began at the end of the economic collapse, came also astounding changes in educational requirements. The order of the day is SPECIALIZATION! This truth was emphasized by Robert P. Moore, secretary of appointments of Columbia University.

"SPECIALISTS MOST SOUGHT

"Particularly sought after by employing companies are candidates who have specialized in some

[p. 111]

field--business-school graduates with training in accounting and statistics, engineers of all varieties, journalists, architects, chemists, and also outstanding leaders and activity men of the senior class.

"The man who has been active on the campus, whose personality is such that he gets along with all kinds of people and who has done an adequate job with his studies has a most decided edge over the strictly academic student. Some of these, because of their all-around qualifications, have received several offers of positions, a few of them as many as six.

"In departing from the conception that the 'straight A' student was invariably the one to get the choice of the better jobs, Mr. Moore said that most companies look not only to academic records but to activity records and personalities of the students.

"One of the largest industrial companies, the leader in its field, in writing to Mr. Moore concerning prospective seniors at the college, said:

"'We are interested primarily in finding men who can make exceptional progress in management work. For this reason we emphasize qualities of character, intelligence and personality far more than specific educational background.'

"'APPRENTICESHIP' PROPOSED

"Proposing a system of 'apprenticing' students in offices, stores and industrial occupations during the summer vacation, Mr. Moore asserts that after the first two or three years of college, every student should be asked 'to choose a definite future course

[p. 112]

and to call a halt if he has been merely pleasantly drifting without purpose through an unspecialized academic curriculum.'

"Colleges and universities must face the practical consideration that all professions and occupations now demand specialists," he said, urging that educational institutions accept more direct responsibility for vocational guidance.

One of the most reliable and practical sources of knowledge available to those who need specialized schooling, is the night schools operated in most large cities. The correspondence schools give specialized training anywhere the U. S. mails go, on all subjects that can be taught by the extension method. One advantage of home study training is the flexibility of the study programme which permits one to study during spare time. Another stupendous advantage of home study training (if the school is carefully chosen), is the fact that most courses offered by home study schools carry with them generous privileges of consultation which can be of priceless value to those needing specialized knowledge. No matter where you live, you can share the benefits.

Anything acquired without effort, and without cost is generally unappreciated, often discredited; perhaps this is why we get so little from our marvelous opportunity in public schools. The SELF-DISCIPLINE one receives from a definite programme of specialized study makes up to some extent, for the wasted opportunity when knowledge was available without cost. Correspondence schools are highly organized business institutions. Their tuition fees are so low that they are forced to insist

[p. 113]

upon prompt payments. Being asked to pay, whether the student makes good grades or poor, has the effect of causing one to follow through with the course when he would otherwise drop it. The correspondence schools have not stressed this point sufficiently, for the truth is that their collection departments constitute the very finest sort of training on DECISION, PROMPTNESS, ACTION and THE HABIT OF FINISHING THAT WHICH ONE BEGINS.

I learned this from experience, more than twenty-five years ago. I enrolled for a home study course in Advertising. After completing eight or ten lessons I stopped studying, but the school did not stop sending me bills. Moreover, it insisted upon payment, whether I kept up my studies or not. I decided that if I had to pay for the course (which I had legally obligated myself to do), I should complete the lessons and get my money's worth. I felt, at the time, that the collection system of the school was somewhat too well organized, but I learned later in life that it was a valuable part of my training for which no charge had been made. Being forced to pay, I went ahead and completed the course. Later in life I discovered that the efficient collection system of that school had been worth much in the form of money earned, because of the training in advertising I had so reluctantly taken.

We have in this country what is said to be the greatest public school system in the world. We have invested fabulous sums for fine buildings, we have provided convenient transportation for children living in the rural districts, so they may attend the

[p. 114]

best schools, but there is one astounding weakness to this marvelous system--IT IS FREE! One of the strange things about human beings is that they value only that which has a price. The free schools of America, and the free public libraries, do not impress people because they are free. This is the major reason why so many people find it necessary to acquire additional training after they quit school and go to work. It is also one of the major reasons why EMPLOYERS GIVE GREATER CONSIDERATION TO EMPLOYEES WHO TAKE HOME STUDY COURSES. They have learned, from experience, that any person who has the ambition to give up a part of his spare time to studying at home has in him those qualities which make for leadership. This recognition is not a charitable gesture, it is sound business judgment upon the part of the employers.

There is one weakness in people for which there is no remedy. It is the universal weakness of LACK OF AMBITION! Persons, especially salaried people, who schedule their spare time, to provide for home study, seldom remain at the bottom very long. Their action opens the way for the upward climb, removes many obstacles from their path, and gains the friendly interest of those who have the power to put them in the way of OPPORTUNITY.

The home study method of training is especially suited to the needs of employed people who find, after leaving school, that they must acquire additional specialized knowledge, but cannot spare the time to go back to school.

The changed economic conditions prevailing since

[p. 115]

the depression have made it necessary for thousands of people to find additional, or new sources of income. For the majority of these, the solution to their problem may be found only by acquiring specialized knowledge. Many will be forced to change their occupations entirely. When a merchant finds that a certain line of merchandise is not selling, he usually supplants it with another that is in demand. The person whose business is that of marketing personal services must also be an efficient merchant. If his services do not bring adequate returns in one occupation, he must change to another, where broader opportunities are available.

Stuart Austin Wier prepared himself as a Construction Engineer and followed this line of work until the depression limited his market to where it did not give him the income he required. He took inventory of himself, decided to change his profession to law, went back to school and took special courses by which he prepared himself as a corporation lawyer. Despite the fact the depression had not ended, he completed his training, passed the Bar Examination, and quickly built a lucrative law practice, in Dallas, Texas; in fact he is turning away clients.

Just to keep the record straight, and to anticipate the alibis of those who will say, "I couldn't go to school because I have a family to support," or "I'm too old," I will add the information that Mr. Wier was past forty, and married when he went back to school. Moreover, by carefully selecting highly specialized courses, in colleges best prepared to teach the subjects chosen, Mr. Wier completed in two

[p. 116]

years the work for which the majority of law students require four years. IT PAYS TO KNOW HOW TO PURCHASE KNOWLEDGE!

The person who stops studying merely because he has finished school is forever hopelessly doomed to mediocrity, no matter what may be his calling. The way of success is the way of continuous pursuit of knowledge.

Let us consider a specific instance.

During the depression a salesman in a grocery store found himself without a position. Having had some bookkeeping experience, he took a special course in accounting, familiarized himself with all the latest bookkeeping and office equipment, and went into business for himself. Starting with the grocer for whom he had formerly worked, he made contracts with more than 100 small merchants to keep their books, at a very nominal monthly fee. His idea was so practical that he soon found it necessary to set up a portable office in a light delivery truck, which he equipped with modern bookkeeping machinery. He now has a fleet of these bookkeeping offices "on wheels" and employs a large staff of assistants, thus providing small merchants with accounting service equal to the best that money can buy, at very nominal cost.

Specialized knowledge, plus imagination, were the ingredients that went into this unique and successful business. Last year the owner of that business paid an income tax of almost ten times as much as was paid by the merchant for whom he worked when the depression forced upon him a temporary adversity which proved to be a blessing in disguise.

[p. 117]

The beginning of this successful business was an IDEA!

Inasmuch as I had the privilege of supplying the unemployed salesman with that idea, I now assume the further privilege of suggesting another idea which has within it the possibility of even greater income. Also the possibility of rendering useful service to thousands of people who badly need that service.

The idea was suggested by the salesman who gave up selling and went into the business of keeping books on a wholesale basis. When the plan was suggested as a solution of his unemployment problem, he quickly exclaimed, "I like the idea, but I would not know how to turn it into cash." In other words, he complained he would not know how to market his bookkeeping knowledge after he acquired it.

So, that brought up another problem which had to be solved. With the aid of a young woman typist, clever at hand lettering, and who could put the story together, a very attractive book was prepared, describing the advantages of the new system of bookkeeping. The pages were neatly typed and pasted in an ordinary scrapbook, which was used as a silent salesman with which the story of this new business was so effectively told that its owner soon had more accounts than he could handle.

There are thousands of people, all over the country, who need the services of a merchandising specialist capable of preparing an attractive brief for use in marketing personal services. The aggregate annual income from such a service might easily exceed

[p. 118]

that received by the largest employment agency, and the benefits of the service might be made far greater to the purchaser than any to be obtained from an employment agency.

The IDEA here described was born of necessity, to bridge an emergency which had to be covered, but it did not stop by merely serving one person. The woman who created the idea has a keen IMAGINATION. She saw in her newly born brain-child the making of a new profession, one that is destined to render valuable service to thousands of people who need practical guidance in marketing personal services.

Spurred to action by the instantaneous success of her first "PREPARED PLAN TO MARKET PERSONAL SERVICES," this energetic woman turned next to the solution of a similar problem for her son who had just finished college, but had been totally unable to find a market for his services. The plan she originated for his use was the finest specimen of merchandising of personal services I have ever seen.

When the plan book had been completed, it contained nearly fifty pages of beautifully typed, properly organized information, telling the story of her son's native ability, schooling, personal experiences, and a great variety of other information too extensive for description. The plan book also contained a complete description of the position her son desired, together with a marvelous word picture of the exact plan he would use in filling the position.

The preparation of the plan book required several week's labor, during which time its creator sent her son to the public library almost daily, to procure

[p. 119]

data needed in selling his services to best advantage. She sent him, also to all the competitors of his prospective employer, and gathered from them vital information concerning their business methods which was of great value in the formation of the plan he intended to use in filling the position he sought. When the plan had been finished, it contained more than half a dozen very fine suggestions for the use and benefit of the prospective employer. (The suggestions were put into use by the company).

One may be inclined to ask, "Why go to all this trouble to secure a job?" The answer is straight to the point, also it is dramatic, because it deals with a subject which assumes the proportion of a tragedy with millions of men and women whose sole source of income is personal services.

The answer is, "DOING A THING WELL NEVER IS TROUBLE! THE PLAN PREPARED BY THIS WOMAN FOR THE BENEFIT OF HER SON, HELPED HIM GET THE JOB FOR WHICH HE APPLIED, AT THE FIRST INTERVIEW, AT A SALARY FIXED BY HIMSELF."

Moreover--and this, too, is important--THE POSITION DID NOT REQUIRE THE YOUNG MAN TO START AT THE BOTTOM. HE BEGAN AS A JUNIOR EXECUTIVE, AT AN EXECUTIVE'S SALARY.

"Why go to all this trouble?" do you ask?

Well, for one thing, the PLANNED PRESENTATION of this young man's application for a position clipped off no less than ten years of time he would have required to get to where he began, had he "started at the bottom and worked his way up."

[p. 120]

This idea of starting at the bottom and working one's way up may appear to be sound, but the major objection to it is this--too many of those who begin at the bottom never manage to lift their heads high enough to be seen by OPPORTUNITY, so they remain at the bottom. It should be remembered, also, that the outlook from the bottom is not so very bright or encouraging. It has a tendency to kill off ambition. We call it "getting into a rut," which means that we accept our fate because we form the HABIT of daily routine, a habit that finally becomes so strong we cease to try to throw it off. And that is another reason why it pays to start one or two steps above the bottom. By so doing one forms the HABIT of looking around, of observing how others get ahead, of seeing OPPORTUNITY, and of embracing it without hesitation.

Dan Halpin is a splendid example of what I mean. During his college days, he was manager of the famous 1930 National Championship Notre Dame football team, when it was under the direction of the late Knute Rockne.

Perhaps he was inspired by the great football coach to aim high, and NOT MISTAKE TEMPORARY DEFEAT FOR FAILURE, just as Andrew Carnegie, the great industrial leader, inspired his young business lieutenants to set high goals for themselves. At any rate, young Halpin finished college at a mighty unfavorable time, when the depression had made jobs scarce, so, after a fling at investment banking and motion pictures, he took the first opening with a potential future he could find--selling electrical hearing aids on a commission

[p. 121]

basis. ANYONE COULD START IN THAT SORT OF JOB, AND HALPIN KNEW IT, but it was enough to open the door of opportunity to him.

For almost two years, he continued in a job not to his liking, and he would never have risen above that job if he had not done something about his dissatisfaction. He aimed, first, at the job of Assistant Sales Manager of his company, and got the job. That one step upward placed him high enough above the crowd to enable him to see still greater opportunity, also, it placed him where OPPORTUNITY COULD SEE HIM.

He made such a fine record selling hearing aids, that A. M. Andrews, Chairman of the Board of the Dictograph Products Company, a business competitor of the company for which Halpin worked, wanted to know something about that man Dan Halpin who was taking big sales away from the long established Dictograph Company. He sent for Halpin. When the interview was over, Halpin was the new Sales Manager, in charge of the Acousticon Division. Then, to test young Halpin's metal, Mr. Andrews went away to Florida for three months, leaving him to sink or swim in his new job. He did not sink! Knute Rockne's spirit of "All the world loves a winner, and has no time for a loser," inspired him to put so much into his job that he was recently elected Vice-President of the company, and General Manager of the Acousticon and Silent Radio Division, a job which most men would be proud to earn through ten years of loyal effort. Halpin turned the trick in little more than six months.

[p. 122]

It is difficult to say whether Mr. Andrews or Mr. Halpin is more deserving of eulogy, for the reason that both showed evidence of having an abundance of that very rare quality known as IMAGINATION. Mr. Andrews deserves credit for seeing, in young Halpin, a "go-getter" of the highest order. Halpin deserves credit for REFUSING TO COMPROMISE WITH LIFE BY ACCEPTING AND KEEPING A JOB HE DID NOT WANT, and that is one of the major points I am trying to emphasize through this entire philosophy--that we rise to high positions or remain at the bottom BECAUSE OF CONDITIONS WE CAN CONTROL IF WE DESIRE TO CONTROL THEM.

I am also trying to emphasize another point, namely, that both success and failure are largely the results of HABIT! I have not the slightest doubt that Dan Halpin's close association with the greatest football coach America ever knew, planted in his mind the same brand of DESIRE to excel which made the Notre Dame football team world famous. Truly, there is something to the idea that hero-worship is helpful, provided one worships a WINNER. Halpin tells me that Rockne was one of the world's greatest leaders of men in all history.

My belief in the theory that business associations are vital factors, both in failure and in success, was recently demonstrated, when my son Blair was negotiating with Dan Halpin for a position. Mr. Halpin offered him a beginning salary of about one half what he could have gotten from a rival company. I brought parental pressure to bear, and induced him to accept the place with Mr. Halpin, because

[p. 123]

[paragraph continues] I BELIEVE THAT CLOSE ASSOCIATION WITH ONE WHO REFUSES TO COMPROMISE WITH CIRCUMSTANCES HE DOES NOT LIKE, IS AN ASSET THAT CAN NEVER BE MEASURED IN TERMS OF MONEY.

The bottom is a monotonous, dreary, unprofitable place for any person. That is why I have taken the time to describe how lowly beginnings may be circumvented by proper planning. Also, that is why so much space has been devoted to a description of this new profession, created by a woman who was inspired to do a fine job of PLANNING because she wanted her son to have a favorable "break."

With the changed conditions ushered in by the world economic collapse, came also the need for newer and better ways of marketing PERSONAL SERVICES. It is hard to determine why someone had not previously discovered this stupendous need, in view of the fact that more money changes hands in return for personal services than for any other purpose. The sum paid out monthly, to people who work for wages and salaries, is so huge that it runs into hundreds of millions, and the annual distribution amounts to billions.

Perhaps some will find, in the IDEA here briefly described, the nucleus of the riches they DESIRE! Ideas with much less merit have been the seedlings from which great fortunes have grown. Woolworth's Five and Ten Cent Store idea, for example, had far less merit, but it piled up a fortune for its creator.

Those seeing OPPORTUNITY lurking in this suggestion will find valuable aid in the chapter on Organized Planning. Incidentally, an efficient merchandiser

[p. 124]

of personal services would find a growing demand for his services wherever there are men and women who seek better markets for their services. By applying the Master Mind principle, a few people with suitable talent, could form an alliance, and have a paying business very quickly. One would need to be a fair writer, with a flair for advertising and selling, one handy at typing and hand lettering, and one should be a first class business getter who would let the world know about the service. If one person possessed all these abilities, he might carry on the business alone, until it outgrew him.

The woman who prepared the "Personal Service Sales Plan" for her son now receives requests from all parts of the country for her cooperation in preparing similar plans for others who desire to market their personal services for more money. She has a staff of expert typists, artists, and writers who have the ability to dramatize the case history so effectively that one's personal services can be marketed for much more money than the prevailing wages for similar services. She is so confident of her ability that she accepts, as the major portion of her fee, a percentage of the increased pay she helps her clients to earn.

It must not be supposed that her plan merely consists of clever salesmanship by which she helps men and women to demand and receive more money for the same services they formerly sold for less pay. She looks after the interests of the purchaser as well as the seller of personal services, and so prepares her plans that the employer receives full value for the additional money he pays. The method by

[p. 125]

which she accomplishes this astonishing result is a professional secret which she discloses to no one excepting her own clients.

If you have the IMAGINATION, and seek a more profitable outlet for your personal services, this suggestion may be the stimulus for which you have been searching. The IDEA is capable of yielding an income far greater than that of the "average" doctor, lawyer, or engineer whose education required several years in college. The idea is saleable to those seeking new positions, in practically all positions calling for managerial or executive ability, and those desiring re-arrangement of incomes in their present positions.

There is no fixed price for sound IDEAS!

Back of all IDEAS is specialized knowledge. Unfortunately, for those who do not find riches in abundance, specialized knowledge is more abundant and more easily acquired than IDEAS. Because of this very truth, there is a universal demand and an ever-increasing opportunity for the person capable of helping men and women to sell their personal services advantageously. Capability means IMAGINATION, the one quality needed to combine specialized knowledge with IDEAS, in the form of ORGANIZED PLANS designed to yield riches.

If you have IMAGINATION this chapter may present you with an idea sufficient to serve as the beginning of the riches you desire. Remember, the IDEA is the main thing. Specialized knowledge may be found just around the corner--any corner!

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 126]

          

          

CHAPTER 6

   

IMAGINATION

THE WORKSHOP OF THE MIND

The Fifth Step   toward Riches

       

     
    

THE imagination is literally the workshop wherein are fashioned all plans created by man. The impulse, the DESIRE, is given shape, form, and ACTION through the aid of the imaginative faculty of the mind.

It has been said that man can create anything which he can imagine.

Of all the ages of civilization, this is the most favorable for the development of the imagination, because it is an age of rapid change. On every hand one may contact stimuli which develop the imagination.

Through the aid of his imaginative faculty, man has discovered, and harnessed, more of Nature's forces during the past fifty years than during the entire history of the human race, previous to that time. He has conquered the air so completely, that the birds are a poor match for him in flying. He has harnessed the ether, and made it serve as a means of instantaneous communication with any part of the world. He has analyzed, and weighed the sun at a distance of millions of miles, and has determined, through the aid of IMAGINATION, the elements of which it consists. He has discovered that his own brain is both a broadcasting, and a receiving station for the vibration of thought, and

[p. 127]

he is beginning now to learn how to make practical use of this discovery. He has increased the speed of locomotion, until he may now travel at a speed of more than three hundred miles an hour. The time will soon come when a man may breakfast in New York, and lunch in San Francisco.

MAN'S ONLY LIMITATION, within reason, LIES IN HIS DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF HIS IMAGINATION. He has not yet reached the apex of development in the use of his imaginative faculty. He has merely discovered that he has an imagination, and has commenced to use it in a very elementary way.

Two FORMS OF IMAGINATION

The imaginative faculty functions in two forms. One is known as "synthetic imagination," and the other as "creative imagination."

SYNTHETIC IMAGINATION:--Through this faculty, one may arrange old concepts, ideas, or plans into new combinations. This faculty creates nothing. It merely works with the material of experience, education, and observation with which it is fed. It is the faculty used most by the inventor, with the exception of the "genius" who draws upon the creative imagination, when he cannot solve his problem through synthetic imagination.

CREATIVE IMAGINATION:--Through the faculty of creative imagination, the finite mind of man has direct communication with Infinite Intelligence. It is the faculty through which "hunches" and "inspirations" are received. It is by this faculty that all basic, or new ideas are handed over to man.

[p. 128]

[paragraph continues] It is through this faculty that thought vibrations from the minds of others are received. It is through this faculty that one individual may "tune in," or communicate with the subconscious minds of other men.

The creative imagination works automatically, in the manner described in subsequent pages. This faculty functions ONLY when the conscious mind is vibrating at an exceedingly rapid rate, as for example, when the conscious mind is stimulated through the emotion of a strong desire.

The creative faculty becomes more alert, more receptive to vibrations from the sources mentioned, in proportion to its development through USE. This statement is significant! Ponder over it before passing on.

Keep in mind as you follow these principles, that the entire story of how one may convert DESIRE into money cannot be told in one statement. The story will be complete, only when one has MASTERED, ASSIMILATED, and BEGUN TO MAKE USE of all the principles.

The great leaders of business, industry, finance, and the great artists, musicians, poets, and writers became great, because they developed the faculty of creative imagination.

Both the synthetic and creative faculties of imagination become more alert with use, just as any muscle or organ of the body develops through use.

Desire is only a thought, an impulse. It is nebulous and ephemeral. It is abstract, and of no value, until it has been transformed into its physical counterpart. While the synthetic imagination is

[p. 129]

the one which will be used most frequently, in the process of transforming the impulse of DESIRE into money, you must keep in mind the fact, that you may face circumstances and situations which demand use of the creative imagination as well.

Your imaginative faculty may have become weak through inaction. It can be revived and made alert through USE. This faculty does not die, though it may become quiescent through lack of use.

Center your attention, for the time being, on the development of the synthetic imagination, because this is the faculty which you will use more often in the process of converting desire into money.

Transformation of the intangible impulse, of DESIRE, into the tangible reality, of MONEY, calls for the use of a plan, or plans. These plans must be formed with the aid of the imagination, and mainly, with the synthetic faculty.

Read the entire book through, then come back to this chapter, and begin at once to put your imagination to work on the building of a plan, or plans, for the transformation of your DESIRE into money. Detailed instructions for the building of plans have been given in almost every chapter. Carry out the instructions best suited to your needs, reduce your plan to writing, if you have not already done so. The moment you complete this, you will have DEFINITELY given concrete form to the intangible DESIRE. Read the preceding sentence once more. Read it aloud, very slowly, and as you do so, remember that the moment you reduce the statement of your desire, and a plan for its realization, to writing, you have actually TAKEN THE FIRST of

[p. 130]

a series of steps, which will enable you to convert the thought into its physical counterpart.

The earth on which you live, you, yourself, and every other material thing are the result of evolutionary change, through which microscopic bits of matter have been organized and arranged in an orderly fashion.

Moreover--and this statement is of stupendous importance--this earth, every one of the billions of individual cells of your body, and every atom of matter, began as an intangible form of energy.

DESIRE is thought impulse! Thought impulses are forms of energy. When you begin with the thought impulse, DESIRE, to accumulate money, you are drafting into your service the same "stuff" that Nature used in creating this earth, and every material form in the universe, including the body and brain in which the thought impulses function.

As far as science has been able to determine, the entire universe consists of but two elements--matter and energy.

Through the combination of energy and matter, has been created everything perceptible to man, from the largest star which floats in the heavens, down to, and including man, himself.

You are now engaged in the task of trying to profit by Nature's method. You are (sincerely and earnestly, we hope), trying to adapt yourself to Nature's laws, by endeavoring to convert DESIRE into its physical or monetary equivalent. YOU CAN DO IT! IT HAS BEEN DONE BEFORE!

You can build a fortune through the aid of laws which are immutable. But, first, you must become

[p. 131]

familiar with these laws, and learn to USE them. Through repetition, and by approaching the description of these principles from every conceivable angle, the author hopes to reveal to you the secret through which every great fortune has been accumulated. Strange and paradoxical as it may seem, the "secret" is NOT A SECRET. Nature, herself, advertises it in the earth on which we live, the stars, the planets suspended within our view, in the elements above and around us, in every blade of grass, and every form of life within our vision.

Nature advertises this "secret" in the terms of biology, in the conversion of a tiny cell, so small that it may be lost on the point of a pin, into the HUMAN BEING now reading this line. The conversion of desire into its physical equivalent is, certainly, no more miraculous!

Do not become discouraged if you do not fully comprehend all that has been stated. Unless you have long been a student of the mind, it is not to be expected that you will assimilate all that is in this chapter upon a first reading.

But you will, in time, make good progress.

The principles which follow will open the way for understanding of imagination. Assimilate that which you understand, as you read this philosophy for the first time, then, when you reread and study it, you will discover that something has happened to clarify it, and give you a broader understanding of the whole. Above all, DO NOT STOP, nor hesitate in your study of these principles until you have read the book at least THREE times, for then, you will not want to stop.

[p. 132]

HOW TO MAKE PRACTICAL USE OF IMAGINATION

Ideas are the beginning points of all fortunes. Ideas are products of the imagination. Let us examine a few well known ideas which have yielded huge fortunes, with the hope that these illustrations will convey definite information concerning the method by which imagination may be used in accumulating riches.

THE ENCHANTED KETTLE

Fifty years ago, an old country doctor drove to town, hitched his horse, quietly slipped into a drug store by the back door, and began "dickering" with the young drug clerk.

His mission was destined to yield great wealth to many people. It was destined to bring to the South the most far-flung benefit since the Civil War.

For more than an hour, behind the prescription counter, the old doctor and the clerk talked in low tones. Then the doctor left. He went out to the buggy and brought back a large, old fashioned kettle, a big wooden paddle (used for stirring the contents of the kettle), and deposited them in the back of the store.

The clerk inspected the kettle, reached into his inside pocket, took out a roll of bills, and handed it over to the doctor. The roll contained exactly $500.00--the clerk's entire savings!

The doctor handed over a small slip of paper on which was written a secret formula. The words on that small slip of paper were worth a King's ransom! But not to the doctor! Those magic words were needed to start the kettle to boiling, but

[p. 133]

neither the doctor nor the young clerk knew what fabulous fortunes were destined to flow from that kettle.

The old doctor was glad to sell the outfit for five hundred dollars. The money would pay off his debts, and give him freedom of mind. The clerk was taking a big chance by staking his entire life's savings on a mere scrap of paper and an old kettle! He never dreamed his investment would start a kettle to overflowing with gold that would surpass the miraculous performance of Aladdin's lamp.

What the clerk really purchased was an IDEA!

The old kettle and the wooden paddle, and the secret message on a slip of paper were incidental. The strange performance of that kettle began to take place after the new owner mixed with the secret instructions an ingredient of which the doctor knew nothing.

Read this story carefully, give your imagination a test! See if you can discover what it was that the young man added to the secret message, which caused the kettle to overflow with gold. Remember, as you read, that this is not a story from Arabian Nights. Here you have a story of facts, stranger than fiction, facts which began in the form of an IDEA.

Let us take a look at the vast fortunes of gold this idea has produced. It has paid, and still pays huge fortunes to men and women all over the world, who distribute the contents of the kettle to millions of people.

The Old Kettle is now one of the world's largest consumers of sugar, thus providing jobs of a permanent

[p. 134]

nature to thousands of men and women engaged in growing sugar cane, and in refining and marketing sugar.

The Old Kettle consumes, annually, millions of glass bottles, providing jobs to huge numbers of glass workers.

The Old Kettle gives employment to an army of clerks, stenographers, copy writers, and advertising experts throughout the nation. It has brought fame and fortune to scores of artists who have created magnificent pictures describing the product.

The Old Kettle has converted a small Southern city into the business capital of the South, where it now benefits, directly, or indirectly, every business and practically every resident of the city.

The influence of this idea now benefits every civilized country in the world, pouring out a continuous stream of gold to all who touch it.

Gold from the kettle built and maintains one of the most prominent colleges of the South, where thousands of young people receive the training essential for success.

The Old Kettle has done other marvelous things.

All through the world depression, when factories, banks and business houses were folding up and quitting by the thousands, the owner of this Enchanted Kettle went marching on, giving continuous employment to an army of men and women all over the world, and paying out extra portions of gold to those who, long ago, had faith in the idea.

If the product of that old brass kettle could talk, it would tell thrilling tales of romance in every language. Romances of love, romances of business,

[p. 135]

romances of professional men and women who are daily being stimulated by it.

The author is sure of at least one such romance, for he was a part of it, and it all began not far from the very spot on which the drug clerk purchased the old kettle. It was here that the author met his wife, and it was she who first told him of the Enchanted Kettle. It was the product of that Kettle they were drinking when he asked her to accept him "for better or worse."

Now that you know the content of the Enchanted Kettle is a world famous drink, it is fitting that the author confess that the home city of the drink supplied him with a wife, also that the drink itself provides him with stimulation of thought without intoxication, and thereby it serves to give the refreshment of mind which an author must have to do his best work.

Whoever you are, wherever you may live, whatever occupation you may be engaged in, just remember in the future, every time you see the words "Coca-Cola," that its vast empire of wealth and influence grew out of a single IDEA, and that the mysterious ingredient the drug clerk--Asa Candler--mixed with the secret formula was . . . IMAGINATION!

Stop and think of that, for a moment.

Remember, also, that the thirteen steps to riches, described in this book, were the media through which the influence of Coca-Cola has been extended to every city, town, village, and cross-roads of the world, and that ANY IDEA you may create, as sound and meritorious as Coca-Cola, has the possibility

[p. 136]

of duplicating the stupendous record of this world-wide thirst-killer.

Truly, thoughts are things, and their scope of operation is the world, itself.

WHAT I WOULD DO IF I HAD A MILLION DOLLARS

This story proves the truth of that old saying, "where there's a will, there's a way." It was told to me by that beloved educator and clergyman, the late Frank W. Gunsaulus, who began his preaching career in the stockyards region of South Chicago.

While Dr. Gunsaulus was going through college, he observed many defects in our educational system, defects which he believed he could correct, if he were the head of a college. His deepest desire was to become the directing head of an educational institution in which young men and women would be taught to "learn by doing."

He made up his mind to organize a new college in which he could carry out his ideas, without being handicapped by orthodox methods of education.

He needed a million dollars to put the project across! Where was he to lay his hands on so large a sum of money? That was the question that absorbed most of this ambitious young preacher's thought.

But he couldn't seem to make any progress.

Every night he took that thought to bed with him. He got up with it in the morning. He took it with him everywhere he went. He turned it over and over in his mind until it became a consuming obsession with him. A million dollars is a lot of money. He recognized that fact, but he also recognized

[p. 137]

the truth that the only limitation is that which one sets up in one's own mind.

Being a philosopher as well as a preacher, Dr. Gunsaulus recognized, as do all who succeed in life, that DEFINITENESS OF PURPOSE is the starting point from which one must begin. He recognized, too, that definiteness of purpose takes on animation, life, and power when backed by a BURNING DESIRE to translate that purpose into its material equivalent.

He knew all these great truths, yet he did not know where, or how to lay his hands on a million dollars. The natural procedure would have been to give up and quit, by saying, "Ah well, my idea is a good one, but I cannot do anything with it, because I never can procure the necessary million dollars." That is exactly what the majority of people would have said, but it is not what Dr. Gunsaulus said. What he said, and what he did are so important that I now introduce him, and let him speak for himself.

"One Saturday afternoon I sat in my room thinking of ways and means of raising the money to carry out my plans. For nearly two years, I had been thinking, but I had done nothing but think!

"The time had come for ACTION!

"I made up my mind, then and there, that I would get the necessary million dollars within a week. How? I was not concerned about that. The main thing of importance was the decision to get the money within a specified time, and I want to tell you that the moment I reached a definite decision to get the money within a specified time, a strange

[p. 138]

feeling of assurance came over me, such as I had never before experienced. Something inside me seemed to say, 'Why didn't you reach that decision a long time ago? The money was waiting for you all the time!'

"Things began to happen in a hurry. I called the newspapers and announced I would preach a sermon the following morning, entitled, 'What I would do if I had a Million Dollars.'

"I went to work on the sermon immediately, but I must tell you, frankly, the task was not difficult, because I had been preparing that sermon for almost two years. The spirit back of it was a part of me!

"Long before midnight I had finished writing the sermon. I went to bed and slept with a feeling of confidence, for I could see myself already in possession of the million dollars.

"Next morning I arose early, went into the bathroom, read the sermon, then knelt on my knees and asked that my sermon might come to the attention of someone who would supply the needed money.

"While I was praying I again had that feeling of assurance that the money would be forthcoming. In my excitement, I walked out without my sermon, and did not discover the oversight until I was in my pulpit and about ready to begin delivering it.

"It was too late to go back for my notes, and what a blessing that I couldn't go back! Instead, my own subconscious mind yielded the material I needed. When I arose to begin my sermon, I closed my eyes, and spoke with all my heart and soul of my dreams. I not only talked to my audience,

[p. 139]

but I fancy I talked also to God. I told what I would do with a million dollars if that amount were placed in my hands. I described the plan I had in mind for organizing a great educational institution, where young people would learn to do practical things, and at the same time develop their minds.

"When I had finished and sat down, a man slowly arose from his seat, about three rows from the rear, and made his way toward the pulpit. I wondered what he was going to do. He came into the pulpit, extended his hand, and said, 'Reverend, I liked your sermon. I believe you can do everything you said you would, if you had a million dollars. To prove that I believe in you and your sermon, if you will come to my office tomorrow morning, I will give you the million dollars. My name is Phillip D. Armour.'"

Young Gunsaulus went to Mr. Armour's office and the million dollars was presented to him. With the money, he founded the Armour Institute of Technology.

That is more money than the majority of preachers ever see in an entire lifetime, yet the thought impulse back of the money was created in the young preacher's mind in a fraction of a minute. The necessary million dollars came as a result of an idea. Back of the idea was a DESIRE which young Gunsaulus had been nursing in his mind for almost two years.

Observe this important fact . . . HE GOT THE MONEY WITHIN THIRTY-SIX HOURS AFTER HE REACHED A DEFINITE DECISION IN HIS OWN MIND TO GET IT, AND

[p. 140]

[paragraph continues] DECIDED UPON A DEFINITE PLAN FOR GETTING IT!

There was nothing new or unique about young Gunsaulus' vague thinking about a million dollars, and weakly hoping for it. Others before him, and many since his time, have had similar thoughts. But there was something very unique and different about the decision he reached on that memorable Saturday, when he put vagueness into the background, and definitely said, "I WILL get that money within a week!"

God seems to throw Himself on the side of the man who knows exactly what he wants, if he is determined to get JUST THAT!

Moreover, the principle through which Dr. Gunsaulus got his million dollars is still alive! It is available to you! This universal law is as workable today as it was when the young preacher made use of it so successfully. This book describes, step by step, the thirteen elements of this great law, and suggests how they may be put to use.

Observe that Asa Candler and Dr. Frank Gunsaulus had one characteristic in common. Both knew the astounding truth that IDEAS CAN BE TRANSMUTED INTO CASH THROUGH THE POWER OF DEFINITE PURPOSE, PLUS DEFINITE PLANS.

If you are one of those who believe that hard work and honesty, alone, will bring riches, perish the thought! It is not true! Riches, when they come in huge quantities, are never the result of HARD work! Riches come, if they come at all, in response to definite demands, based upon the application of

[p. 141]

definite principles, and not by chance or luck.

Generally speaking, an idea is an impulse of thought that impels action, by an appeal to the imagination. All master salesmen know that ideas can be sold where merchandise cannot. Ordinary salesmen do not know this--that is why they are "ordinary."

A publisher of books, which sell for a nickel, made a discovery that should be worth much to publishers generally. He learned that many people buy titles, and not contents of books. By merely changing the name of one book that was not moving, his sales on that book jumped upward more than a million copies. The inside of the book was not changed in any way. He merely ripped off the cover bearing the title that did not sell, and put on a new cover with a title that had "box-office" value.

That, as simple as it may seem, was an IDEA! It was IMAGINATION.

There is no standard price on ideas. The creator of ideas makes his own price, and, if he is smart, gets it.

The moving picture industry created a whole flock of millionaires. Most of them were men who couldn't create ideas--BUT--they had the imagination to recognize ideas when they saw them.

The next flock of millionaires will grow out of the radio business, which is new and not overburdened with men of keen imagination. The money will be made by those who discover or create new and more meritorious radio programmes and have the imagination to recognize merit, and to give the radio listeners a chance to profit by it.

The sponsor! That unfortunate victim who now

[p. 142]

pays the cost of all radio "entertainment," soon will become idea conscious, and demand something for his money. The man who beats the sponsor to the draw, and supplies programmes that render useful service, is the man who will become rich in this new industry.

Crooners and light chatter artists who now pollute the air with wisecracks and silly giggles, will go the way of all light timbers, and their places will be taken by real artists who interpret carefully planned programmes which have been designed to service the minds of men, as well as provide entertainment.

Here is a wide open field of opportunity screaming its protest at the way it is being butchered, because of lack of imagination, and begging for rescue at any price. Above all, the thing that radio needs is new IDEAS!

If this new field of opportunity intrigues you, perhaps you might profit by the suggestion that the successful radio programmes of the future will give more attention to creating "buyer" audiences, and less attention to "listener" audiences. Stated more plainly, the builder of radio programmes who succeeds in the future, must find practical ways to convert "listeners" into "buyers." Moreover, the successful producer of radio programmes in the future must key his features so that he can definitely show its effect upon the audience.

Sponsors are becoming a bit weary of buying glib selling talks, based upon statements grabbed! out of thin air. They want, and in the future will demand, indisputable proof that the Whoosit programme not only gives millions of people the silliest

[p. 143]

giggle ever, but that the silly giggler can sell merchandise!

Another thing that might as well be understood by those who contemplate entering this new field of opportunity, radio advertising is going to be handled by an entirely new group of advertising experts, separate and distinct from the old time newspaper and magazine advertising agency men. The old timers in the advertising game cannot read the modern radio scripts, because they have been schooled to SEE ideas. The new radio technique demands men who can interpret ideas from a written manuscript in terms of SOUND! It cost the author a year of hard labor, and many thousands of dollars to learn this.

Radio, right now, is about where the moving pictures were, when Mary Pickford and her curls first appeared on the screen. There is plenty of room in radio for those who can produce or recognize IDEAS.

If the foregoing comment on the opportunities of radio has not started your idea factory to work, you had better forget it. Your opportunity is in some other field. If the comment intrigued you in the slightest degree, then go further into it, and you may find the one IDEA you need to round out your career.

Never let it discourage you if you have no experience in radio. Andrew Carnegie knew very little about making steel--I have Carnegie's own word for this--but he made practical use of two of the principles described in this book, and made the steel business yield him a fortune.

[p. 144]

The story of practically every great fortune starts with the day when a creator of ideas and a seller of ideas got together and worked in harmony. Carnegie surrounded himself with men who could do all that he could not do. Men who created ideas, and men who put ideas into operation, and made himself and the others fabulously rich.

Millions of people go through life hoping for favorable "breaks." Perhaps a favorable break can get one an opportunity, but the safest plan is not to depend upon luck. It was a favorable "break" that gave me the biggest opportunity of my life--but--twenty-five years of determined effort had to be devoted to that opportunity before it became an asset.

The "break" consisted of my good fortune in meeting and gaining the cooperation of Andrew Carnegie. On that occasion Carnegie planted in my mind the idea of organizing the principles of achievement into a philosophy of success. Thousands of people have profited by the discoveries made in the twenty-five years of research, and several fortunes have been accumulated through the application of the philosophy. The beginning was simple. It was an IDEA which anyone might have developed.

The favorable break came through Carnegie, but what about the DETERMINATION, DEFINITENESS OF PURPOSE, and the DESIRE TO ATTAIN THE GOAL, and the PERSISTENT EFFORT OF TWENTY-FIVE YEARS? It was no ordinary DESIRE that survived disappointment, discouragement, temporary defeat, criticism, and the

[p. 145]

constant reminding of "waste of time." It was a BURNING DESIRE! an OBSESSION!

When the idea was first planted in my mind by Mr. Carnegie, it was coaxed, nursed, and enticed to remain alive. Gradually, the idea became a giant under its own power, and it coaxed, nursed, and drove me. Ideas are like that. First you give life and action and guidance to ideas, then they take on power of their own and sweep aside all opposition.

Ideas are intangible forces, but they have more power than the physical brains that give birth to them. They have the power to live on, after the brain that creates them has returned to dust. For example, take the power of Christianity. That began with a simple idea, born in the brain of Christ. Its chief tenet was, "do unto others as you would have others do unto you." Christ has gone back to the source from whence He came, but His IDEA goes marching on. Some day, it may grow up, and come into its own, then it will have fulfilled Christ's deepest DESIRE. The IDEA has been developing only two thousand years. Give it time!

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 146]

          SUCCESS REQUIRES NO EXPLANATIONS

FAILURE PERMITS NO ALIBIS

     
    

[p. 147]

          

          

CHAPTER 7

   

ORGANIZED PLANNING

THE CRYSTALLIZATION OF DESIRE INTO ACTION

The Sixth Step   toward Riches

       

     
    

You have learned that everything man creates or acquires, begins in the form of DESIRE, that desire is taken on the first lap of its journey, from the abstract to the concrete, into the workshop of the IMAGINATION, where PLANS for its transition are created and organized.

In Chapter two, you were instructed to take six definite, practical steps, as your first move in translating the desire for money into its monetary equivalent. One of these steps is the formation of a DEFINITE, practical plan, or plans, through which this transformation may be made.

You will now be instructed how to build plans which will be practical, viz:

        (a)

       Ally yourself with   a group of as many people as you may need for the creation, and carrying out   of your plan, or plans for the accumulation of money--making use of the   "Master Mind" principle described in a later chapter. (Compliance   with this instruction is absolutely essential. Do not neglect it.)

     
      (b)

       Before forming   your "Master Mind" alliance, decide what advantages, and benefits,   you may offer the individual members of your group, in return for their   cooperation. No one will

     
       

       [p. 148]

     
       

       work indefinitely   without some form of compensation. No intelligent person will either request   or expect another to work without adequate compensation, although this may   not always be in the form of money.

     
      (c)

       Arrange to meet   with the members of your "Master Mind" group at least twice a week,   and more often if possible, until you have jointly perfected the necessary   plan, or plans for the accumulation of money.

     
      (d)

       Maintain   PERFECT HARMONY between yourself and every member of your "Master   Mind" group. If you fail to carry out this instruction to the letter,   you may expect to meet with failure. The "Master Mind" principle cannot obtain where PERFECT HARMONY   does not prevail.

     
 Keep in mind these facts:--

        First.

       You are engaged   in an undertaking of major importance to you. To be sure of success, you must   have plans which are faultless.

     
      Second.

       You must have   the advantage of the experience, education, native ability and imagination of   other minds. This is in harmony with the methods followed by every person who   has accumulated a great fortune.

     
 No individual has sufficient experience, education, native ability, and knowledge to insure the accumulation of a great fortune, without the cooperation of other people. Every plan you adopt, in your endeavor to accumulate wealth, should be the joint

[p. 149]

creation of yourself and every other member of your "Master Mind" group. You may originate your own plans, either in whole or in part, but SEE THAT THOSE PLANS ARE CHECKED, AND APPROVED BY THE MEMBERS OF YOUR "MASTER MIND" ALLIANCE.

If the first plan which you adopt does not work successfully, replace it with a new plan, if this new plan fails to work, replace it, in turn with still another, and so on, until you find a plan which DOES WORK. Right here is the point at which the majority of men meet with failure, because of their lack of PERSISTENCE in creating new plans to take the place of those which fail.

The most intelligent man living cannot succeed in accumulating money--nor in any other undertaking--without plans which are practical and workable. Just keep this fact in mind, and remember when your plans fail, that temporary defeat is not permanent failure. It may only mean that your plans have not been sound. Build other plans. Start all over again.

Thomas A. Edison "failed" ten thousand times before he perfected the incandescent electric light bulb. That is--he met with temporary defeat ten thousand times, before his efforts were crowned with success.

Temporary defeat should mean only one thing, the certain knowledge that there is something wrong with your plan. Millions of men go through life in misery and poverty, because they lack a sound plan through which to accumulate a fortune.

Henry Ford accumulated a fortune, not because

[p. 150]

of his superior mind, but because he adopted and followed a PLAN which proved to be sound. A thousand men could be pointed out, each with a better education than Ford's, yet each of whom lives in poverty, because he does not possess the RIGHT plan for the accumulation of money.

Your achievement can be no greater than your PLANS are sound. That may seem to be an axiomatic statement, but it is true. Samuel Insull lost his fortune of over one hundred million dollars. The Insull fortune was built on plans which were sound. The business depression forced Mr. Insull to CHANGE HIS PLANS; and the CHANGE brought "temporary defeat," because his new plans were NOT SOUND. Mr. Insull is now an old man, he may, consequently, accept "failure" instead of "temporary defeat," but if his experience turns out to be FAILURE, it will be for the reason that he lacks the fire of PERSISTENCE to rebuild his plans.

No man is ever whipped, until he QUITS--in his own mind.

This fact will be repeated many times, because it is so easy to "take the count" at the first sign of defeat.

James J. Hill met with temporary defeat when he first endeavored to raise the necessary capital to build a railroad from the East to the West, but he, too turned defeat into victory through new plans.

Henry Ford met with temporary defeat, not only at the beginning of his automobile career, but after he had gone far toward the top. He created new plans, and went marching on to financial victory.

[p. 151]

We see men who have accumulated great fortunes, but we often recognize only their triumph, overlooking the temporary defeats which they had to surmount before "arriving."

NO FOLLOWER OF THIS PHILOSOPHY CAN REASONABLY EXPECT TO ACCUMULATE A FORTUNE WITHOUT EXPERIENCING "TEMPORARY DEFEAT." When defeat comes, accept it as a signal that your plans are not sound, rebuild those plans, and set sail once more toward your coveted goal. If you give up before your goal has been reached, you are a "quitter." A QUITTER NEVER WINS--AND--A WINNER NEVER QUITS. Lift this sentence out, write it on a piece of paper in letters an inch high, and place it where you will see it every night before you go to sleep, and every morning before you go to work.

When you begin to select members for your "Master Mind" group, endeavor to select those who do not take defeat seriously.

Some people foolishly believe that only MONEY can make money. This is not true! DESIRE, transmuted into its monetary equivalent, through the principles laid down here, is the agency through which money is "made." Money, of itself, is nothing but inert matter. It cannot move, think, or talk, but it can "hear" when a man who DESIRES it, calls it to come!

PLANNING THE SALE OF SERVICES

The remainder of this chapter has been given over to a description of ways and means of marketing

[p. 152]

personal services. The information here conveyed will be of practical help to any person having any form of personal services to market, but it will be of priceless benefit to those who aspire to leadership in their chosen occupations.

Intelligent planning is essential for success in any undertaking designed to accumulate riches. Here will be found detailed instructions to those who must begin the accumulation of riches by selling personal services.

It should be encouraging to know that practically all the great fortunes began in the form of compensation for personal services, or from the sale of IDEAS. What else, except ideas and personal services, would one not possessed of property have to give in return for riches?

Broadly speaking, there are two types of people in the world. One type is known as LEADERS, and the other as FOLLOWERS. Decide at the outset whether you intend to become a leader in your chosen calling, or remain a follower. The difference in compensation is vast. The follower cannot reasonably expect the compensation to which a leader is entitled, although many followers make the mistake of expecting such pay.

It is no disgrace to be a follower. On the other hand, it is no credit to remain a follower. Most great leaders began in the capacity of followers. They became great leaders because they were INTELLIGENT FOLLOWERS. With few exceptions, the man who cannot follow a leader intelligently, cannot become an efficient leader. The man who can follow a leader most efficiently, is

[p. 153]

usually the man who develops into leadership most rapidly. An intelligent follower has many advantages, among them the OPPORTUNITY TO ACQUIRE KNOWLEDGE FROM HIS LEADER.

THE MAJOR ATTRIBUTES OF LEADERSHIP

The following are important factors of leadership:--

        1.

       UNWAVERING   COURAGE based upon knowledge of self, and of one's occupation. No follower   wishes to be dominated by a leader who lacks self-confidence and courage. No   intelligent follower will be dominated by such a leader very long.

     
      2.

       SELF-CONTROL.   The man who cannot control himself, can never control others. Self-control   sets a mighty example for one's followers, which the more intelligent will   emulate.

     
      3.

       A KEEN SENSE OF   JUSTICE. Without a sense of fairness and justice, no leader can command and   retain the respect of his followers.

     
      4.

       DEFINITENESS OF   DECISION. The man who wavers in his decisions, shows that he is not sure of   himself. He cannot lead others successfully.

     
      5.

       DEFINITENESS OF   PLANS. The successful leader must plan his work, and work his plan. A leader who moves by guesswork, without   practical, definite plans, is comparable to a ship without a rudder. Sooner   or later he will land on the rocks.

     
       

       [p. 154]

     
      6.

       THE HABIT OF   DOING MORE THAN PAID FOR. One of the penalties of leadership is the necessity   of willingness, upon the part of the leader, to do more than he requires of   his followers.

     
      7.

       A PLEASING PERSONALITY.   No slovenly, careless person can become a successful leader. Leadership calls   for respect. Followers will not respect a leader who does not grade high on   all of the factors of a Pleasing Personality.

     
      8.

       SYMPATHY AND   UNDERSTANDING. The successful leader must be in sympathy with his followers.   Moreover, he must understand them and their problems.

     
      9.

       MASTERY OF   DETAIL. Successful leadership calls for mastery of details of the leader's   position.

     
      10.

       WILLINGNESS TO ASSUME   FULL RESPONSIBILITY. The successful leader must be willing to assume   responsibility for the mistakes and the shortcomings of his followers. If he   tries to shift this responsibility, he will not remain the leader. If one of   his followers makes a mistake, and shows himself incompetent, the leader must   consider that it is he who failed.

     
      11.

       COOPERATION.   The successful leader must understand, and apply the principle of cooperative effort and be able to induce   his followers to do the same. Leadership calls for POWER, and power calls for   COOPERATION.

     
 [p. 155]

There are two forms of Leadership. The first, and by far the most effective, is LEADERSHIP BY CONSENT of, and with the sympathy of the followers. The second is LEADERSHIP BY FORCE, without the consent and sympathy of the followers.

History is filled with evidences that Leadership by Force cannot endure. The downfall and disappearance of "Dictators" and kings is significant. It means that people will not follow forced leadership indefinitely.

The world has just entered a new era of relationship between leaders and followers, which very clearly calls for new leaders, and a new brand of leadership in business and industry. Those who belong to the old school of leadership-by-force, must acquire an understanding of the new brand of leadership (cooperation) or be relegated to the rank and file of the followers. There is no other way out for them.

The relationship of employer and employee, or of leader and follower, in the future, will be one of mutual cooperation, based upon an equitable division of the profits of business. In the future, the relationship of employer and employee will be more like a partnership than it has been in the past.

Napoleon, Kaiser Wilhelm of Germany, the Czar of Russia, and the King of Spain were examples of leadership by force. Their leadership passed. Without much difficulty, one might point to the prototypes of these ex-leaders, among the business, financial, and labor leaders of America who have been dethroned or slated to go. Leadership-by-consent 

[p. 156]

of the followers is the only brand which can endure!

Men may follow the forced leadership temporarily, but they will not do so willingly.

The new brand of LEADERSHIP will embrace the eleven factors of leadership, described in this chapter, as well as some other factors. The man who makes these the basis of his leadership, will find abundant opportunity to lead in any walk of life. The depression was prolonged, largely, because the world lacked LEADERSHIP of the new brand. At the end of the depression, the demand for leaders who are competent to apply the new methods of leadership has greatly exceeded the supply. Some of the old type of leaders will reform and adapt themselves to the new brand of leadership, but generally speaking, the world will have to look for new timber for its leadership.

This necessity may be your OPPORTUNITY!

THE 10 MAJOR CAUSES OF FAILURE IN LEADERSHIP

We come now to the major faults of leaders who fail, because it is just as essential to know WHAT NOT TO DO as it is to know what to do.

        1.

       INABILITY TO   ORGANIZE DETAILS. Efficient leadership calls for ability to organize and to   master details. No genuine leader is ever "too busy" to do anything   which may be required of him in his capacity as leader. When a man, whether   he is a leader or follower, admits that he is "too busy" to change   his plans, or to give attention to any emergency, he admits his

     
       

       [p. 157]

     
       

       inefficiency.   The successful leader must be the master of all details connected with his   position. That means, of course, that he must acquire the habit of relegating   details to capable lieutenants.

     
      2.

       UNWILLINGNESS   TO RENDER HUMBLE SERVICE. Truly great leaders are willing, when occasion   demands, to perform any sort of labor which they would ask another to   perform. "The greatest among ye shall be the servant of all" is a   truth which all able leaders observe and respect.

     
      3.

       EXPECTATION OF PAY   FOR WHAT THEY "KNOW" INSTEAD OF WHAT THEY DO WITH THAT WHICH THEY KNOW. The world does not pay men for that   which they "know." It pays them for what they DO, or induce others   to do.

     
      4.

       FEAR OF   COMPETITION FROM FOLLOWERS. The leader who fears that one of his followers   may take his position is practically sure to realize that fear sooner or   later. The able leader trains understudies to whom he may delegate, at will,   any of the details of his position. Only in this way may a leader multiply   himself and prepare himself to be at many places, and give attention to many   things at one time. It is an eternal truth that men receive more pay for   their ABILITY TO GET OTHERS TO PERFORM, than they could possibly earn by   their own efforts. An efficient leader may, through his knowledge of his job

     
       

       [p. 158]

     
       

       and the   magnetism of his personality, greatly increase the efficiency of others, and   induce them to render more service and better service than they could render   without his aid.

     
      5.

       LACK OF IMAGINATION.   Without imagination, the leader is incapable of meeting emergencies, and of   creating plans by which to guide his followers efficiently.

     
      6.

       SELFISHNESS.   The leader who claims all the honor for the work of his followers, is sure to   be met by resentment. The really great leader CLAIMS NONE OF THE HONORS. He   is contented to see the honors, when there are any, go to his followers,   because he knows that most men will work harder for commendation and   recognition than they will for money alone.

     
      7.

       INTEMPERANCE.   Followers do not respect an intemperate leader. Moreover, intemperance in any   of its various forms, destroys the endurance and the vitality of all who   indulge in it.

     
      8.

       DISLOYALTY.   Perhaps this should have come at the head of the list. The leader who is not   loyal to his trust, and to his associates, those above him, and those below   him, cannot long maintain his leadership. Disloyalty marks one as being less   than the dust of the earth, and brings down on one's head the contempt he deserves.   Lack of loyalty is one of the major causes of failure in every walk of life.

     
      9.

       EMPHASIS OF THE   "AUTHORITY" OF LEADERSHIP. The efficient leader leads by

     
       

       [p. 159]

     
       

       encouraging,   and not by trying to instil fear in the hearts of his followers. The leader   who tries to impress his followers with his "authority" comes   within the category of leadership through FORCE. If a leader is a REAL   LEADER, he will have no need to advertise that fact except by his   conduct--his sympathy, understanding, fairness, and a demonstration that he   knows his job.

     
      10.

       EMPHASIS OF   TITLE. The competent leader requires no "title" to give him the respect   of his followers. The man who makes too much over his title generally has   little else to emphasize. The doors to the office of the real leader are open   to all who wish to enter, and his working quarters are free from formality or   ostentation.

     
 These are among the more common of the causes of failure in leadership. Any one of these faults is sufficient to induce failure. Study the list carefully if you aspire to leadership, and make sure that you are free of these faults.

SOME FERTILE FIELDS IN WHICH "NEW LEADERSHIP" WILL BE REQUIRED

Before leaving this chapter, your attention is called to a few of the fertile fields in which there has been a decline of leadership, and in which the new type of leader may find an abundance of OPPORTUNITY.

        First.

       In the field of   politics there is a most insistent demand for new leaders; a demand

     
       

       [p. 160]

     
       

       which indicates   nothing less than an emergency. The majority of politicians have, seemingly,   become high-grade, legalized racketeers. They have increased taxes and   debauched the machinery of industry and business until the people can no   longer stand the burden.

     
      Second.

       The banking   business is undergoing a reform. The leaders in this field have almost   entirely lost the confidence of the public. Already the bankers have sensed   the need of reform, and they have begun it.

     
      Third.

       Industry calls   for new leaders. The old type of leaders thought and moved in terms of   dividends instead of thinking and moving in terms of human equations! The   future leader in industry, to endure, must regard himself as a quasi-public   official whose duty it is to manage his trust in such a way that it will work   hardship on no individual, or group of individuals. Exploitation of working   men is a thing of the past. Let the man who aspires to leadership in the   field of business, industry, and labor remember this.

     
      Fourth.

       The religious   leader of the future will be forced to give more attention to the temporal   needs of his followers, in the solution of their economic and personal   problems of the present, and less attention to the dead past, and the yet   unborn future.

     
      Fifth.

       In the   professions of law, medicine, and education, a new brand of leadership, and   to some

     
       

       [p. 161]

     
       

       extent, new   leaders will become a necessity. This is especially true in the field of   education. The leader in that field must, in the future, find ways and means   of teaching people HOW TO APPLY the knowledge they receive in school. He must   deal more with PRACTICE and less with THEORY.

     
      Sixth.

       New leaders   will be required in the field of Journalism. Newspapers of the future, to be   conducted successfully, must be divorced from "special privilege"   and relieved from the subsidy of advertising. They must cease to be organs of   propaganda for the interests which patronize their advertising columns. The   type of newspaper which publishes scandal and lewd pictures will eventually   go the way of all forces which debauch the human mind.

     
 These are but a few of the fields in which opportunities for new leaders and a new brand of leadership are now available. The world is undergoing a rapid change. This means that the media through which the changes in human habits are promoted, must be adapted to the changes. The media here described, are the ones which, more than any others, determine the trend of civilization.

WHEN AND HOW TO APPLY FOR A POSITION

The information described here is the net result of many years of experience during which thousands of men and women were helped to market their services effectively. It can, therefore, be relied upon as sound and practical.

[p. 162]

MEDIA THROUGH WHICH SERVICES MAY BE MARKETED

Experience has proved that the following media offer the most direct and effective methods of bringing the buyer and seller of personal services together.

        1.

       EMPLOYMENT   BUREAUS. Care must be taken to select only reputable bureaus, the management   of which can show adequate records of achievement of satisfactory results.   There are comparatively few such bureaus.

     
      2.

       ADVERTISING in   newspapers, trade journals, magazines, and radio. Classified advertising may   usually be relied upon to produce satisfactory results in the case of those   who apply for clerical or ordinary salaried positions. Display advertising is   more desirable in the case of those who seek executive connections, the copy   to appear in the section of the paper which is most apt to come to the   attention of the class of employer being sought. The copy should be prepared   by an expert, who understands how to inject sufficient selling qualities to   produce replies.

     
      3.

       PERSONAL   LETTERS OF APPLICATION, directed to particular firms or individuals most apt   to need such services as are being offered. Letters should be neatly typed,   ALWAYS, and signed by hand. With the letter, should be sent a complete   "brief" or outline of the applicant's qualifications. Both the   letter of application and the brief of experience or qualifications should

     
       

       [p. 163]

     
       

       be prepared by   an expert. (See instructions as to information to be supplied).

     
      4.

       APPLICATION   THROUGH PERSONAL ACQUAINTANCES. When possible, the applicant should endeavor   to approach prospective employers through some mutual acquaintance. This   method of approach is particularly advantageous in the case of those who seek   executive connections and do not wish to appear to be "peddling"   themselves.

     
      5.

       APPLICATION IN   PERSON. In some instances, it may be more effective if the applicant offers   personally, his services to prospective employers, in which event a complete   written statement of qualifications for the position should be presented, for   the reason that prospective employers often wish to discuss with associates,   one's record.

     
 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED IN A WRITTEN "BRIEF"

This brief should be prepared as carefully as a lawyer would prepare the brief of a case to be tried in court. Unless the applicant is experienced in the preparation of such briefs, an expert should be consulted, and his services enlisted for this purpose. Successful merchants employ men and women who understand the art and the psychology of advertising to present the merits of their merchandise. One who has personal services for sale should do the same. The following information should appear in the brief:

[p. 164]

        1.

       Education. State briefly, but   definitely, what schooling you have had, and in what subjects you specialized   in school, giving the reasons for that specialization.

     
      2.

       Experience. If you have had experience   in connection with positions similar to the one you seek, describe it fully,   state names and addresses of former employers. Be sure to bring out clearly   any special experience you may have had which would equip you to fill the   position you seek.

     
      3.

       References. Practically every business   firm desires to know all about the previous records, antecedents, etc., of   prospective employees who seek positions of responsibility. Attach to your   brief photostatic copies of letters from:

     
       

       a.

       Former employers

     
       

       b. 

       Teachers under   whom you studied

     
       

       c. 

       Prominent   people whose judgement may be relied upon.

     
      4.

       Photograph of self. Attach to your   brief a recent, unmounted photograph of yourself.

     
      5.

       Apply for a specific position. Avoid application   for a position without describing EXACTLY what particular position you seek.   Never apply for "just a position." That indicates you lack   specialized qualifications.

     
      6.

       State your qualifications for the   particular position for which you apply. Give full details as to the reason   you believe you are qualified for the particular position you seek. This is   THE MOST IMPORTANT DETAIL OF YOUR

     
       

       [p. 165]

     
       

       [paragraph continues] APPLICATION.   It will determine, more than anything else, what consideration you receive.

     
      7.

       Offer to go to work on probation. In   the majority of instances if you are determined to have the position for   which you apply, it will be most effective if you offer to work for a week,   or a month, or for a sufficient length of time to enable your prospective   employer to judge your value WITHOUT PAY. This may appear to be a radical   suggestion, but experience has proved that it seldom fails to win at least a   trial. If you are SURE OF YOUR QUALIFICATIONS, a trial is all you need.   Incidentally, such an offer indicates that you have confidence in your   ability to fill the position you seek. It is most convincing. If your offer   is accepted, and you make good, more than likely you will be paid for your   "probation" period. Make clear the fact that your offer is based   upon:

     
       

       a. 

       Your confidence   in your ability to fill the position.

     
       

       b. 

       Your confidence   in your prospective employer's decision to employ you after trial.

     
       

       c. 

       Your   DETERMINATION to have the position you seek.

     
      8.

       Knowledge of your prospective employer's   business. Before applying for a position, do sufficient research in   connection with the business to familiarize yourself thoroughly with that   business, and indicate in your brief the knowledge you have acquired in this   field. This will be impressive, as it will indicate that you have   imagination,

     
       

       [p. 166]

     
       

       and a real   interest in the position you seek.

     
 Remember that it is not the lawyer who knows the most law, but the one who best prepares his case, who wins. If your "case" is properly prepared and presented, your victory will have been more than half won at the outset.

Do not be afraid of making your brief too long. Employers are just as much interested in purchasing the services of well-qualified applicants as you are in securing employment. In fact, the success of most successful employers is due, in the main, to their ability to select well-qualified lieutenants. They want all the information available.

Remember another thing; neatness in the preparation of your brief will indicate that you are a painstaking person. I have helped to prepare briefs for clients which were so striking and out of the ordinary that they resulted in the employment of the applicant without a personal interview.

When your brief has been completed, have it neatly bound by an experienced binder, and lettered by an artist, or printer similar to the following:

BRIEF OF THE QUALIFICATIONS OF

Robert K. Smith

APPLYING FOR THE POSITION OF

          

       Private Secretary to

The President of

THE BLANK COMPANY, Inc.

       

     
   Change names each time brief is shown.

This personal touch is sure to command attention. Have your brief neatly typed or mimeographed

[p. 167]

on the finest paper you can obtain, and bound with a heavy paper of the book-cover variety, the binder to be changed, and the proper firm name to be inserted if it is to be shown to more than one company. Your photograph should be pasted on one of the pages of your brief. Follow these instructions to the letter, improving upon them wherever your imagination suggests.

Successful salesmen groom themselves with care. They understand that first impressions are lasting. Your brief is your salesman. Give it a good suit of clothes, so it will stand out in bold contrast to anything your prospective employer ever saw, in the way of an application for a position. If the position you seek is worth having, it is worth going after with care. Moreover, if you sell yourself to an employer in a manner that impresses him with your individuality, you probably will receive more money for your services from the very start, than you would if you applied for employment in the usual conventional way.

If you seek employment through an advertising agency, or an employment agency, have the agent use copies of your brief in marketing your services. This will help to gain preference for you, both with the agent, and the prospective employers.

HOW TO GET THE EXACT POSITION YOU DESIRE

Everyone enjoys doing the kind of work for which he is best suited. An artist loves to work with paints, a craftsman with his hands, a writer loves to write. Those with less definite talents have their preferences for certain fields of business and industry.

[p. 168]

[paragraph continues] If America does anything well, it offers a full range of occupations, tilling the soil, manufacturing, marketing, and the professions.

        First.

       Decide EXACTLY   what kind of a job you want. If the job doesn't already exist, perhaps you   can create it.

     
      Second.

       Choose the   company, or individual for whom you wish to work.

     
      Third.

       Study your   prospective employer, as to policies, personnel, and chances of advancement.

     
      Fourth.

       By analysis of   yourself, your talents and capabilities, figure WHAT YOU CAN OFFER, and plan   ways and means of giving advantages, services, developments, ideas that you believe you can successfully   deliver.

     
      Fifth.

       Forget about   "a job." Forget whether or not there is an opening. Forget the   usual routine of "have you got a job for me?" Concentrate on what you can give.

     
      Sixth.

       Once you have   your plan in mind, arrange with an experienced writer to put it on paper in   neat form, and in full detail.

     
      Seventh.

       Present it to   the proper person with authority   and he will do the rest. Every company is looking for men who can give   something of value, whether it be ideas, services, or   "connections." Every company has room for the man who has a   definite plan of action which is to the advantage of that company.

     
 [p. 169]

This line of procedure may take a few days or weeks of extra time, but the difference in income, in advancement, and in gaining recognition will save years of hard work at small pay. It has many advantages, the main one being that it will often save from one to five years of time in reaching a chosen goal.

Every person who starts, or "gets in" half way up the ladder, does so by deliberate and careful planning, (excepting, of course, the Boss' son).

THE NEW WAY OF MARKETING SERVICES

"JOBS" ARE NOW "PARTNERSHIPS"

Men and women who market their services to best advantage in the future, must recognize the stupendous change which has taken place in connection with the relationship between employer and employee.

In the future, the "Golden Rule," and not the "Rule of Gold" will be the dominating factor in the marketing of merchandise as well as personal services. The future relationship between employers and their employees will be more in the nature of a partnership consisting of:

          a.

       The employer

     
      b.

       The employee

     
      c.

       The public they   serve

     
   This new way of marketing personal services is called new for many reasons, first, both the employer and the employee of the future will be considered as fellow-employees whose business it will be to SERVE THE PUBLIC EFFICIENTLY. In

[p. 170]

times past, employers, and employees have bartered among themselves, driving the best bargains they could with one another, not considering that in the final analysis they were, in reality, BARGAINING AT THE EXPENSE OF THE THIRD PARTY, THE PUBLIC THEY SERVED.

The depression served as a mighty protest from an injured public, whose rights had been trampled upon in every direction by those who were clamoring for individual advantages and profits. When the debris of the depression shall have been cleared away, and business shall have been once again restored to balance, both employers and employees will recognize that they are NO LONGER PRIVILEGED TO DRIVE BARGAINS AT THE EXPENSE OF THOSE WHOM THEY SERVE. The real employer of the future will be the public. This should be kept uppermost in mind by every person seeking to market personal services effectively.

Nearly every railroad in America is in financial difficulty. Who does not remember the day when, if a citizen enquired at the ticket office, the time of departure of a train, he was abruptly referred to the bulletin board instead of being politely given the information?

The street car companies have experienced a "change of times" also. There was a time not so very long ago when street car conductors took pride in giving argument to passengers. Many of the street car tracks have been removed and passengers ride on a bus, whose driver is "the last word in politeness."

All over the country street car tracks are rusting

[p. 171]

from abandonment, or have been taken up. Whereever street cars are still in operation, passengers may now ride without argument, and one may even hail the car in the middle of the block, and the motorman will OBLIGINGLY pick him up.

HOW TIMES HAVE CHANGED! That is just the point I am trying to emphasize. TIMES HAVE CHANGED! Moreover, the change is reflected not merely in railroad offices and on street cars, but in other walks of life as well. The "public-be-damned" policy is now passe. It has been supplanted by the "we-are-obligingly-at-your-service, sir," policy.

The bankers have learned a thing or two during this rapid change which has taken place during the past few years. Impoliteness on the part of a bank official, or bank employee today is as rare as it was conspicuous a dozen years ago. In the years past, some bankers (not all of them, of course), carried an atmosphere of austerity which gave every would-be borrower a chill when he even thought of approaching his banker for a loan.

The thousands of bank failures during the depression had the effect of removing the mahogany doors behind which bankers formerly barricaded themselves. They now sit at desks in the open, where they may be seen and approached at will by any depositor, or by anyone who wishes to see them, and the whole atmosphere of the bank is one of courtesy and understanding.

It used to be customary for customers to have to stand and wait at the corner grocery until the clerks were through passing the time of day with friends,

[p. 172]

and the proprietor had finished making up his bank deposit, before being waited upon. Chain stores, managed by COURTEOUS MEN who do everything in the way of service, short of shining the customer's shoes, have PUSHED THE OLD-TIME MERCHANTS INTO THE BACKGROUND. TIME MARCHES ON!

"Courtesy" and "Service" are the watch-words of merchandising today, and apply to the person who is marketing personal services even more directly than to the employer whom he serves, because, in the final analysis, both the employer and his employee are EMPLOYED BY THE PUBLIC THEY SERVE. If they fail to serve well, they pay by the loss of their privilege of serving.

We can all remember the time when the gas-meter reader pounded on the door hard enough to break the panels. When the door was opened, he pushed his way in, uninvited, with a scowl on his face which plainly said, "what-the-hell-did-you-keep-me-waiting-for?" All that has undergone a change. The meter-man now conducts himself as a gentleman who is "delighted-to-be-at-your-service-sir." Before the gas companies learned that their scowling meter-men were accumulating liabilities never to be cleared away, the polite salesmen of oil burners came along and did a land office business.

During the depression, I spent several months in the anthracite coal region of Pennsylvania, studying conditions which all but destroyed the coal industry. Among several very significant discoveries, was the fact that greed on the part of operators and

[p. 173]

their employees was the chief cause of the loss of business for the operators, and loss of jobs for the miners.

Through the pressure of a group of overzealous labor leaders, representing the employees, and the greed for profits on the part of the operators, the anthracite business suddenly dwindled. The coal operators and their employees drove sharp bargains with one another, adding the cost of the "bargaining" to the price of the coal, until, finally, they discovered they had BUILT UP A WONDERFUL BUSINESS FOR THE MANUFACTURERS OF OIL BURNING OUTFITS AND THE PRODUCERS OF CRUDE OIL.

"The wages of sin is death!" Many have read this in the Bible, but few have discovered its meaning. Now, and for several years, the entire world has been listening BY FORCE, to a sermon which might well be called "WHATSOEVER A MAN SOWETH, THAT SHALL HE ALSO REAP."

Nothing as widespread and effective as the depression could possibly be "just a coincidence." Behind the depression was a CAUSE. Nothing ever happens without a CAUSE. In the main, the cause of the depression is traceable directly to the worldwide habit of trying to REAP without SOWING.

This should not be mistaken to mean that the depression represents a crop which the world is being FORCED to reap without having SOWN. The trouble is that the world sowed the wrong sort of seed. Any farmer knows he cannot sow the seed of thistles, and reap a harvest of grain. Beginning at the outbreak of the world war, the people of the

[p. 174]

world began to sow the seed of service inadequate in both quality and quantity. Nearly everyone was engaged in the pastime of trying to GET WITHOUT GIVING.

These illustrations are brought to the attention of those who have personal services to market, to show that we are where we are, and what we are, because of our own conduct! If there is a principle of cause and effect, which controls business, finance, and transportation, this same principle controls individuals and determines their economic status.

WHAT IS YOUR "QQS" RATING?

The causes of success in marketing services EFFECTIVELY and permanently, have been clearly described. Unless those causes are studied, analyzed, understood and APPLIED, no man can market his services effectively and permanently. Every person must be his own salesman of personal services. The QUALITY and the QUANTITY of service rendered, and the SPIRIT in which it is rendered, determine to a large extent, the price, and the duration of employment. To market Personal services effectively, (which means a permanent market, at a satisfactory price, under pleasant conditions), one must adopt and follow the "QQS" formula which means that QUALITY, plus QUANTITY, plus the proper SPIRIT of cooperation, equals perfect salesmanship of service. Remember the "QQS" formula, but do more--APPLY IT AS A HABIT!

Let us analyze the formula to make sure we understand exactly what it means.

[p. 175]

        1.

       QUALITY of service shall be construed   to mean the performance of every detail, in connection with your position, in   the most efficient manner possible, with the object of greater efficiency   always in mind.

     
      2.

       QUANTITY of service shall be   understood to mean the HABIT of rendering all the service of which you are   capable, at all times, with the purpose of increasing the amount of service   rendered as greater skill is developed through practice and experience. Emphasis   is again placed on the word HABIT.

     
      3.

       SPIRIT of service shall be construed   to mean the HABIT of agreeable, harmonious conduct which will induce   cooperation from associates and fellow employees.

     
 Adequacy of QUALITY and QUANTITY of service is not sufficient to maintain a permanent market for your services. The conduct, or the SPIRIT in which you deliver service, is a strong determining factor in connection with both the price you receive, and the duration of employment.

Andrew Carnegie stressed this point more than others in connection with his description of the factors which lead to success in the marketing of personal services. He emphasized again, and again, the necessity for HARMONIOUS CONDUCT. He stressed the fact that he would not retain any man, no matter how great a QUANTITY, or how efficient the QUALITY of his work, unless he worked in a spirit of HARMONY. Mr. Carnegie insisted upon men being AGREEABLE.

[p. 176]

[paragraph continues] To prove that he placed a high value upon this quality, he permitted many men who conformed to his standards to become very wealthy. Those who did not conform, had to make room for others.

The importance of a pleasing personality has been stressed, because it is a factor which enables one to render service in the proper SPIRIT. If one has a personality which PLEASES, and renders service in a spirit of HARMONY, these assets often make up for deficiencies in both the QUALITY, and the QUANTITY of service one renders. Nothing, however, can be SUCCESSFULLY SUBSTITUTED FOR PLEASING CONDUCT.

THE CAPITAL VALUE OF YOUR SERVICES

The person whose income is derived entirely from the sale of personal services is no less a merchant than the man who sells commodities, and it might well be added, such a person is subject to EXACTLY THE SAME RULES of conduct as the merchant who sells merchandise.

This has been emphasized, because the majority of people who live by the sale of personal services make the mistake of considering themselves free from the rules of conduct, and the responsibilities attached to those who are engaged in marketing commodities.

The new way of marketing services has practically forced both employer and, employee into partnership alliances, through which both take into consideration the rights of the third party, THE PUBLIC THEY SERVE.

The day of the "go-getter" has passed. He has

[p. 177]

been supplanted by the "go-giver." High-pressure methods in business finally blew the lid off. There will never be the need to put the lid back on, because, in the future, business will be conducted by methods that will require no pressure.

The actual capital value of your brains may be determined by the amount of income you can produce (by marketing your services). A fair estimate of the capital value of your services may be made by multiplying your annual income by sixteen and two-thirds, as it is reasonable to estimate that your annual income represents six percent of your capital value. Money rents for 6% per annum. Money is worth no more than brains. It is often worth much less.

Competent "brains," if effectively marketed, represent a much more desirable form of capital than that which is required to conduct a business dealing in commodities, because "brains" are a form of capital which cannot be permanently depreciated through depressions, nor can this form of capital be stolen or spent. Moreover, the money which is essential for the conduct of business is as worthless as a sand dune, until it has been mixed with efficient "brains."

THE THIRTY MAJOR CAUSES OF FAILURE

HOW MANY OF THESE ARE HOLDING YOU BACK?

Life's greatest tragedy consists of men and women who earnestly try, and fail! The tragedy lies in the overwhelmingly large majority of people who fail, as compared to the few who succeed.

I have had the privilege of analyzing several

[p. 178]

thousand men and women, 98% of whom were classed as "failures." There is something radically wrong with a civilization, and a system of education, which permit 98% of the people to go through life as failures. But I did not write this book for the purpose of moralizing on the rights and wrongs of the world; that would require a book a hundred times the size of this one.

My analysis work proved that there are thirty major reasons for failure, and thirteen major principles through which people accumulate fortunes. In this chapter, a description of the thirty major causes of failure will be given. As you go over the list, check yourself by it, point by point, for the purpose of discovering how many of these causes-of-failure stand between you and success.

        1.

       UNFAVORABLE   HEREDITARY BACKGROUND. There is but little, if anything, which can be done   for people who are born with a deficiency in brain power. This philosophy   offers but one method of bridging this weakness--through the aid of the   Master Mind. Observe with profit, however, that this is the ONLY one of the   thirty causes of failure which may not be easily   corrected by any individual.

     
      2.

       LACK OF A   WELL-DEFINED PURPOSE IN LIFE. There is no hope of success for the person who   does not have a central purpose, or definite   goal at which to aim. Ninety-eight out of every hundred of those whom I   have analyzed, had no such aim. Perhaps this was the MAJOR CAUSE OF THEIR   FAILURE.

     
       

       [p. 179]

     
      3.

       LACK OF   AMBITION TO AIM ABOVE MEDIOCRITY. We offer no hope for the person who is so   indifferent as not to want to get ahead in life, and who is not willing to   pay the price.

     
      4.

       INSUFFICIENT   EDUCATION. This is a handicap which may be overcome with comparative ease.   Experience has proven that the best-educated people are often those who are   known as "self-made," or self-educated. It takes more than a   college degree to make one a person of education. Any person who is educated   is one who has learned to get whatever he wants in life without violating the   rights of others. Education consists, not so much of knowledge, but of   knowledge effectively and persistently APPLIED. Men are paid, not merely for   what they know, but more particularly for WHAT THEY DO WITH THAT WHICH THEY   KNOW.

     
      5.

       LACK OF   SELF-DISCIPLINE. Discipline comes through self-control. This means that one   must control all negative qualities. Before you can control conditions, you   must first control yourself. Self-mastery is the hardest job you will ever   tackle. If you do not conquer self, you will be conquered by self. You may   see at one and the same time both your best friend and your greatest enemy,   by stepping in front of a mirror.

     
      6.

       ILL HEALTH. No   person may enjoy outstanding success without good health. Many

     
       

       [p. 180]

     
       

       of the causes   of ill health are subject to mastery and control. These, in the main are:

     
       

       a.

       Overeating of   foods not conducive to health

     
       

       b. 

       Wrong habits of   thought; giving expression to negatives.

     
       

       c. 

       Wrong use of,   and over indulgence in sex.

     
       

       d. 

       Lack of proper   physical exercise

     
       

       e. 

       An inadequate   supply of fresh air, due to improper breathing.

     
      7.

       UNFAVORABLE   ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES DURING CHILDHOOD. "As the twig is bent, so   shall the tree grow." Most people who have criminal tendencies acquire   them as the result of bad environment, and improper associates during   childhood.

     
      8.

       PROCRASTINATION.   This is one of the most common causes of failure. "Old Man   Procrastination" stands within the shadow of every human being, waiting   his opportunity to spoil one's chances of success. Most of us go through life   as failures, because we are waiting for the "time to be right" to   start doing something worthwhile. Do not wait. The time will never be   "just right." Start where you stand, and work with whatever tools   you may have at your command, and better tools will be found as you go along.

     
      9.

       LACK OF   PERSISTENCE. Most of us are good "starters" but poor   "finishers" of everything we begin. Moreover, people are prone to   give up at the first signs of defeat. There is

     
       

       [p. 181]

     
       

       no substitute   for PERSISTENCE. The person who makes PERSISTENCE his watch-word, discovers   that "Old Man Failure" finally becomes tired, and makes his   departure. Failure cannot cope with PERSISTENCE.

     
      10.

       NEGATIVE   PERSONALITY. There is no hope of success for the person who repels people   through a negative personality. Success comes through the application of POWER,   and power is attained through the cooperative efforts of other people. A   negative personality will not induce cooperation.

     
      11.

       LACK OF   CONTROLLED SEXUAL URGE. Sex energy is the most powerful of all the stimuli   which move people into ACTION. Because it is the most powerful of the   emotions, it must be controlled, through transmutation, and converted into   other channels.

     
      12.

       UNCONTROLLED   DESIRE FOR "SOMETHING FOR NOTHING." The gambling instinct drives   millions of people to failure. Evidence of this may be found in a study of   the Wall Street crash of '29, during which millions of people tried to   make money by gambling on stock margins.

     
      13.

       LACK OF A WELL   DEFINED POWER OF DECISION. Men who succeed reach decisions promptly, and   change them, if at all, very slowly. Men who fail, reach decisions, if at   all, very slowly, and change them frequently, and quickly. Indecision and   procrastination are twin brothers. Where one is found, the other

     
       

       [p. 182]

     
       

       may usually be   found also. Kill off this pair before they completely "hog-tie" you   to the treadmill of FAILURE.

     
      14.

       ONE OR MORE OF   THE SIX BASIC FEARS. These fears have been analyzed for you in a later   chapter. They must be mastered before you can market your services   effectively.

     
      15.

       WRONG SELECTION   OF A MATE IN MARRIAGE. This a most common cause of failure. The relationship   of marriage brings people intimately into contact. Unless this relationship   is harmonious, failure is likely to follow. Moreover, it will be a form of   failure that is marked by misery and unhappiness, destroying all signs of   AMBITION.

     
      16.

       OVER-CAUTION.   The person who takes no chances, generally has to take whatever is left when   others are through choosing. Over-caution is as bad as under-caution. Both   are extremes to be guarded against. Life itself is filled with the element of   chance.

     
      17.

       WRONG SELECTION   OF ASSOCIATES IN BUSINESS. This is one of the most common causes of failure   in business. In marketing personal services, one should use great care to   select an employer who will be an inspiration, and who is, himself,   intelligent and successful. We emulate those with whom we associate most   closely. Pick an employer who is worth emulating.

     
      18.

       SUPERSTITION   AND PREJUDICE. Superstition is a form of fear. It is also a sign of

     
       

       [p. 183]

     
       

       ignorance. Men   who succeed keep open minds and are afraid of nothing.

     
      19.

       WRONG SELECTION   OF A VOCATION. No man can succeed in a line of endeavor which he does not   like. The most essential step in the marketing of personal services is that   of selecting an occupation into which you can throw yourself wholeheartedly.

     
      20.

       LACK OF   CONCENTRATION OF EFFORT. The "jack-of-all-trades" seldom is good at   any. Concentrate all of your efforts on one DEFINITE CHIEF AIM.

     
      21.

       THE HABIT OF   INDISCRIMINATE SPENDING. The spend-thrift cannot succeed, mainly because he   stands eternally in FEAR OF POVERTY. Form the habit of systematic saving by   putting aside a definite percentage of your income. Money in the bank gives   one a very safe foundation of COURAGE when bargaining for the sale of   personal services. Without money, one must take what one is offered, and be   glad to get it.

     
      22.

       LACK OF   ENTHUSIASM. Without enthusiasm one cannot be convincing. Moreover, enthusiasm   is contagious, and the person who has it, under control, is generally welcome   in any group of people.

     
      23.

       INTOLERANCE.   The person with a "closed" mind on any subject seldom gets ahead.   Intolerance means that one has stopped acquiring knowledge. The most damaging   forms of intolerance

     
       

       [p. 184]

     
       

       are those connected   with religious, racial, and political differences of opinion.

     
      24.

       INTEMPERANCE.   The most damaging forms of intemperance are connected with eating, strong   drink, and sexual activities. Overindulgence in any of these is fatal to   success.

     
      25.

       INABILITY TO   COOPERATE WITH OTHERS. More people lose their positions and their big   opportunities in life, because of this fault, than for all other reasons   combined. It is a fault which no well-informed business man, or leader will   tolerate.

     
      26.

       POSSESSION OF   POWER THAT WAS NOT ACQUIRED THROUGH SELF EFFORT. (Sons and daughters of   wealthy men, and others who inherit money which they did not earn). Power in   the hands of one who did not acquire it gradually, is often fatal to success.   QUICK RICHES are more dangerous than poverty.

     
      27.

       INTENTIONAL   DISHONESTY. There is no substitute for honesty. One may be temporarily   dishonest by force of circumstances over which one has no control, without   permanent damage. But, there is NO HOPE for the person who is dishonest by   choice. Sooner or later, his deeds will catch up with him, and he will pay by   loss of reputation, and perhaps even loss of liberty.

     
      28.

       EGOTISM AND   VANITY. These qualities serve as red lights which warn others to keep away.   THEY ARE FATAL TO SUCCESS.

     
       

       [p. 185]

     
      29.

       GUESSING   INSTEAD OF THINKING. Most people are too indifferent or lazy to acquire FACTS   with which to THINK ACCURATELY. They prefer to act on "opinions"   created by guesswork or snap-judgments.

     
      30.

       LACK OF   CAPITAL. This is a common cause of failure among those who start out in   business for the first time, without sufficient reserve of capital to absorb   the shock of their mistakes, and to carry them over until they have   established a REPUTATION.

     
      31.

       Under this,   name any particular cause of failure from which you have suffered that has   not been included in the foregoing list.

     
 In these thirty major causes of failure is found a description of the tragedy of life, which obtains for practically every person who tries and fails. It will be helpful if you can induce someone who knows you well to go over this list with you, and help to analyze you by the thirty causes of failure. It may be beneficial if you try this alone. Most people cannot see themselves as others see them. You may be one who cannot.

The oldest of admonitions is "Man, know thyself!" If you market merchandise successfully, you must know the merchandise. The same is true in marketing personal services. You should know all of your weaknesses in order that you may either bridge them or eliminate them entirely. You should know your strength in order that you may call attention to it when selling your services. You can know yourself only through accurate analysis.

[p. 186]

The folly of ignorance in connection with self was displayed by a young man who applied to the manager of a well known business for a position. He made a very good impression until the manager asked him what salary he expected. He replied that he had no fixed sum in mind (lack of a definite aim). The manager then said, "We will pay you all you are worth, after we try you out for a week."

"I will not accept it," the applicant replied, "because I AM GETTING MORE THAN THAT WHERE I AM NOW EMPLOYED."

Before you even start to negotiate for a readjustment of your salary in your present position, or to seek employment elsewhere, BE SURE THAT YOU ARE WORTH MORE THAN YOU NOW RECEIVE.

It is one thing to WANT money--everyone wants more--but it is something entirely different to be WORTH MORE! Many people mistake their WANTS for their JUST DUES. Your financial requirements or wants have nothing whatever to do with your WORTH. Your value is established entirely by your ability to render useful service or your capacity to induce others to render such service.

TAKE INVENTORY OF YOURSELF

28 QUESTIONS YOU SHOULD ANSWER

Annual self-analysis is an essential in the effective marketing of personal services, as is annual inventory in merchandising. Moreover, the yearly analysis should disclose a DECREASE IN FAULTS, and an increase in VIRTUES. One goes

[p. 187]

ahead, stands still, or goes backward in life. One's object should be, of course, to go ahead. Annual self-analysis will disclose whether advancement has been made, and if so, how much. It will also disclose any backward steps one may have made. The effective marketing of personal services requires one to move forward even if the progress is slow.

Your annual self-analysis should be made at the end of each year, so you can include in your New Year's Resolutions any improvements which the analysis indicates should be made. Take this inventory by asking yourself the following questions, and by checking your answers with the aid of someone who will not permit you to deceive yourself as to their accuracy.

SELF-ANALYSIS QUESTIONNAIRE FOR PERSONAL INVENTORY

        1.

       Have I attained   the goal which I established as my objective for this year? (You should work   with a definite yearly objective to be attained as a part of your major life   objective).

     
      2.

       Have I delivered   service of the best possible QUALITY of which I was capable, or could I have   improved any part of this service?

     
      3.

       Have I   delivered service in the greatest possible QUANTITY of which I was capable?

     
      4.

       Has the spirit   of my conduct been harmonious, and cooperative at all times?

     
      5.

       Have I   permitted the habit of PROCRASTINATION to decrease my efficiency, and if so,   to what extent?

     
       

       [p. 188]

     
      6.

       Have I improved   my PERSONALITY, and if so, in what ways?

     
      7.

       Have I been   PERSISTENT in following my plans through to completion?

     
      8.

       Have I reached   DECISIONS PROMPTLY AND DEFINITELY on all occasions?

     
      9.

       Have I   permitted any one or more of the six basic fears to decrease my efficiency?

     
      10.

       Have I been either   "over-cautious," or "under-cautious?"

     
      11.

       Has my   relationship with my associates in work been pleasant, or unpleasant? If it   has been unpleasant, has the fault been partly, or wholly mine?

     
      12.

       Have I   dissipated any of my energy through lack of CONCENTRATION of effort?

     
      13.

       Have I been   open minded and tolerant in connection with all subjects?

     
      14.

       In what way   have I improved my ability to render service?

     
      15.

       Have I been   intemperate in any of my habits?

     
      16.

       Have I   expressed, either openly or secretly, any form of EGOTISM?

     
      17.

       Has my conduct   toward my associates been such that it has induced them to RESPECT me?

     
      18.

       Have my   opinions and DECISIONS been based upon guesswork, or accuracy of analysis and   THOUGHT?

     
      19.

       Have I followed   the habit of budgeting my

     
       

       [p. 189]

     
       

       time, my   expenses, and my income, and have I been conservative in these budgets?

     
      20.

       How much time   have I devoted to UNPROFITABLE effort which I might have used to better   advantage?

     
      21.

       How may I   RE-BUDGET my time, and change my habits so I will be more efficient during   the coming year?

     
      22.

       Have I been   guilty of any conduct which was not approved by my conscience?

     
      23.

       In what ways   have I rendered MORE SERVICE AND BETTER SERVICE than I was paid to render?

     
      24.

       Have I been   unfair to anyone, and if so, in what way?

     
      25.

       If I had been   the purchaser of my own services for the year, would I be satisfied with my   purchase?

     
      26.

       Am I in the   right vocation, and if not, why not?

     
      27.

       Has the   purchaser of my services been satisfied with the service I have rendered, and   if not, why not?

     
      28.

       What is my   present rating on the fundamental principles of success? (Make this rating fairly,   and frankly, and have it checked by someone who is courageous enough to do it   accurately).

     
 Having read and assimilated the information conveyed through this chapter, you are now ready to create a practical plan for marketing your personal services. In this chapter will be found an

[p. 190]

adequate description of every principle essential in planning the sale of personal services, including the major attributes of leadership; the most common causes of failure in leadership; a description of the fields of opportunity for leadership; the main causes of failure in all walks of life, and the important questions which should be used in self-analysis.

This extensive and detailed presentation of accurate information has been included, because it will be needed by all who must begin the accumulation of riches by marketing personal services. Those who have lost their fortunes, and those who are just beginning to earn money, have nothing but personal services to offer in return for riches, therefore it is essential that they have available the practical information needed to market services to best advantage.

The information contained in this chapter will be of great value to all who aspire to attain leadership in any calling. It will be particularly helpful to those aiming to market their services as business or industrial executives.

Complete assimilation and understanding of the information here conveyed will be helpful in marketing one's own services, and it will also help one to become more analytical and capable of judging people. The information will be priceless to personnel directors, employment managers, and other executives charged with the selection of employees, and the maintenance of efficient organizations. If you doubt this statement, test its soundness by answering in writing the twenty-eight self-analysis questions. That might be both interesting and

[p. 191]

profitable, even though you do not doubt the soundness of the statement.

WHERE AND HOW ONE MAY FIND OPPORTUNITIES TO ACCUMULATE RICHES

Now that we have analyzed the principles by which riches may be accumulated, we naturally ask, "where may one find favorable opportunities to apply these principles?" Very well, let us take inventory and see what the United States of America offer the person seeking riches, great or small.

To begin with, let us remember, all of us, that we live in a country where every law-abiding citizen enjoys freedom of thought and freedom of deed unequaled anywhere in the world. Most of us have never taken inventory of the advantages of this freedom. We have never compared our unlimited freedom with the curtailed freedom in other countries.

Here we have freedom of thought, freedom in the choice and enjoyment of education, freedom in religion, freedom in politics, freedom in the choice of a business, profession or occupation, freedom to accumulate and own without molestation, ALL THE PROPERTY WE CAN ACCUMULATE, freedom to choose our place of residence, freedom in marriage, freedom through equal opportunity to all races, freedom of travel from one state to another, freedom in our choice of foods, and freedom to AIM FOR ANY STATION IN LIFE FOR WHICH WE HAVE PREPARED OURSELVES, even for the presidency of the United States.

[p. 192]

We have other forms of freedom, but this list will give a bird's eye view of the most important, which constitute OPPORTUNITY of the highest order. This advantage of freedom is all the more conspicuous because the United States is the only country guaranteeing to every citizen, whether native born or naturalized, so broad and varied a list of freedom.

Next, let us recount some of the blessings which our widespread freedom has placed within our hands. Take the average American family for example (meaning, the family of average income) and sum up the benefits available to every member of the family, in this land of OPPORTUNITY and plenty!

        a.

       FOOD. Next to   freedom of thought and deed comes FOOD, CLOTHING, and SHELTER, the three   basic necessities of life.

Because of our   universal freedom the average American family has available, at its very   door, the choicest selection of food to be found anywhere in the world, and   at prices within its financial range.

A family of   two, living in the heart of Times Square district of New York City, far   removed from the source of production of foods, took careful inventory of the   cost of a simple breakfast, with this astonishing result:

     
  

        Articles of food;

       Cost at the   breakfast table:

     
      Grape Fruit   Juice, (From Florida)

       .02 

     
      [p. 193]

        

     
      Rippled Wheat   Breakfast food (Kansas Farm)

       .02 

     
      Tea (From   China)

       .02 

     
      Bananas (From   South America)

       .02 1/2

     
      Toasted Bread   (From Kansas Farm)

       .01 

     
      Fresh Country   Eggs (From Utah)

       .07 

     
      Sugar (From   Cuba, or Utah)

       .00 1/2

     
      Butter and   Cream (From New England)

       .03 

     
       

       ------------

     
      Grand total

       .20 

     
 It is not very difficult to obtain FOOD in a country where two people can have breakfast consisting of all they want or need for a dime apiece! Observe that this simple breakfast was gathered, by some strange form of magic (?) from China, South America, Utah, Kansas and the New England States, and delivered on the breakfast table, ready for consumption, in the very heart of the most crowded city in America, at a cost well within the means of the most humble laborer.

The cost included all federal, state and city taxes! (Here is a fact the politicians did not mention when they were crying out to the voters to throw their opponents out of office because the people were being taxed to death).

        b.

       SHELTER. This   family lives in a comfortable apartment, heated by steam, lighted with   electricity, with gas for cooking, all for $65.00 a month. In a smaller   city, or a more sparsely settled part of New York city, the same apartment   could be had for as low as $20.00 a month.

[p. 194]

The toast they   had for breakfast in the food estimate was toasted on an electric toaster,   which cost but a few dollars, the apartment is cleaned with a vacuum sweeper   that is run by electricity. Hot and cold water is available, at all times, in   the kitchen and the bathroom. The food is kept cool in a refrigerator that is   run by electricity. The wife curls her hair, washes her clothes and irons   them with easily operated electrical equipment, on power obtained by sticking   a plug in the wall. The husband shaves with an electric shaver, and they   receive entertainment from all over the world, twenty four hours a day, if   they want it, without cost, by merely turning the dial of their radio.

There are other   conveniences in this apartment, but the foregoing list will give a fair idea   of some of the concrete evidences of the freedom we, of America, enjoy. (And this is neither political nor economic   propaganda).

 

     
      c.

       CLOTHING.   Anywhere in the United States, the woman of average clothing requirements can   dress very comfortably and neatly for less than $200.00 a year, and the   average man can dress for the same, or less.

     
  

Only the three basic necessities of food, clothing, and shelter have been mentioned. The average American citizen has other privileges and advantages available in return for modest effort, not exceeding eight hours per day of labor. Among these is the privilege of automobile transportation, with

[p. 195]

which one can go and come at will, at very small cost.

The average American has security of property rights not found in any other country in the world. He can place his surplus money in a bank with the assurance that his government will protect it, and make good to him if the bank fails. If an American citizen wants to travel from one state to another he needs no passport, no one's permission. He may go when he pleases, and return at will. Moreover, he may travel by train, private automobile, bus, airplane, or ship, as his pocketbook permits. In Germany, Russia, Italy, and most of the other European and Oriental countries, the people cannot travel with so much freedom, and at so little cost.

THE "MIRACLE" THAT HAS PROVIDED THESE BLESSINGS

We often hear politicians proclaiming the freedom of America, when they solicit votes, but seldom do they take the time or devote sufficient effort to the analysis of the source or nature of this "freedom." Having no axe to grind, no grudge to express, no ulterior motives to be carried out, I have the privilege of going into a frank analysis of that mysterious, abstract, greatly misunderstood "SOMETHING" which gives to every citizen of America more blessings, more opportunities to accumulate wealth, more freedom of every nature, than may be found in any other country.

I have the right to analyze the source and nature of this UNSEEN POWER, because I know, and

[p. 196]

have known for more than a quarter of a century, many of the men who organized that power, and many who are now responsible for its maintenance.

The name of this mysterious benefactor of mankind is CAPITAL!

CAPITAL consists not alone of money, but more particularly of highly organized, intelligent groups of men who plan ways and means of using money efficiently for the good of the public, and profitably to themselves.

These groups consist of scientists, educators, chemists, inventors, business analysts, publicity men, transportation experts, accountants, lawyers, doctors, and both men and women who have highly specialized knowledge in all fields of industry and business. They pioneer, experiment, and blaze trails in new fields of endeavor. They support colleges, hospitals, public schools, build good roads, publish newspapers, pay most of the cost of government, and take care of the multitudinous detail essential to human progress. Stated briefly, the capitalists are the brains of civilization, because they supply the entire fabric of which all education, enlightenment and human progress consists.

Money, without brains, always is dangerous. Properly used, it is the most important essential of civilization. The simple breakfast here described could not have been delivered to the New York family at a dime each, or at any other price, if organized capital had not provided the machinery, the ships, the railroads, and the huge armies of trained men to operate them.

Some slight idea of the importance of ORGANIZED

[p. 197]

[paragraph continues] CAPITAL may be had by trying to imagine yourself burdened with the responsibility of collecting, without the aid of capital, and delivering to the New York City family, the simple breakfast described.

To supply the tea, you would have to make a trip to China or India, both a very long way from America. Unless you are an excellent swimmer, you would become rather tired before making the round trip. Then, too, another problem would confront you. What would you use for money, even if you had the physical endurance to swim the ocean?

To supply the sugar, you would have to take another long swim to Cuba, or a long walk to the sugar beet section of Utah. But even then, you might come back without the sugar, because organized effort and money are necessary to produce sugar, to say nothing of what is required to refine, transport, and deliver it to the breakfast table anywhere in the United States.

The eggs, you could deliver easily enough from the barn yards near New York City, but you would have a very long walk to Florida and return, before you could serve the two glasses of grapefruit juice.

You would have another long walk, to Kansas, or one of the other wheat growing states, when you went after the four slices of wheat bread.

The Rippled Wheat Biscuits would have to be omitted from the menu, because they would not be available except through the labor of a trained organization of men and suitable machinery, ALL OF WHICH CALL FOR CAPITAL.

While resting, you could take off for another little

[p. 198]

swim down to South America, where you would pick up a couple of bananas, and on your return, you could take a short walk to the nearest farm having a dairy and pick up some butter and cream. Then your New York City family would be ready to sit down and enjoy breakfast, and you could collect your two dimes for your labor!

Seems absurd, doesn't it? Well, the procedure described would be the only possible way these simple items of food could be delivered to the heart of New York City, if we had no capitalistic system.

The sum of money required for the building and maintenance of the railroads and steam ships used in the delivery of that simple breakfast is so huge that it staggers one's imagination. It runs into hundreds of millions of dollars, not to mention the armies of trained employees required to man the ships and trains. But, transportation is only a part of the requirements of modern civilization in capitalistic America. Before there can be anything to haul, something must be grown from the ground, or manufactured and prepared for market. This calls for more millions of dollars for equipment, machinery, boxing, marketing, and for the wages of millions of men and women.

Steam ships and railroads do not spring up from the earth and function automatically. They come in response to the call of civilization, through the labor and ingenuity and organizing ability of men who have IMAGINATION, FAITH, ENTHUSIASM, DECISION, PERSISTENCE! These men are known as capitalists. They are motivated by the desire to build, construct, achieve, render useful

[p. 199]

service, earn profits and accumulate riches. And, because they RENDER SERVICE WITHOUT WHICH THERE WOULD BE NO CIVILIZATION, they put themselves in the way of great riches.

Just to keep the record simple and understandable, I will add that these capitalists are the selfsame men of whom most of us have heard soap-box orators speak. They are the same men to whom radicals, racketeers, dishonest politicians and grafting labor leaders refer as "the predatory interests," or "Wall Street."

I am not attempting to present a brief for or against any group of men or any system of economics. I am not attempting to condemn collective bargaining when I refer to "grafting labor leaders," nor do I aim to give a clean bill of health to all individuals known as capitalists.

The purpose of this book--A purpose to which I have faithfully devoted over a quarter of a century--is to present to all who want the knowledge, the most dependable philosophy through which individuals may accumulate riches in whatever amounts they desire.

I have here analyzed the economic advantages of the capitalistic system for the two-fold purpose of showing:

        1.

       that all who   seek riches must recognize and adapt themselves to the system that controls   all approaches to fortunes, large or small, and

     
      2.

       to present the   side of the picture opposite to that being shown by politicians and   demagogues

[p. 200]

who   deliberately becloud the issues they bring up, by referring to organized   capital as if it were something poisonous.

     
 This is a capitalistic country, it was developed through the use of capital, and we who claim the right to partake of the blessings of freedom and opportunity, we who seek to accumulate riches here, may as well know that neither riches nor opportunity would be available to us if ORGANIZED CAPITAL had not provided these benefits.

For more than twenty years it has been a somewhat popular and growing pastime for radicals, self-seeking politicians, racketeers, crooked labor leaders, and on occasion religious leaders, to take pot-shots at "WALL STREET, THE MONEY CHANGERS, and BIG BUSINESS."

The practice became so general that we witnessed during the business depression, the unbelievable sight of high government officials lining up with the cheap politicians, and labor leaders, with the openly avowed purpose of throttling the system which has made Industrial America the richest country on earth. The line-up was so general and so well organized that it prolonged the worst depression America has ever known. It cost millions of men their jobs, because those jobs were inseparably a part of the industrial and capitalistic system which form the very backbone of the nation.

During this unusual alliance of government officials and self-seeking individuals who were endeavoring to profit by declaring "open season" on the American system of industry, a certain type of

[p. 201]

labor leader joined forces with the politicians and offered to deliver voters in return for legislation designed to permit men to TAKE RICHES AWAY FROM INDUSTRY BY ORGANIZED . FORCE OF NUMBERS, INSTEAD OF THE BETTER METHOD OF GIVING A FAIR DAY'S WORK FOR A FAIR DAY'S PAY.

Millions of men and women throughout the nation are still engaged in this popular pastime of trying to GET without GIVING. Some of them are lined up with labor unions, where they demand SHORTER HOURS AND MORE PAY! Others do not take the trouble to work at all. THEY DEMAND GOVERNMENT RELIEF AND ARE GETTING IT. Their idea of their rights of freedom was demonstrated in New York City, where violent complaint was registered with the Postmaster, by a group of "relief beneficiaries," because the Postmen awakened them at 7:30 A.M. to deliver Government relief checks. They DEMANDED that the time of delivery be set up to 10:00 o'clock.

If you are one of those who believe that riches can be accumulated by the mere act of men who organize themselves into groups and demand MORE PAY for LESS SERVICE, if you are one of those who DEMAND Government relief without early morning disturbance when the money is delivered to you, if you are one of those who believe in trading their votes to politicians in return for the passing of laws which permit the raiding of the public treasury, you may rest securely on your belief, with certain knowledge that no one will disturb

[p. 202]

you, because THIS IS A FREE COUNTRY WHERE EVERY MAN MAY THINK AS HE PLEASES, where nearly everybody can live with but little effort, where many may live well without doing any work whatsoever.

However, you should know the full truth concerning this FREEDOM of which so many people boast, and so few understand. As great as it is, as far as it reaches, as many privileges as it provides, IT DOES NOT, AND CANNOT BRING RICHES WITHOUT EFFORT.

There is but one dependable method of accumulating, and legally holding riches, and that is by rendering useful service. No system has ever been created by which men can legally acquire riches through mere force of numbers, or without giving in return an equivalent value of one form or another.

There is a principle known as the law of ECONOMICS! This is more than a theory. It is a law no man can beat.

Mark well the name of the principle, and remember it, because it is far more powerful than all the politicians and political machines. It is above and beyond the control of all the labor unions. It cannot be swayed, nor influenced nor bribed by racketeers or self-appointed leaders in any calling. Moreover, IT HAS AN ALL-SEEING EYE, AND A PERFECT SYSTEM OF BOOKKEEPING, in which it keeps an accurate account of the transactions of every human being engaged in the business of trying to get without giving. Sooner or later its auditors come around, look over the records of

[p. 203]

individuals both great and small, and demand an accounting.

"Wall Street, Big Business, Capital Predatory Interests," or whatever name you choose to give the system which has given us AMERICAN FREEDOM, represents a group of men who understand, respect, and adapt themselves to this powerful LAW OF ECONOMICS! Their financial continuation depends upon their respecting the law.

Most people living in America like this country, its capitalistic system and all. I must confess I know of no better country, where one may find greater opportunities to accumulate riches. Judging by their acts and deeds, there are some in this country who do not like it. That, of course is their privilege; if they do not like this country, its capitalistic system, its boundless opportunities, THEY HAVE THE PRIVILEGE OF CLEARING OUT! Always there are other countries, such as Germany, Russia, and Italy, where one may try one's hand at enjoying freedom, and accumulating riches providing one is not too particular.

America provides all the freedom and all the opportunity to accumulate riches that any honest person may require. When one goes hunting for game, one selects hunting grounds where game is plentiful. When seeking riches, the same rule would naturally obtain.

If it is riches you are seeking, do not overlook the possibilities of a country whose citizens are so rich that women, alone, spend over two hundred million dollars annually for lip-sticks, rouge and cosmetics. Think twice, you who are seeking riches,

[p. 204]

before trying to destroy the Capitalistic System of a country whose citizens spend over fifty million dollars a year for GREETING CARDS, with which to express their appreciation of their FREEDOM!

If it is money you are seeking, consider carefully a country that spends hundreds of millions of dollars annually for cigarettes, the bulk of the income from which goes to only four major companies engaged in supplying this national builder of "nonchalance" and "quiet nerves."

By all means give plenty of consideration to a country whose people spend annually more than fifteen million dollars for the privilege of seeing moving pictures, and toss in a few additional millions for liquor, narcotics, and other less potent soft drinks and giggle-waters.

Do not be in too big a hurry to get away from a country whose people willingly, even eagerly, hand over millions of dollars annually for football, baseball, and prize fights.

And, by all means, STICK by a country whose inhabitants give up more than a million dollars a year for chewing gum, and another million for safety razor blades.

Remember, also, that this is but the beginning of the available sources for the accumulation of wealth. Only a few of the luxuries and non-essentials have been mentioned. But, remember that the business of producing, transporting, and marketing these few items of merchandise gives regular employment to MANY MILLIONS OF MEN AND WOMEN, who receive for their services MANY MILLIONS OF DOLLARS MONTHLY,

[p. 205]

and spend it freely for both the luxuries and the necessities.

Especially remember, that back of all this exchange of merchandise and personal services may be found an abundance of OPPORTUNITY to accumulate riches. Here our AMERICAN FREEDOM comes to one's aid. There is nothing to stop you, or anyone from engaging in any portion of the effort necessary to carry on these businesses. If one has superior talent, training, experience, one may accumulate riches in large amounts. Those not so fortunate may accumulate smaller amounts. Anyone may earn a living in return for a very nominal amount of labor.

So--there you are!

OPPORTUNITY has spread its wares before you. Step up to the front, select what you want, create your plan, put the plan into action, and follow through with PERSISTENCE. "Capitalistic" America will do the rest. You can depend upon this much--CAPITALISTIC AMERICA INSURES EVERY PERSON THE OPPORTUNITY TO RENDER USEFUL SERVICE, AND TO COLLECT RICHES IN PROPORTION TO THE VALUE OF THE SERVICE.

The "System" denies no one this right, but it does not, and cannot promise SOMETHING FOR NOTHING, because the system, itself, is irrevocably controlled by the LAW OF ECONOMICS which neither recognizes nor tolerates for long, GETTING WITHOUT GIVING.

The LAW OF ECONOMICS was passed by Nature! There is no Supreme Court to which

[p. 206]

violators of this law may appeal. The law hands out both penalties for its violation, and appropriate rewards for its observance, without interference or the possibility of interference by any human being. The law cannot be repealed. It is as fixed as the stars in the heavens, and subject to, and a part of the same system that controls the stars.

May one refuse to adapt one's self to the LAW OF ECONOMICS?

Certainly! This is a free country, where all men are born with equal rights, including the privilege of ignoring the LAW OF ECONOMICS.

What happens then?

Well, nothing happens until large numbers of men join forces for the avowed purpose of ignoring the law, and taking what they want by force. THEN COMES THE DICTATOR, WITH WELL ORGANIZED FIRING SQUADS AND MACHINE GUNS!

We have not yet reached that stage in America! But we have heard all we want to know about how the system works. Perhaps we shall be fortunate enough not to demand personal knowledge of so gruesome a reality. Doubtless we shall prefer to continue with our FREEDOM OF SPEECH, FREEDOM OF DEED, and FREEDOM TO RENDER USEFUL SERVICE IN RETURN FOR RICHES.

The practice, by Government officials of extending to men and women the privilege of raiding the public treasury in return for votes, sometimes results in election, but as night follows day, the final payoff comes; when every penny wrongfully used,

[p. 207]

must be repaid with compound interest on compound interest. If those who make the grab are not forced to repay, the burden falls on their children, and their children's children, "even unto the third and fourth generations." There is no way to avoid the debt.

Men can, and sometimes do, form themselves into groups for the purpose of crowding wages up, and working hours down. There is a point beyond which they cannot go. It is the point at which the LAW OF ECONOMICS steps in, and the sheriff gets both the employer and the employees.

For six years, from 1929, to 1935, the people of America, both rich and poor, barely missed seeing the Old Man Economics hand over to the sheriff all the businesses, and industries and banks. It was not a pretty sight! It did not increase our respect for mob psychology through which men cast reason to the winds and start trying to GET without GIVING.

We who went through those six discouraging years, when FEAR WAS IN THE SADDLE, AND FAITH WAS ON THE GROUND, cannot forget how ruthlessly the LAW OF ECONOMICS exacted its toll from both rich and poor, weak and strong, old and young. We shall not wish to go through another such experience.

These observations are not founded upon short-time experience. They are the result of twenty-five years of careful analysis of the methods of both the most successful and the most unsuccessful men America has known.

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 208]

          

          

CHAPTER 8

   

DECISION

THE MASTERY OF PROCRASTINATION

The Seventh Step   toward Riches

       

     
    

ACCURATE analysis of over 25,000 men and women who had experienced failure, disclosed the fact that LACK OF DECISION was near the head of the list of the 30 major causes of FAILURE. This is no mere statement of a theory--it is a fact.

PROCRASTINATION, the opposite of DECISION, is a common enemy which practically every man must conquer.

You will have an opportunity to test your capacity to reach quick and definite DECISIONS when you finish reading this book, and are ready to begin putting into ACTION the principles which it describes.

Analysis of several hundred people who had accumulated fortunes well beyond the million dollar mark, disclosed the fact that every one of them had the habit of REACHING DECISIONS PROMPTLY, and of changing these decisions SLOWLY, if, and when they were changed. People who fail to accumulate money, without exception, have the habit of reaching decisions, IF AT ALL, very slowly, and of changing these decisions quickly and often.

One of Henry Ford's most outstanding qualities is his habit of reaching decisions quickly and definitely, and changing them slowly. This quality

[p. 209]

is so pronounced in Mr. Ford, that it has given him the reputation of being obstinate. It was this quality which prompted Mr. Ford to continue to manufacture his famous Model "T" (the world's ugliest car), when all of his advisors, and many of the purchasers of the car, were urging him to change it.

Perhaps, Mr. Ford delayed too long in making the change, but the other side of the story is, that Mr. Ford's firmness of decision yielded a huge fortune, before the change in model became necessary. There is but little doubt that Mr. Ford's habit of definiteness of decision assumes the proportion of obstinacy, but this quality is preferable to slowness in reaching decisions and quickness in changing them.

The majority of people who fail to accumulate money sufficient for their needs, are, generally, easily influenced by the "opinions" of others. They permit the newspapers and the "gossiping" neighbors to do their "thinking" for them. "Opinions" are the cheapest commodities on earth. Everyone has a flock of opinions ready to be wished upon anyone who will accept them. If you are influenced by "opinions" when you reach DECISIONS, you will not succeed in any undertaking, much less in that of transmuting YOUR OWN DESIRE into money.

If you are influenced by the opinions of others, you will have no DESIRE of your own.

Keep your own counsel, when you begin to put into practice the principles described here, by reaching your own decisions and following them. Take no one into your confidence, EXCEPT the members

[p. 210]

of your "Master Mind" group, and be very sure in your selection of this group, that you choose ONLY those who will be in COMPLETE SYMPATHY AND HARMONY WITH YOUR PURPOSE.

Close friends and relatives, while not meaning to do so, often handicap one through "opinions" and sometimes through ridicule, which is meant to be humorous. Thousands of men and women carry inferiority complexes with them all through life, because some well-meaning, but ignorant person destroyed their confidence through "opinions" or ridicule.

You have a brain and mind of your own. USE IT, and reach your own decisions. If you need facts or information from other people, to enable you to reach decisions, as you probably will in many instances; acquire these facts or secure the information you need quietly, without disclosing your purpose.

It is characteristic of people who have but a smattering or a veneer of knowledge to try to give the impression that they have much knowledge. Such people generally do TOO MUCH talking, and TOO LITTLE listening. Keep your eyes and ears wide open--and your mouth CLOSED, if you wish to acquire the habit of prompt DECISION. Those who talk too much do little else. If you talk more than you listen, you not only deprive yourself of many opportunities to accumulate useful knowledge, but you also disclose your PLANS and PURPOSES to people who will take great delight in defeating you, because they envy you.

[p. 211]

Remember, also, that every time you open your mouth in the presence of a person who has an abundance of knowledge, you display to that person, your exact stock of knowledge, or your LACK of it! Genuine wisdom is usually conspicuous through modesty and silence.

Keep in mind the fact that every person with whom you associate is, like yourself, seeking the opportunity to accumulate money. If you talk about your plans too freely, you may be surprised when you learn that some other person has beaten you to your goal by PUTTING INTO ACTION AHEAD OF YOU, the plans of which you talked unwisely.

Let one of your first decisions be to KEEP A CLOSED MOUTH AND OPEN EARS AND EYES.

As a reminder to yourself to follow this advice, it will be helpful if you copy the following epigram in large letters and place it where you will see it daily.

"TELL THE WORLD WHAT YOU INTEND TO DO, BUT FIRST SHOW IT."

This is the equivalent of saying that "deeds, and not words, are what count most."

FREEDOM OR DEATH ON A DECISION

The value of decisions depends upon the courage required to render them. The great decisions, which served as the foundation of civilization, were reached by assuming great risks, which often meant the possibility of death.

Lincoln's decision to issue his famous Proclamation

[p. 212]

of Emancipation, which gave freedom to the colored people of America, was rendered with full understanding that his act would turn thousands of friends and political supporters against him. He knew, too, that the carrying out of that proclamation would mean death to thousands of men on the battlefield. In the end, it cost Lincoln his life. That required courage.

Socrates' decision to drink the cup of poison, rather than compromise in his personal belief, was a decision of courage. It turned Time ahead a thousand years, and gave to people then unborn, the right to freedom of thought and of speech.

The decision of Gen. Robert E. Lee, when he came to the parting of the way with the Union, and took up the cause of the South, was a decision of courage, for he well knew that it might cost him his own life, that it would surely cost the lives of others.

But, the greatest decision of all time, as far as any American citizen is concerned, was reached in Philadelphia, July 4, 1776, when fifty-six men signed their names to a document, which they well knew would bring freedom to all Americans, or leave every one of the fifty-six hanging from a gallows!

You have heard of this famous document, but you may not have drawn from it the great lesson in personal achievement it so plainly taught.

We all remember the date of this momentous decision, but few of us realize what courage that decision required. We remember our history, as it was taught; we remember dates, and the names

[p. 213]

of the men who fought; we remember Valley Forge, and Yorktown; we remember George Washington, and Lord Cornwallis. But we know little of the real forces back of these names, dates, and places. We know still less of that intangible POWER, which insured us freedom long before Washington's armies reached Yorktown.

We read the history of the Revolution, and falsely imagine that George Washington was the Father of our Country, that it was he who won our freedom, while the truth is--Washington was only an accessory after the fact, because victory for his armies had been insured long before Lord Cornwallis surrendered. This is not intended to rob Washington of any of the glory he so richly merited. Its purpose, rather, is to give greater attention to the astounding POWER that was the real cause of his victory.

It is nothing short of tragedy that the writers of history have missed, entirely, even the slightest reference to the irresistible POWER, which gave birth and freedom to the nation destined to set up new standards of independence for all the peoples of the earth. I say it is a tragedy, because it is the selfsame POWER which must be used by every individual who surmounts the difficulties of Life, and forces Life to pay the price asked.

Let us briefly review the events which gave birth to this POWER. The story begins with an incident in Boston, March 5, 1770. British soldiers were patroling the streets, by their presence, openly threatening the citizens. The colonists resented armed men marching in their midst. They began

[p. 214]

to express their resentment openly, hurling stones as well as epithets, at the marching soldiers, until the commanding officer gave orders, "Fix bayonets. . . . Charge!"

The battle was on. It resulted in the death and injury of many. The incident aroused such resentment that the Provincial Assembly, (made up of prominent colonists), called a meeting for the purpose of taking definite action. Two of the members of that Assembly were, John Hancock, and Samuel Adams--LONG LIVE THEIR NAMES! They spoke up courageously, and declared that a move must be made to eject all British soldiers from Boston.

Remember this--a DECISION, in the minds of two men, might properly be called the beginning of the freedom which we, of the United States now enjoy. Remember, too, that the DECISION of these two men called for FAITH, and COURAGE, because it was dangerous.

Before the Assembly adjourned, Samuel Adams was appointed to call on the Governor of the Province, Hutchinson, and demand the withdrawal of the British troops.

The request was granted, the troops were removed from Boston, but the incident was not closed. It had caused a situation destined to change the entire trend of civilization. Strange, is it not, how the great changes, such as the American Revolution, and the World War, often have their beginnings in circumstances which seem unimportant? It is interesting, also, to observe that these important changes usually begin in the form of a

[p. 215]

[paragraph continues] DEFINITE DECISION in the minds of a relatively small number of people. Few of us know the history of our country well enough to realize that John Hancock, Samuel Adams, and Richard Henry Lee (of the Province of Virginia) were the real Fathers of our Country.

Richard Henry Lee became an important factor in this story by reason of the fact that he and Samuel Adams communicated frequently (by correspondence), sharing freely their fears and their hopes concerning the welfare of the people of their Provinces. From this practice, Adams conceived the idea that a mutual exchange of letters between the thirteen Colonies might help to bring about the coordination of effort so badly needed in connection with the solution of their problems. Two years after the clash with the soldiers in Boston (March '72), Adams presented this idea to the Assembly, in the form of a motion that a Correspondence Committee be established among the Colonies, with definitely appointed correspondents in each Colony, "for the purpose of friendly cooperation for the betterment of the Colonies of British America."

Mark well this incident! It was the beginning of the organization of the far-flung POWER destined to give freedom to you, and to me. The Master Mind had already been organized. It consisted of Adams, Lee, and Hancock. "I tell you further, that if two of you agree upon the earth concerning anything for which you ask, it will come to you from My Father, who is in Heaven."

The Committee of Correspondence was organized. Observe that this move provided the way for

[p. 216]

increasing the power of the Master Mind by adding to it men from all the Colonies. Take notice that this procedure constituted the first ORGANIZED PLANNING of the disgruntled Colonists.

In union there is strength! The citizens of the Colonies had been waging disorganized warfare against the British soldiers, through incidents similar to the Boston riot, but nothing of benefit had been accomplished. Their individual grievances had not been consolidated under one Master Mind. No group of individuals had put their hearts, minds, souls, and bodies together in one definite DECISION to settle their difficulty with the British once and for all, until Adams, Hancock, and Lee got together.

Meanwhile, the British were not idle. They, too, were doing some PLANNING and "Master-Minding" on their own account, with the advantage of having back of them money, and organized soldiery.

The Crown appointed Gage to supplant Hutchinson as the Governor of Massachusetts. One of the new Governor's first acts was to send a messenger to call on Samuel Adams, for the purpose of endeavoring to stop his opposition--by FEAR.

We can best understand the spirit of what happened by quoting the conversation between Col. Fenton, (the messenger sent by Gage), and Adams.

Col. Fenton: "I have been authorized by Governor Gage, to assure you, Mr. Adams, that the Governor has been empowered to confer upon you such benefits as would be satisfactory, [endeavor to win Adams by promise of bribes], upon the condition

[p. 217]

that you engage to cease in your opposition to the measures of the government. It is the Governor's advice to you, Sir, not to incur the further displeasure of his majesty. Your conduct has been such as makes you liable to penalties of an Act of Henry VIII, by which persons can be sent to England for trial for treason, or misprision of treason, at the discretion of a governor of a province. But, BY CHANGING YOUR POLITICAL COURSE, you will not only receive great personal advantages, but you will make your peace with the King."

Samuel Adams had the choice of two DECISIONS. He could cease his opposition, and receive personal bribes, or he could CONTINUE, AND RUN THE RISK OF BEING HANGED!

Clearly, the time had come when Adams was forced to reach instantly, a DECISION which could have cost his life. The majority of men would have found it difficult to reach such a decision. The majority would have sent back an evasive reply, but not Adams! He insisted upon Col. Fenton's word of honor, that the Colonel would deliver to the Governor the answer exactly as Adams would give it to him.

Adams' answer, "Then you may tell Governor Gage that I trust I have long since made my peace with the King of Kings. No personal consideration shall induce me to abandon the righteous cause of my Country. And, TELL GOVERNOR GAGE IT IS THE ADVICE OF SAMUEL ADAMS TO HIM, no longer to insult the feelings of an exasperated people."

Comment as to the character of this man seem

[p. 218]

unnecessary. It must be obvious to all who read this astounding message that its sender possessed loyalty of the highest order. This is important. (Racketeers and dishonest politicians have prostituted the honor for which such men as Adams died) .

When Governor Gage received Adams' caustic reply, he flew into a rage, and issued a proclamation which read, "I do, hereby, in his majesty's name, offer and promise his most gracious pardon to all persons who shall forthwith lay down their arms, and return to the duties of peaceable subjects, excepting only from the benefit of such pardon, SAMUEL ADAMS AND JOHN HANCOCK, whose offences are of too flagitious a nature to admit of any other consideration but that of condign punishment."

As one might say, in modern slang, Adams and Hancock were "on the spot!" The threat of the irate Governor forced the two men to reach another DECISION, equally as dangerous. They hurriedly called a secret meeting of their staunchest followers. (Here the Master Mind began to take on momentum). After the meeting had been called to order, Adams locked the door, placed the key in his pocket, and informed all present that it was imperative that a Congress of the Colonists be organized, and that NO MAN SHOULD LEAVE THE ROOM UNTIL THE DECISION FOR SUCH A CONGRESS HAD BEEN REACHED.

Great excitement followed. Some weighed the possible consequences of such radicalism. (Old Man Fear). Some expressed grave doubt as to the

[p. 219]

wisdom of so definite a decision in defiance of the Crown. Locked in that room were TWO MEN immune to Fear, blind to the possibility of Failure. Hancock and Adams. Through the influence of their minds, the others were induced to agree that, through the Correspondence Committee, arrangements should be made for a meeting of the First Continental Congress, to be held in Philadelphia, September 5, 1774.

Remember this date. It is more important than July 4, 1776. If there had been no DECISION to hold a Continental Congress, there could have been no signing of the Declaration of Independence.

Before the first meeting of the new Congress, another leader, in a different section of the country was deep in the throes of publishing a "Summary View of the Rights of British America." He was Thomas Jefferson, of the Province of Virginia, whose relationship to Lord Dunmore, (representative of the Crown in Virginia), was as strained as that of Hancock and Adams with their Governor.

Shortly after his famous Summary of Rights was published, Jefferson was informed that he was subject to prosecution for high treason against his majesty's government. Inspired by the threat, one of Jefferson's colleagues, Patrick Henry, boldly spoke his mind, concluding his remarks with a sentence which shall remain forever a classic, "If this be treason, then make the most of it."

It was such men as these who, without power, without authority, without military strength, without money, sat in solemn consideration of the destiny of the colonies, beginning at the opening of

[p. 220]

the First Continental Congress, and continuing at intervals for two years--until on June 7, 1776, Richard Henry Lee arose, addressed the Chair, and to the startled Assembly made this motion:

"Gentlemen, I make the motion that these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be free and independent states, that they be absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection between them and the state of Great Britain is, and ought to be totally dissolved."

Lee's astounding motion was discussed fervently, and at such length that he began to lose patience. Finally, after days of argument, he again took the floor, and declared, in a clear, firm voice, "Mr. President, we have discussed this issue for days. It is the only course for us to follow. Why, then Sir, do we longer delay? Why still deliberate? Let this happy day give birth to an American Republic. Let her arise, not to devastate and to conquer, but to reestablish the reign of peace, and of law. The eyes of Europe are fixed upon us. She demands of us a living example of freedom, that may exhibit a contrast, in the felicity of the citizen, to the ever increasing tyranny."

Before his motion was finally voted upon, Lee was called back to Virginia, because of serious family illness, but before leaving, he placed his cause in the hands of his friend, Thomas Jefferson, who promised to fight until favorable action was taken. Shortly thereafter the President of the Congress (Hancock), appointed Jefferson as Chairman of a Committee to draw up a Declaration of Independence.

[p. 221]

Long and hard the Committee labored, on a document which would mean, when accepted by the Congress, that EVERY MAN WHO SIGNED IT, WOULD BE SIGNING HIS OWN DEATH WARRANT, should the Colonies lose in the fight with Great Britain, which was sure to follow.

The document was drawn, and on June 28, the original draft was read before the Congress. For several days it was discussed, altered, and made ready. On July 4, 1776, Thomas Jefferson stood before the Assembly, and fearlessly read the most  DECISION ever placed upon paper.

"When in the course of human events it is necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to assume, among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which the laws of Nature, and of Nature's God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation. . . ."

When Jefferson finished, the document was voted upon, accepted, and signed by the fifty-six men, every one staking his own life upon his DECISION to write his name. By that DECISION came into existence a nation destined to bring to mankind forever, the privilege of making DECISIONS.

By decisions made in a similar spirit of Faith, and only by such decisions, can men solve their personal problems, and win for themselves high estates of material and spiritual wealth. Let us not forget this!

Analyze the events which led to the Declaration

[p. 222]

of Independence, and be convinced that this nation, which now holds a position of commanding respect and power among all nations of the world, was born of a DECISION created by a Master Mind, consisting of fifty-six men. Note well, the fact that it was their DECISION which insured the success of Washington's armies, because the spirit of that decision was in the heart of every soldier who fought with him, and served as a spiritual power which recognizes no such thing as FAILURE.

Note, also, (with great personal benefit), that the POWER which gave this nation its freedom, is the self-same power that must be used by every individual who becomes self-determining. This POWER is made up of the principles described in this book. It will not be difficult to detect, in the story of the Declaration of Independence, at least six of these principles; DESIRE, DECISION, FAITH, PERSISTENCE, THE MASTER MIND, and ORGANIZED PLANNING.

Throughout this philosophy will be found the suggestion that thought, backed by strong DESIRE, has a tendency to transmute itself into its physical equivalent. Before passing on, I wish to leave with you the suggestion that one may find in this story, and in the story of the organization of the United States Steel Corporation, a perfect description of the method by which thought makes this astounding transformation.

In your search for the secret of the method, do not look for a miracle, because you will not find it. You will find only the eternal laws of Nature. These laws are available to every person who has

[p. 223]

the FAITH and the COURAGE to use them. They may be used to bring freedom to a nation, or to accumulate riches. There is no charge save the time necessary to understand and appropriate them.

Those who reach DECISIONS promptly and definitely, know what they want, and generally get it. The leaders in every walk of life DECIDE quickly, and firmly. That is the major reason why they are leaders. The world has the habit of making room for the man whose words and actions show that he knows where he is going.

INDECISION is a habit which usually begins in youth. The habit takes on permanency as the youth goes through graded school, high school, and even through college, without DEFINITENESS OF PURPOSE. The major weakness of all educational systems is that they neither teach nor encourage the habit of DEFINITE DECISION.

It would be beneficial if no college would permit the enrollment of any student, unless and until the student declared his major purpose in matriculating. It would be of still greater benefit, if every student who enters the graded schools were compelled to accept training in the HABIT OF DECISION, and forced to pass a satisfactory examination on this subject before being permitted to advance in the grades.

The habit of INDECISION acquired because of the deficiencies of our school systems, goes with the student into the occupation he chooses . . . IF . . . in fact, he chooses his occupation. Generally, the youth just out of school seeks any job that can be found. He takes the first place he finds, because he

[p. 224]

has fallen into the habit of INDECISION. Ninety-eight out of every hundred people working for wages today, are in the positions they hold, because they lacked the DEFINITENESS OF DECISION to PLAN A DEFINITE POSITION, and the knowledge of how to choose an employer.

DEFINITENESS OF DECISION always requires courage, sometimes very great courage. The fifty-six men who signed the Declaration of Independence staked their lives on the DECISION to affix their signatures to that document. The person who reaches a DEFINITE DECISION to procure the particular job, and make life pay the price he asks, does not stake his life on that decision; he stakes his ECONOMIC FREEDOM. Financial independence, riches, desirable business and professional positions are not within reach of the person who neglects or refuses to EXPECT, PLAN, and DEMAND these things. The person who desires riches in the same spirit that Samuel Adams desired freedom for the Colonies, is sure to accumulate wealth.

In the chapter on Organized Planning, you will find complete instructions for marketing every type of personal services. You will find also detailed information on how to choose the employer you prefer, and the particular job you desire. These instructions will be of no value to you UNLESS YOU DEFINITELY DECIDE to organize them into a plan of action.

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 225]

          

          

CHAPTER 9

   

PERSISTENCE

THE SUSTAINED EFFORT NECESSARY TO INDUCE FAITH

The Eighth Step   toward Riches

       

     
    

PERSISTENCE is an essential factor in the procedure of transmuting DESIRE into its monetary equivalent. The basis of persistence is the POWER OF WILL.

Will-power and desire, when properly combined, make an irresistible pair. Men who accumulate great fortunes are generally known as cold-blooded, and sometimes ruthless. Often they are misunderstood. What they have is will-power, which they mix with persistence, and place back of their desires to insure the attainment of their objectives.

Henry Ford has been generally misunderstood to be ruthless and cold-blooded. This misconception grew out of Ford's habit of following through in all of his plans with PERSISTENCE.

The majority of people are ready to throw their aims and purposes overboard, and give up at the first sign of opposition or misfortune. A few carry on DESPITE all opposition, until they attain their goal. These few are the Fords, Carnegies, Rockefellers, and Edisons.

There may be no heroic connotation to the word "persistence," but the quality is to the character of man what carbon is to steel.

The building of a fortune, generally, involves the application of the entire thirteen factors of this

[p. 226]

philosophy. These principles must be understood, they must be applied with PERSISTENCE by all who accumulate money.

If you are following this book with the intention of applying the knowledge it conveys, your first test as to your PERSISTENCE will come when you begin to follow the six steps described in the second chapter. Unless you are one of the two out of every hundred who already have a DEFINITE GOAL at which you are aiming, and a DEFINITE PLAN for its attainment, you may read the instructions, and then pass on with your daily routine, and never comply with those instructions.

The author is checking you up at this point, because lack of persistence is one of the major causes of failure. Moreover, experience with thousands of people has proved that lack of persistence is a weakness common to the majority of men. It is a weakness which may be overcome by effort. The ease with which lack of persistence may be conquered will depend entirely upon the INTENSITY OF ONE'S DESIRE.

The starting point of all achievement is DESIRE. Keep this constantly in mind. Weak desires bring weak results, just as a small amount of fire makes a small amount of heat. If you find yourself lacking in persistence, this weakness may be remedied by building a stronger fire under your desires.

Continue to read through to the end, then go back to Chapter two, and start immediately to carry out the instructions given in connection with the six steps. The eagerness with which you follow these instructions will indicate clearly, how much,

[p. 227]

or how little you really DESIRE to accumulate money. If you find that you are indifferent, you may be sure that you have not yet acquired the "money consciousness" which you must possess, before you can be sure of accumulating a fortune.

Fortunes gravitate to men whose minds have been prepared to "attract" them, just as surely as water gravitates to the ocean. In this book may be found all the stimuli necessary to "attune" any normal mind to the vibrations which will attract the object of one's desires.

If you find you are weak in PERSISTENCE, center your attention upon the instructions contained in the chapter on "Power"; surround yourself with a "MASTER MIND" group, and through the cooperative efforts of the members of this group, you can develop persistence. You will find additional instructions for the development of persistence in the chapters on auto-suggestion, and the subconscious mind. Follow the instructions outlined in these chapters until your habit nature hands over to your subconscious mind, a clear picture of the object of your DESIRE. From that point on, you will not be handicapped by lack of persistence.

Your subconscious mind works continuously, while you are awake, and while you are asleep.

Spasmodic, or occasional effort to apply the rules will be of no value to you. To get RESULTS, you must apply all of the rules until their application becomes a fixed habit with you. In no other way can you develop the necessary "money consciousness."

POVERTY is attracted to the one whose mind is

[p. 228]

favorable to it, as money is attracted to him whose mind has been deliberately prepared to attract it, and through the same laws. POVERTY CONSCIOUSNESS WILL VOLUNTARILY SEIZE THE MIND WHICH IS NOT OCCUPIED WITH THE MONEY CONSCIOUSNESS. A poverty consciousness develops without conscious application of habits favorable to it. The money consciousness must be created to order, unless one is born with such a consciousness.

Catch the full significance of the statements in the preceding paragraph, and you will understand the importance of PERSISTENCE in the accumulation of a fortune. Without PERSISTENCE, you will be defeated, even before you start. With PERSISTENCE you will win.

If you have ever experienced a nightmare, you will realize the value of persistence. You are lying in bed, half awake, with a feeling that you are about to smother. You are unable to turn over, or to move a muscle. You realize that you MUST BEGIN to regain control over your muscles. Through persistent effort of will-power, you finally manage to move the fingers of one hand. By continuing to move your fingers, you extend your control to the muscles of one arm, until you can lift it. Then you gain control of the other arm in the same manner. You finally gain control over the muscles of one leg, and then extend it to the other leg. THEN--WITH ONE SUPREME EFFORT OF WILL--you regain complete control over your muscular system, and "snap" out of your nightmare. The trick has been turned step by step.

[p. 229]

You may find it necessary to "snap" out of your mental inertia, through a similar procedure, moving slowly at first, then increasing your speed, until you gain complete control over your will. Be PERSISTENT no matter how slowly you may, at first, have to move. WITH PERSISTENCE WILL COME SUCCESS.

If you select your "Master Mind" group with care, you will have in it, at least one person who will aid you in the development of PERSISTENCE. Some men who have accumulated great fortunes, did so because of NECESSITY. They developed the habit of PERSISTENCE, because they were so closely driven by circumstances, that they had to become persistent.

THERE IS NO SUBSTITUTE FOR PERSISTENCE! It cannot be supplanted by any other quality! Remember this, and it will hearten you, in the beginning, when the going may seem difficult and slow.

Those who have cultivated the HABIT of persistence seem to enjoy insurance against failure. No matter how many times they are defeated, they finally arrive up toward the top of the ladder. Sometimes it appears that there is a hidden Guide whose duty is to test men through all sorts of discouraging experiences. Those who pick themselves up after defeat and keep on trying, arrive; and the world cries, "Bravo! I knew you could do it!" The hidden Guide lets no one enjoy great achievement without passing the PERSISTENCE TEST. Those who can't take it, simply do not make the grade.

[p. 230]

Those who can "take it" are bountifully rewarded for their PERSISTENCE. They receive, as their compensation, whatever goal they are pursuing. That is not all! They receive something infinitely more important than material compensation--the knowledge that "EVERY FAILURE BRINGS WITH IT THE SEED OF AN EQUIVALENT ADVANTAGE."

There are exceptions to this rule; a few people know from experience the soundness of persistence. They are the ones who have not accepted defeat as being anything more than temporary. They are the ones whose DESIRES are so PERSISTENTLY APPLIED that defeat is finally changed into victory. We who stand on the side-lines of Life see the overwhelmingly large number who go down in defeat, never to rise again. We see the few who take the punishment of defeat as an urge to greater effort. These, fortunately, never learn to accept Life's reverse gear. But what we DO NOT SEE, what most of us never suspect of existing, is the silent but irresistible POWER which comes to the rescue of those who fight on in the face of discouragement. If we speak of this power at all we call it PERSISTENCE, and let it go at that. One thing we all know, if one does not possess PERSISTENCE, one does not achieve noteworthy success in any calling.

As these lines are being written, I look up from my work, and see before me, less than a block away, the great mysterious "Broadway," the "Graveyard of Dead Hopes," and the "Front Porch of Opportunity." From all over the world people have come

[p. 231]

to Broadway, seeking fame, fortune, power, love, or whatever it is that human beings call success. Once in a great while someone steps out from the long procession of seekers, and the world hears that another person has mastered Broadway. But Broadway is not easily nor quickly conquered. She acknowledges talent, recognizes genius, pays off in money, only after one has refused to QUIT.

Then we know he has discovered the secret of how to conquer Broadway. The secret is always inseparably attached to one word, PERSISTENCE!

The secret is told in the struggle of Fannie Hurst, whose PERSISTENCE conquered the Great White Way. She came to New York in 1915, to convert writing into riches. The conversion did not come quickly, BUT IT CAME. For four years Miss Hurst learned about "The Sidewalks of New York" from first hand experience. She spent her days laboring, and her nights HOPING. When hope grew dim, she did not say, "Alright Broadway, you win!" She said, "Very well, Broadway, you may whip some, but not me. I'm going to force you to give up."

One publisher (The Saturday Evening Post) sent her thirty six rejection slips, before she "broke the ice" and got a story across. The average writer, like the "average" in other walks of life, would have given up the job when the first rejection slip came. She pounded the pavements for four years to the tune of the publisher's "NO," because she was determined to win.

Then came the "payoff." The spell had been broken, the unseen Guide had tested Fannie Hurst,

[p. 232]

and she could take it. From that time on publishers made a beaten path to her door. Money came so fast she hardly had time to count it. Then the moving picture men discovered her, and money came not in small change, but in floods. The moving picture rights to her latest novel, "Great Laughter," brought $100,000.00, said to be the highest price ever paid for a story before publication. Her royalties from the sale of the book probably will run much more.

Briefly, you have a description of what PERSISTENCE is capable of achieving. Fannie Hurst is no exception. Wherever men and women accumulate great riches, you may be sure they first acquired PERSISTENCE. Broadway will give any beggar a cup of coffee and a sandwich, but it demands PERSISTENCE of those who go after the big stakes.

Kate Smith will say "amen" when she reads this. For years she sang, without money, and without price, before any microphone she could reach. Broadway said to her, "Come and get it, if you can take it." She did take it until one happy day Broadway got tired and said, "Aw, what's the use? You don't know when you're whipped, so name your price, and go to work in earnest." Miss Smith named her price! It was plenty. Away up in figures so high that one week's salary is far more than most people make in a whole year.

Verily it pays to be PERSISTENT!

And here is an encouraging statement which carries with it a suggestion of great significance--THOUSANDS OF SINGERS WHO EXCEL

[p. 233]

[paragraph continues] KATE SMITH ARE WALKING UP AND DOWN BROADWAY LOOKING FOR A "BREAK"--WITHOUT SUCCESS. Countless others have come and gone, many of them sang well enough, but they failed to make the grade because they lacked the courage to keep on keeping on, until Broadway became tired of turning them away.

Persistence is a state of mind, therefore it can be cultivated. Like all states of mind, persistence is based upon definite causes, among them these:

        a.

       DEFINITENESS OF   PURPOSE. Knowing what one wants is the first and, perhaps, the most important   step toward the development of persistence. A strong motive forces one to   surmount many difficulties.

     
      b.

       DESIRE. It is   comparatively easy to acquire and to maintain persistence in pursuing the   object of intense desire.

     
      c.

       SELF-RELIANCE.   Belief in one's ability to carry out a plan encourages one to follow the plan   through with persistence. (Self-reliance can be developed through the   principle described in the chapter on auto-suggestion).

     
      d.

       DEFINITENESS OF   PLANS. Organized plans, even though they may be weak and entirely   impractical, encourage persistence.

     
      e.

       ACCURATE   KNOWLEDGE. Knowing that one's plans are sound, based upon experience or observation,   encourages persistence; "guessing" instead of "knowing"   destroys persistence.

     
       

       [p. 234]

     
      f.

       CO-OPERATION.   Sympathy, understanding, and harmonious cooperation with others tend to   develop persistence.

     
      g.

       WILL-POWER. The   habit of concentrating one's thoughts upon the building of plans for the   attainment of a definite purpose, leads to persistence.

     
      h.

       HABIT.   Persistence is the direct result of habit. The mind absorbs and becomes a   part of the daily experiences upon which it feeds. Fear, the worst of all   enemies, can be effectively cured by forced   repetition of acts of courage. Everyone who has seen active service in   war knows this.

     
 Before leaving the subject of PERSISTENCE, take inventory of yourself, and determine in what particular, if any, you are lacking in this essential quality. Measure yourself courageously, point by point, and see how many of the eight factors of persistence you lack. The analysis may lead to discoveries that will give you a new grip on yourself.

SYMPTOMS OF LACK OF PERSISTENCE

Here you will find the real enemies which stand between you and noteworthy achievement. Here you will find not only the "symptoms" indicating weakness of PERSISTENCE, but also the deeply seated subconscious causes of this weakness. Study the list carefully, and face yourself squarely IF YOU REALLY WISH TO KNOW WHO YOU ARE, AND WHAT YOU ARE CAPABLE OF DOING. These are the weaknesses which must be mastered by all who accumulate riches.

[p. 235]

        1.

       Failure to   recognize and to clearly define exactly what one wants.

     
      2.

       Procrastination,   with or without cause. (Usually backed up with a formidable array of alibis   and excuses).

     
      3.

       Lack of interest   in acquiring specialized knowledge.

     
      4.

       Indecision, the   habit of "passing the buck" on all occasions, instead of facing   issues squarely. (Also backed by alibis).

     
      5.

       The habit of   relying upon alibis instead of creating definite plans for the solution of   problems.

     
      6.

       Self-satisfaction.   There is but little remedy for this affliction, and no hope for those who   suffer from it.

     
      7.

       Indifference,   usually reflected in one's readiness to compromise on all occasions, rather than   meet opposition and fight it.

     
      8.

       The habit of   blaming others for one's mistakes, and accepting unfavorable circumstances as   being unavoidable.

     
      9.

       WEAKNESS OF   DESIRE, due to neglect in the choice of MOTIVES that impel action.

     
      10.

       Willingness,   even eagerness, to quit at the first sign of defeat. (Based upon one or more   of the 6 basic fears).

     
      11.

       Lack of   ORGANIZED PLANS, placed in writing where they may be analyzed.

     
      12.

       The habit of   neglecting to move on ideas, or to grasp opportunity when it presents itself.

     
       

       [p. 236]

     
      13.

       WISHING instead   of WILLING.

     
      14.

       The habit of   compromising with POVERTY instead of aiming at riches. General absence of   ambition to be, to do, and to own.

     
      15.

       Searching for   all the short-cuts to riches, trying to GET without GIVING a fair equivalent,   usually reflected in the habit of gambling, endeavoring to drive   "sharp" bargains.

     
      16.

       FEAR OF   CRITICISM, failure to create plans and to put them into action, because of   what other people will think, do, or say. This enemy belongs at the head of   the list, because it generally exists in one's subconscious mind, where its   presence is not recognized. (See the Six Basic Fears in a later chapter).

     
 Let us examine some of the symptoms of the Fear of Criticism. The majority of people permit relatives, friends, and the public at large to so influence them that they cannot live their own lives, because they fear criticism.

Huge numbers of people make mistakes in marriage, stand by the bargain, and go through life miserable and unhappy, because they fear criticism which may follow if they correct the mistake. (Anyone who has submitted to this form of fear knows the irreparable damage it does, by destroying ambition, self-reliance, and the desire to achieve).

Millions of people neglect to acquire belated educations, after having left school, because they fear criticism.

Countless numbers of men and women, both young and old, permit relatives to wreck their lives

[p. 237]

in the name of DUTY, because they fear criticism. (Duty does not require any person to submit to the destruction of his personal ambitions and the right to live his own life in his own way).

People refuse to take chances in business, because they fear the criticism which may follow if they fail. The fear of criticism, in such cases is stronger than the DESIRE for success.

Too many people refuse to set high goals for themselves, or even neglect selecting a career, because they fear the criticism of relatives and "friends" who may say "Don't aim so high, people will think you are crazy."

When Andrew Carnegie suggested that I devote twenty years to the organization of a philosophy of individual achievement my first impulse of thought was fear of what people might say. The suggestion set up a goal for me, far out of proportion to any I had ever conceived. As quick as a flash, my mind began to create alibis and excuses, all of them traceable to the inherent FEAR OF CRITICISM. Something inside of me said, "You can't do it--the job is too big, and requires too much time--what will your relatives think of you?--how will you earn a living?--no one has ever organized a philosophy of success, what right have you to believe you can do it?--who are you, anyway, to aim so high?--remember your humble birth--what do you know about philosophy--people will think you are crazy--(and they did)--why hasn't some other person done this before now?"

These, and many other questions flashed into my mind, and demanded attention. It seemed as if the

[p. 238]

whole world had suddenly turned its attention to me with the purpose of ridiculing me into giving up all desire to carry out Mr. Carnegie's suggestion.

I had a fine opportunity, then and there, to kill off ambition before it gained control of me. Later in life, after having analyzed thousands of people, I discovered that MOST IDEAS ARE STILLBORN, AND NEED THE BREATH OF LIFE INJECTED INTO THEM THROUGH DEFINITE PLANS OF IMMEDIATE ACTION. The time to nurse an idea is at the time of its birth. Every minute it lives, gives it a better chance of surviving. The FEAR OF CRITICISM is at the bottom of the destruction of most ideas which never reach the PLANNING and ACTION stage.

Many people believe that material success is the result of favorable "breaks." There is an element of ground for the belief, but those depending entirely upon luck, are nearly always disappointed, because they overlook another important factor which must be present before one can be sure of success. It is the knowledge with which favorable "breaks" can be made to order.

During the depression, W. C. Fields, the comedian, lost all his money, and found himself without income, without a job, and his means of earning a living (vaudeville) no longer existed. Moreover, he was past sixty, when many men consider themselves "old." He was so eager to stage a comeback that he offered to work without pay, in a new field (movies). In addition to his other troubles, he fell and injured his neck. To many that would have been the place to give up and QUIT. But Fields

[p. 239]

was PERSISTENT. He knew that if he carried on he would get the "breaks" sooner or later, and he did get them, but not by chance.

Marie Dressler found herself down and out, with her money gone, with no job, when she was about sixty. She, too, went after the "breaks," and got them. Her PERSISTENCE brought an astounding triumph late in life, long beyond the age when most men and women are done with ambition to achieve.

Eddie Cantor lost his money in the 1929 stock crash, but he still had his PERSISTENCE and his courage. With these, plus two prominent eyes, he exploited himself back into an income of $10,000 a week! Verily, if one has PERSISTENCE, one can get along very well without many other qualities.

The only "break" anyone can afford to rely upon is a self-made "break." These come through the application of PERSISTENCE. The starting point is DEFINITENESS OF PURPOSE.

Examine the first hundred people you meet, ask them what they want most in life, and ninety eight of them will not be able to tell you. If you press them for an answer, some will say--SECURITY, many will say--MONEY, a few will say--HAPPINESS, others will say--FAME AND POWER, and still others will say--SOCIAL RECOGNITION, EASE IN LIVING, ABILITY TO SING, DANCE, or WRITE, but none of them will be able to define these terms, or give the slightest indication of a PLAN by which they hope to attain these vaguely expressed wishes. Riches do not respond to wishes. They respond only to definite plans, backed by definite desires, through constant PERSISTENCE.

[p. 240]

How TO DEVELOP PERSISTENCE

There are four simple steps which lead to the habit of PERSISTENCE. They call for no great amount of intelligence, no particular amount of education, and but little time or effort. The necessary steps are:--

        1.

       A DEFINITE   PURPOSE BACKED BY BURNING DESIRE FOR ITS FULFILLMENT.

     
      2.

       A DEFINITE   PLAN, EXPRESSED IN CONTINUOUS ACTION.

     
      3.

       A MIND CLOSED   TIGHTLY AGAINST ALL NEGATIVE AND DISCOURAGING INFLUENCES, including negative   suggestions of relatives, friends and acquaintances.

     
      4.

       A FRIENDLY   ALLIANCE WITH ONE OR MORE PERSONS WHO WILL ENCOURAGE ONE TO FOLLOW THROUGH   WITH BOTH PLAN AND PURPOSE.

     
 These four steps are essential for success in all walks of life. The .entire purpose of the thirteen principles of this philosophy is to enable one to take these four steps as a matter of habit.

These are the steps by which one may control one's economic destiny.

They are the steps that lead to freedom and independence of thought.

They are the steps that lead to riches, in small or great quantities.

They lead the way to power, fame, and worldly recognition.

[p. 241]

They are the four steps which guarantee favorable "breaks."

They are the steps that convert dreams into physical realities.

They lead, also, to the mastery of FEAR, DISCOURAGEMENT, INDIFFERENCE.

There is a magnificent reward for all who learn to take these four steps. It is the privilege of writing one's own ticket, and of making Life yield whatever price is asked.

I have no way of knowing the facts, but I venture to conjecture that Mrs. Wallis Simpson's great love for a man was not accidental, nor the result of favorable "breaks" alone. There was a burning desire, and careful searching at every step of the way. Her first duty was to love. What is the greatest thing on earth? The Master called it love--not man made rules, criticism, bitterness, slander, or political "marriages," but love.

She knew what she wanted, not after she met the Prince of Wales, but long before that. Twice when she had failed to find it, she had the courage to continue her search. "To thine own self be true, and it must follow, as the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any man."

Her rise from obscurity was of the slow, progressive, PERSISTENT order, but it was SURE! She triumphed over unbelievably long odds; and, no matter who you are, or what you may think of Wallis Simpson, or the king who gave up his Crown for her love, she is an astounding example of applied PERSISTENCE, an instructor on the rules of self-determination,

[p. 242]

from whom the entire world might profitably take lessons.

When you think of Wallis Simpson, think of one who knew what she wanted, and shook the greatest empire on earth to get it. Women who complain that this is a man's world, that women do not have an equal chance to win, owe it to themselves to study carefully the life of this unusual woman, who, at an age which most women consider "old," captured the affections of the most desirable bachelor in the entire world.

And what of King Edward? What lesson may we learn from his part in the world's greatest drama of recent times? Did he pay too high a price for the affections of the woman of his choice?

Surely no one but he can give the correct answer.

The rest of us can only conjecture. This much we know, the king came into the world without his own consent. He was born to great riches, without requesting them. He was persistently sought in marriage; politicians and statesmen throughout Europe tossed dowagers and princesses at his feet. Because he was the first born of his parents, he inherited a crown, which he did not seek, and perhaps did not desire. For more than forty years he was not a free agent, could not live his life in his own way, had but little privacy, and finally assumed duties inflicted upon him when he ascended the throne.

Some will say, "With all these blessings, King Edward should have found peace of mind, contentment, and joy of living."

The truth is that back of all the privileges of a crown, all the money, the fame, and the power inherited

[p. 243]

by King Edward, there was an emptiness which could be filled only by love.

His greatest DESIRE was for love. Long before he met Wallis Simpson, he doubtless felt this great universal emotion tugging at the strings of his heart, beating upon the door of his soul, and crying out for expression.

And when he met a kindred spirit, crying out for this same Holy privilege of expression, he recognized it, and without fear or apology, opened his heart and bade it enter. All the scandal-mongers in the world cannot destroy the beauty of this international drama, through which two people found love, and had the courage to face open criticism, renounce ALL ELSE to give it holy expression.

King Edward's DECISION to give up the crown of the world's most powerful empire, for the privilege of going the remainder of the way through life with the woman of his choice, was a decision that required courage. The decision also had a price, but who has the right to say the price was too great? Surely not He who said, "He among you who is without sin, let him cast the first stone."

As a suggestion to any evil-minded person who chooses to find fault with the Duke of Windsor, because his DESIRE was for LOVE, and for openly declaring his love for Wallis Simpson, and giving up his throne for her, let it be remembered that the OPEN DECLARATION was not essential. He could have followed the custom of clandestine liaison which has prevailed in Europe for centuries, without giving up either his throne, or the woman of his choice, and there would have been NO COMPLAINT

[p. 244]

[paragraph continues] FROM EITHER CHURCH OR LAITY. But this unusual man was built of sterner stuff. His love was clean. It was deep and sincere. It represented the one thing which, above ALL ELSE he truly DESIRED, therefore, he took what he wanted, and paid the price demanded.

If Europe had been blessed with more rulers with the human heart and the traits of honesty of ex-king Edward, for the past century, that unfortunate hemisphere now seething with greed, hate, lust, political connivance, and threats of war, would have a DIFFERENT AND A BETTER STORY TO TELL. A story in which Love and not Hate would rule.

In the words of Stuart Austin Wier we raise our cup and drink this toast to ex-king Edward and Wallis Simpson:

"Blessed is the man who has come to know that our muted thoughts are our sweetest thoughts.
 "Blessed is the man who, from the blackest depths, can see the luminous figure of LOVE, and seeing, sing; and singing, say: 'Sweeter far than uttered lays are the thoughts I have of you.'"

In these words would we pay tribute to the two people who, more than all others of modern times, have been the victims of criticism and the recipients of abuse, because they found Life's greatest treasure, and claimed it. [**]

Most of the world will applaud the Duke of Windsor and Wallis Simpson, because of their PERSISTENCE in searching until they found life's greatest reward. ALL OF US CAN PROFIT by

[p. 245]

following their example in our own search for that which we demand of life.

What mystical power gives to men of PERSISTENCE the capacity to master difficulties? Does the quality of PERSISTENCE set up in one's mind some form of spiritual, mental or chemical activity which gives one access to supernatural forces? Does Infinite Intelligence throw itself on the side of the person who still fights on, after the battle has been lost, with the whole world on the opposing side?

These and many other similar questions have arisen in my mind as I have observed men like Henry Ford, who started at scratch, and built an Industrial Empire of huge proportions, with little else in the way of a beginning but PERSISTENCE. Or, Thomas A. Edison, who, with less than three months of schooling, became the world's leading inventor and converted PERSISTENCE into the talking machine, the moving picture machine, and the incandescent light, to say nothing of half a hundred other useful inventions.

I had the happy privilege of analyzing both Mr. Edison and Mr. Ford, year by year, over a long period of years, and therefore, the opportunity to study them at close range, so I speak from actual knowledge when I say that I found no quality save PERSISTENCE, in either of them, that even remotely suggested the major source of their stupendous achievements.

As one makes an impartial study of the prophets, philosophers, "miracle" men, and religious leaders of the past, one is drawn to the inevitable conclusion that PERSISTENCE, concentration of effort,

[p. 246]

and DEFINITENESS OF PURPOSE, were the major sources of their achievements.

Consider, for example, the strange and fascinating story of Mohammed; analyze his life, compare him with men of achievement in this modern age of industry and finance, and observe how they have one outstanding trait in common, PERSISTENCE!

If you are keenly interested in studying the strange power which gives potency to PERSISTENCE, read a biography of Mohammed, especially the one by Essad Bey. This brief review of that book, by Thomas Sugrue, in the Herald-Tribune, will provide a preview of the rare treat in store for those who take the time to read the entire story of one of the most astounding examples of the power of PERSISTENCE known to civilization.

THE LAST GREAT PROPHET

Reviewed by Thomas Sugrue

.     .     .     .     .

"Mohammed was a prophet, but he never performed a miracle. He was not a mystic; he had no formal schooling; he did not begin his mission until he was forty. When he announced that he was the Messenger of God, bringing word of the true religion, he was ridiculed and labeled a lunatic. Children tripped him and women threw filth upon him. He was banished from his native city, Mecca, and his followers were stripped of their worldly goods and sent into the desert after him. When he had been preaching ten years he had nothing to show for it but banishment, poverty and ridicule. Yet before another ten years had passed, he was dictator

[p. 247]

of all Arabia, ruler of Mecca, and the head of a New World religion which was to sweep to the Danube and the Pyrenees before exhausting the impetus he gave it. That impetus was three-fold: the power of words, the efficacy of prayer and man's kinship with God.

"His career never made sense. Mohammed was born to impoverished members of a leading family of Mecca. Because Mecca, the crossroads of the world, home of the magic stone called the Caaba, great city of trade and the center of trade routes, was unsanitary, its children were sent to be raised in the desert by Bedouins. Mohammed was thus nurtured, drawing strength and health from the milk of nomad, vicarious mothers. He tended sheep and soon hired out to a rich widow as leader of her caravans. He traveled to all parts of the Eastern World, talked with many men of diverse beliefs and observed the decline of Christianity into warring sects. When he was twenty-eight, Khadija, the widow, looked upon him with favor, and married him. Her father would have objected to such a marriage, so she got him drunk and held him up while he gave the paternal blessing. For the next twelve years Mohammed lived as a rich and respected and very shrewd trader. Then he took to wandering in the desert, and one day he returned with the first verse of the Koran and told Khadija that the archangel Gabriel had appeared to him and said that he was to be the Messenger of God.

"The Koran, the revealed word of God, was the closest thing to a miracle in Mohammed's life. He had not been a poet; he had no gift of words. Yet

[p. 248]

the verses of the Koran, as he received them and recited them to the faithful, were better than any verses which the professional poets of the tribes could produce. This, to the Arabs, was a miracle. To them the gift of words was the greatest gift, the poet was all-powerful. In addition the Koran said that all men were equal before God, that the world should be a democratic state Islam. It was this political heresy, plus Mohammed's desire to destroy all the 360 idols in the courtyard of the Caaba, which brought about his banishment. The idols brought the desert tribes to Mecca, and that meant trade. So the business men of Mecca, the capitalists, of which he had been one, set upon Mohammed. Then he retreated to the desert and demanded sovereignty over the world.

"The rise of Islam began. Out of the desert came a flame which would not be extinguished--a democratic army fighting as a unit and prepared to die without wincing. Mohammed had invited the Jews and Christians to join him; for he was not building a new religion. He was calling all who believed in one God to join in a single faith. If the Jews and Christians had accepted his invitation Islam would have conquered the world. They didn't. They would not even accept Mohammed's innovation of humane warfare. When the armies of the prophet entered Jerusalem not a single person was killed because of his faith. When the crusaders entered the city, centuries later, not a Moslem man, woman, or child was spared. But the Christians did accept one Moslem idea--the place of learning, the university."

Footnotes

^244:* Mrs. Simpson read and approved this analysis.

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 249]

          

          

CHAPTER 10

   

POWER OF THE MASTER MIND

THE DRIVING FORCE

The Ninth Step   toward Riches

       

     
    

POWER is essential for success in the accumulation of money.

PLANS are inert and useless, without sufficient POWER to translate them into ACTION. This chapter will describe the method by which an individual may attain and apply POWER.

POWER may be defined as "organized and intelligently directed KNOWLEDGE." Power, as the term is here used, refers to ORGANIZED effort, sufficient to enable an individual to transmute DESIRE into its monetary equivalent. ORGANIZED effort is produced through the coordination of effort of two or more people, who work toward a DEFINITE end, in a spirit of harmony.

POWER IS REQUIRED FOR THE ACCUMULATION OF MONEY! POWER IS NECESSARY FOR THE RETENTION OF MONEY AFTER IT HAS BEEN ACCUMULATED!

Let us ascertain how power may be acquired. If power is "organized knowledge," let us examine the sources of knowledge:

        a.

       INFINITE   INTELLIGENCE. This source of knowledge may be contacted through the procedure   described in another chapter, with the aid of Creative Imagination.

     
       

       [p. 250]

     
      b.

       ACCUMULATED   EXPERIENCE. The accumulated experience of man, (or that portion of it which   has been organized and recorded), may be found in any well-equipped public   library. An important part of this accumulated experience is taught in public   schools and colleges, where it has been classified and organized.

     
      c.

       EXPERIMENT AND   RESEARCH. In the field of science, and in practically every other walk of   life, men are gathering, classifying, and organizing new facts daily. This is   the source to which one must turn when knowledge is not available through   "accumulated experience." Here, too, the Creative Imagination must   often be used.

     
 Knowledge may be acquired from any of the foregoing sources. It may be converted into POWER by organizing it into definite PLANS and by expressing those plans in terms of ACTION.

Examination of the three major sources of knowledge will readily disclose the difficulty an individual would have, if he depended upon his efforts alone, in assembling knowledge and expressing it through definite plans in terms of ACTION. If his plans are comprehensive, and if they contemplate large proportions, he must, generally, induce others to cooperate with him, before he can inject into them the necessary element of POWER.

GAINING POWER THROUGH THE "MASTER MIND"

The "Master Mind" may be defined as: "Coordination of knowledge and effort, in a spirit of

[p. 251]

harmony, between two or more people, for the attainment of a definite purpose."

No individual may have great power without availing himself of the "Master Mind." In a preceding chapter, instructions were given for the creation of PLANS for the purpose of translating DESIRE into its monetary equivalent. If you carry out these instructions with PERSISTENCE and intelligence, and use discrimination in the selection of your "Master Mind" group, your objective will have been half-way reached, even before you begin to recognize it.

So you may better understand the "intangible" potentialities of power available to you, through a properly chosen "Master Mind" group, we will here explain the two characteristics of the Master Mind principle, one of which is economic in nature, and the other psychic. The economic feature is obvious. Economic advantages may be created by any person who surrounds himself with the advice, counsel, and personal cooperation of a group of men who are willing to lend him wholehearted aid, in a spirit of PERFECT HARMONY. This form of cooperative alliance has been the basis of nearly every great fortune. Your understanding of this great truth may definitely determine your financial status.

The psychic phase of the Master Mind principle is much more abstract, much more difficult to comprehend, because it has reference to the spiritual forces with which the human race, as a whole, is not well acquainted. You may catch a significant suggestion from this statement: "No two minds ever come together without, thereby, creating a third,

[p. 252]

invisible, intangible force which may be likened to a third mind."

Keep in mind the fact that there are only two known elements in the whole universe, energy and matter. It is a well known fact that matter may be broken down into units of molecules, atoms, and electrons. There are units of matter which may be isolated, separated, and analyzed.

Likewise, there are units of energy.

The human mind is a form of energy, a part of it being spiritual in nature. When the minds of two people are coordinated in a SPIRIT OF HARMONY, the spiritual units of energy of each mind form an affinity, which constitutes the "psychic" phase of the Master Mind.

The Master Mind principle, or rather the economic feature of it, was first called to my attention by Andrew Carnegie, over twenty-five years ago. Discovery of this principle was responsible for the choice of my life's work.

Mr. Carnegie's Master Mind group consisted of a staff of approximately fifty men, with whom he surrounded himself, for the DEFINITE PURPOSE of manufacturing and marketing steel. He attributed his entire fortune to the POWER he accumulated through this "Master Mind."

Analyze the record of any man who has accumulated a great fortune, and many of those who have accumulated modest fortunes, and you will find that they have either consciously, or unconsciously employed the "Master Mind" principle.

GREAT POWER CAN BE ACCUMULATED THROUGH NO OTHER PRINCIPLE!

[p. 253]

ENERGY is Nature's universal set of building blocks, out of which she constructs every material thing in the universe, including man, and every form of animal and vegetable life. Through a process which only Nature completely understands, she translates energy into matter.

Nature's building blocks are available to man, in the energy involved in THINKING! Man's brain may be compared to an electric battery. It absorbs energy from the ether, which permeates every atom of matter, and fills the entire universe.

It is a well known fact that a group of electric batteries will provide more energy than a single battery. It is also a well known fact that an individual battery will provide energy in proportion to the number and capacity of the cells it contains.

The brain functions in a similar fashion. This accounts for the fact that some brains are more efficient than others, and leads to this significant statement--a group of brains coordinated (or connected) in a spirit of harmony, will provide more thought-energy than a single brain, just as a group of electric batteries will provide more energy than a single battery.

Through this metaphor it becomes immediately obvious that the Master Mind principle holds the secret of the POWER wielded by men who surround themselves with other men of brains.

There follows, now, another statement which will lead still nearer to an understanding of the psychic phase of the Master Mind principle: When a group of individual brains are coordinated and function in Harmony, the increased energy created through that

[p. 254]

alliance, becomes available to every individual brain in the group.

It is a well known fact that Henry Ford began his business career under the handicap of poverty, illiteracy, and ignorance. It is an equally well known fact that, within the inconceivably short period of ten years, Mr. Ford mastered these three handicaps, and that within twenty-five years he made himself one of the richest men in America. Connect with this fact, the additional knowledge that Mr. Ford's most rapid strides became noticeable, from the time he became a personal friend of Thomas A. Edison, and you will begin to understand what the influence of one mind upon another can accomplish. Go a step farther, and consider the fact that Mr. Ford's most outstanding achievements began from the time that he formed the acquaintances of Harvey Firestone, John Burroughs, and Luther Burbank, (each a man of great brain capacity), and you will have further evidence that POWER may be produced through friendly alliance of minds.

There is little if any doubt that Henry Ford is one of the best informed men in the business and industrial world. The question of his wealth needs no discussion. Analyze Mr. Ford's intimate personal friends, some of whom have already been mentioned, and you will be prepared to understand the following statement:

"Men take on the nature and the habits and the POWER OF THOUGHT of those with whom they associate in a spirit of sympathy and harmony."

Henry Ford whipped poverty, illiteracy, and

[p. 255]

ignorance by allying himself with great minds, whose vibrations of thought he absorbed into his own mind. Through his association with Edison, Burbank, Burroughs, and Firestone, Mr. Ford added to his own brain power, the sum and substance of the intelligence, experience, knowledge, and spiritual forces of these four men. Moreover, he appropriated, and made use of the Master Mind principle through the methods of procedure described in this book.

This principle is available to you!

We have already mentioned Mahatma Gandhi. Perhaps the majority of those who have heard of Gandhi, look upon him as merely an eccentric little man, who goes around without formal wearing apparel, and makes trouble for the British Government.

In reality, Gandhi is not eccentric, but HE IS THE MOST POWERFUL MAN NOW LIVING. (Estimated by the number of his followers and their faith in their leader.) Moreover, he is probably the most powerful man who has ever lived. His power is passive, but it is real.

Let us study the method by which he attained his stupendous POWER. It may be explained in a few words. He came by POWER through inducing over two hundred million people to coordinate, with mind and body, in a spirit of HARMONY, for a DEFINITE PURPOSE.

In brief, Gandhi has accomplished a MIRACLE, for it is a miracle when two hundred million people can be induced--not forced--to cooperate in a spirit of HARMONY, for a limitless time. If you doubt

[p. 256]

that this is a miracle, try to induce ANY TWO PEOPLE to cooperate in a spirit of harmony for any length of time.

Every man who manages a business knows what a difficult matter it is to get employees to work together in a spirit even remotely resembling HARMONY.

The list of the chief sources from which POWER may be attained is, as you have seen, headed by INFINITE INTELLIGENCE. When two or more people coordinate in a spirit of HARMONY, and work toward a definite objective, they place themselves in position, through that alliance, to absorb power directly from the great universal storehouse of Infinite Intelligence. This is the greatest of all sources of POWER. It is the source to which the genius turns. It is the source to which every great leader turns, (whether he may be conscious of the fact or not).

The other two major sources from which the knowledge, necessary for the accumulation of POWER, may be obtained are no more reliable than the five senses of man. The senses are not always reliable. Infinite Intelligence DOES NOT ERR.

In subsequent chapters, the methods by which Infinite Intelligence may be most readily contacted will be adequately described.

This is not a course on religion. No fundamental principle described in this book should be interpreted as being intended to interfere either directly, or indirectly, with any man's religious habits. This book has been confined, exclusively, to instructing the reader how to transmute the DEFINITE PURPOSE

[p. 257]

[paragraph continues] OF DESIRE FOR MONEY, into its monetary equivalent.

Read, THINK, and meditate as you read. Soon, the entire subject will unfold, and you will see it in perspective. You are now seeing the detail of the individual chapters.

Money is as shy and elusive as the "old time" maiden. It must be wooed and won by methods not unlike those used by a determined lover, in pursuit of the girl of his choice. And, coincidental as it is, the POWER used in the "wooing" of money is not greatly different from that used in wooing a maiden. That power, when successfully used in the pursuit of money must be mixed with FAITH. It must be mixed with DESIRE. It must be mixed with PERSISTENCE. It must be applied through a plan, and that plan must be set into ACTION.

When money comes in quantities known as "the big money," it flows to the one who accumulates it, as easily as water flows down hill. There exists a great unseen stream of POWER, which may be compared to a river; except that one side flows in one direction, carrying all who get into that side of the stream, onward and upward to WEALTH--and the other side flows in the opposite direction, carrying all who are unfortunate enough to get into it (and not able to extricate themselves from it), downward to misery and POVERTY.

Every man who has accumulated a great fortune, has recognized the existence of this stream of life. It consists of one's THINKING PROCESS. The positive emotions of thought form the side of the stream which carries one to fortune. The negative

[p. 258]

emotions form the side which carries one down to poverty.

This carries a thought of stupendous importance to the person who is following this book with the object of accumulating a fortune.

If you are in the side of the stream of POWER which leads to poverty, this may serve as an oar, by which you may propel yourself over into the other side of the stream. It can serve you ONLY through application and use. Merely reading, and passing judgment on it, either one way or another, will in no way benefit you.

Some people undergo the experience of alternating between the positive and negative sides of the stream, being at times on the positive side, and at times on the negative side. The Wall Street crash of '29 swept millions of people from the positive to the negative side of the stream. These millions are struggling, some of them in desperation and fear, to get back to the positive side of the stream. This book was written especially for those millions.

Poverty and riches often change places. The Crash taught the world this truth, although the world will not long remember the lesson. Poverty may, and generally does, voluntarily take the place of riches. When riches take the place of poverty, the change is usually brought about through well-conceived and carefully executed PLANS. Poverty needs no plan. It needs no one to aid it, because it is bold and ruthless. Riches are shy and timid. They have to be "attracted."

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 259]

          ANYBODY can WISH for riches, and most people do, but only   a few know that a definite plan, plus a BURNING DESIRE for wealth, are the   only dependable means of accumulating wealth.

     
   [p. 260]

          

          

CHAPTER 11

   

THE MYSTERY OF SEX TRANSMUTATION

The Tenth Step   toward Riches

       

     
    

THE meaning of the word "transmute" is, in simple language, "the changing, or transferring of one element, or form of energy, into another."

The emotion of sex brings into being a state of mind.

Because of ignorance on the subject, this state of mind is generally associated with the physical, and because of improper influences, to which most people have been subjected, in acquiring knowledge of sex, things essentially physical have highly biased the mind.

The emotion of sex has back of it the possibility of three constructive potentialities, they are:--

        1.

       The   perpetuation of mankind.

     
      2.

       The maintenance   of health, (as a therapeutic agency, it has no equal).

     
      3.

       The   transformation of mediocrity into genius through transmutation.

     
 Sex transmutation is simple and easily explained. It means the switching of the mind from thoughts of physical expression, to thoughts of some other nature.

Sex desire is the most powerful of human desires.

[p. 261]

[paragraph continues] When driven by this desire, men develop keenness of imagination, courage, will-power, persistence, and creative ability unknown to them at other times. So strong and impelling is the desire for sexual contact that men freely run the risk of life and reputation to indulge it. When harnessed, and redirected along other lines, this motivating force maintains all of its attributes of keenness of imagination, courage, etc., which may be used as powerful creative forces in literature, art, or in any other profession or calling, including, of course, the accumulation of riches.

The transmutation of sex energy calls for the exercise of will-power, to be sure, but the reward is worth the effort. The desire for sexual expression is inborn and natural. The desire cannot, and should not be submerged or eliminated. But it should be given an outlet through forms of expression which enrich the body, mind, and spirit of man. If not given this form of outlet, through transmutation, it will seek outlets through purely physical channels.

A river may be dammed, and its water controlled for a time, but eventually, it will force an outlet. The same is true of the emotion of sex. It may be submerged and controlled for a time, but its very nature causes it to be ever seeking means of expression. If it is not transmuted into some creative effort it will find a less worthy outlet.

Fortunate, indeed, is the person who has discovered how to give sex emotion an outlet through some form of creative effort, for he has, by that discovery, lifted himself to the status of a genius.

[p. 262]

Scientific research has disclosed these significant facts:

        1.

       The men of   greatest achievement are men with highly developed sex natures; men who have   learned the art of sex transmutation.

     
      2.

       The men who   have accumulated great fortunes and achieved outstanding recognition in   literature, art, industry, architecture, and the professions, were motivated   by the influence of a woman.

     
 The research from which these astounding discoveries were made, went back through the pages of biography and history for more than two thousand years. Wherever there was evidence available in connection with the lives of men and women of great achievement, it indicated most convincingly that they possessed highly developed sex natures.

The emotion of sex is an "irresistible force," against which there can be no such opposition as an "immovable body." When driven by this emotion, men become gifted with a super power for action. Understand this truth, and you will catch the significance of the statement that sex transmutation will lift one to the status of a genius.

The emotion of sex contains the secret of creative ability.

Destroy the sex glands, whether in man or beast, and you have removed the major source of action. For proof of this, observe what happens to any animal after it has been castrated. A bull becomes as docile as a cow after it has been altered sexually. Sex alteration takes out of the male, whether man

[p. 263]

or beast, all the FIGHT that was in him. Sex alteration of the female has the same effect.

THE TEN MIND STIMULI

The human mind responds to stimuli, through which it may be "keyed up" to high rates of vibration, known as enthusiasm, creative imagination, intense desire, etc. The stimuli to which the mind responds most freely are:--

        1.

       The desire for   sex expression

     
      2.

       Love

     
      3.

       A burning   desire for fame, power, or financial gain, MONEY

     
      4.

       Music

     
      5.

       Friendship   between either those of the same sex, or those of the opposite sex.

     
      6.

       A Master Mind   alliance based upon the harmony of two or more people who ally themselves for   spiritual or temporal advancement.

     
      7.

       Mutual   suffering, such as that experienced by people who are persecuted.

     
      8.

       Auto-suggestion

     
      9.

       Fear

     
      10.

       Narcotics and   alcohol.

     
 The desire for sex expression comes at the head of the list of stimuli, which most effectively "step-up" the vibrations of the mind and start the "wheels" of physical action. Eight of these stimuli are natural and constructive. Two are destructive. The list is here presented for the purpose of enabling

[p. 264]

you to make a comparative study of the major sources of mind stimulation. From this study, it will be readily seen that the emotion of sex is, by great odds, the most intense and powerful of all mind stimuli.

This comparison is necessary as a foundation for proof of the statement that transmutation of sex energy may lift one to the status of a genius. Let us find out what constitutes a genius.

Some wiseacre has said that a genius is a man who "wears long hair, eats queer food, lives alone, and serves as a target for the joke makers." A better definition of a genius is, "a man who has discovered how to increase the vibrations of thought to the point where he can freely communicate with sources of knowledge not available through the ordinary rate of vibration of thought."

The person who thinks will want to ask some questions concerning this definition of genius. The first question will be, "How may one communicate with sources of knowledge which are not available through the ORDINARY rate of vibration of thought?"

The next question will be, "Are there known sources of knowledge which are available only to genii, and if so, WHAT ARE THESE SOURCES, and exactly how may they be reached?"

We shall offer proof of the soundness of some of the more important statements made in this book--or at least we shall offer evidence through which you may secure your own proof through experimentation, and in doing so, we shall answer both of these questions.

[p. 265]

"GENIUS" IS DEVELOPED THROUGH THE SIXTH SENSE

The reality of a "sixth sense" has been fairly well established. This sixth sense is "Creative Imagination." The faculty of creative imagination is one which the majority of people never use during an entire lifetime, and if used at all, it usually happens by mere accident. A relatively small number of people use, WITH DELIBERATION AND PURPOSE AFORETHOUGHT, the faculty of creative imagination. Those who use this faculty voluntarily, and with understanding of its functions, are GENII.

The faculty of creative imagination is the direct link between the finite mind of man and Infinite Intelligence. All so-called revelations, referred to in the realm of religion, and all discoveries of basic or new principles in the field of invention, take place through the faculty of creative imagination.

When ideas or concepts flash into one's mind, through what is popularly called a "hunch," they come from one or more of the following sources:--

        1.

       Infinite   Intelligence

     
      2.

       One's   subconscious mind, wherein is stored every sense impression and thought   impulse which ever reached the brain through any of the five senses

     
      3.

       From the mind   of some other person who has just released the thought, or picture of the   idea or concept, through conscious thought, or

     
      4.

       From the other   person's subconscious storehouse.

     
 [p. 266]

There are no other KNOWN sources from which "inspired" ideas or "hunches" may be received.

The creative imagination functions best when the mind is vibrating (due to some form of mind stimulation) at an exceedingly high rate. That is, when the mind is functioning at a rate of vibration higher than that of ordinary, normal thought.

When brain action has been stimulated, through one or more of the ten mind stimulants, it has the effect of lifting the individual far above the horizon of ordinary thought, and permits him to envision distance, scope, and quality of THOUGHTS not available on the lower plane, such as that occupied while one is engaged in the solution of the problems of business and professional routine.

When lifted to this higher level of thought, through any form of mind stimulation, an individual occupies, relatively, the same position as one who has ascended in an airplane to a height from which he may see over and beyond the horizon line which limits his vision, while on the ground. Moreover, while on this higher level of thought, the individual is not hampered or bound by any of the stimuli which circumscribe and limit his vision while wrestling with the problems of gaining the three basic necessities of food, clothing, and shelter. He is in a world of thought in which the ORDINARY, work-a-day thoughts have been as effectively removed as are the hills and valleys and other limitations of physical vision, when he rises in an airplane.

While on this exalted plane of THOUGHT, the creative faculty of the mind is given freedom for

[p. 267]

action. The way has been cleared for the sixth sense to function, it becomes receptive to ideas which could not reach the individual under any other circumstances. The "sixth sense" is the faculty which marks the difference between a genius and an ordinary individual.

The creative faculty becomes more alert and receptive to vibrations, originating outside the individual's subconscious mind, the more this faculty is used, and the more the individual relies upon it, and makes demands upon it for thought impulses. This faculty can be cultivated and developed only through use.

That which is known as one's "conscience" operates entirely through the faculty of the sixth sense.

The great artists, writers, musicians, and poets become great, because they acquire the habit of relying upon the "still small voice" which speaks from within, through the faculty of creative imagination. It is a fact well known to people who have "keen" imaginations that their best ideas come through so-called "hunches."

There is a great orator who does not attain to greatness, until he closes his eyes and begins to rely entirely upon the faculty of Creative Imagination. When asked why he closed his eyes just before the climaxes of his oratory, he replied, "I do it, because, then I speak through ideas which come to me from within."

One of America's most successful and best known financiers followed the habit of closing his eyes for two or three minutes before making a decision.

[p. 268]

[paragraph continues] When asked why he did this, he replied, "With my eyes closed, I am able to draw upon a source of superior intelligence."

The late Dr. Elmer R. Gates, of Chevy Chase, Maryland, created more than 200 useful patents, many of them basic, through the process of cultivating and using the creative faculty. His method is both significant and interesting to one interested in attaining to the status of genius, in which category Dr. Gates, unquestionably belonged. Dr. Gates was one of the really great, though less publicized scientists of the world.

In his laboratory, he had what he called his "personal communication room." It was practically sound proof, and so arranged that all light could be shut out. It was equipped with a small table, on which he kept a pad of writing paper. In front of the table, on the wall, was an electric pushbutton, which controlled the lights. When Dr. Gates desired to draw upon the forces available to him through his Creative Imagination, he would go into this room, seat himself at the table, shut off the lights, and CONCENTRATE upon the KNOWN factors of the invention on which he was working, remaining in that position until ideas began to "flash" into his mind in connection with the UNKNOWN factors of the invention.

On one occasion, ideas came through so fast that he was forced to write for almost three hours. When the thoughts stopped flowing, and he examined his notes, he found they contained a minute description of principles which had not a parallel among the known data of the scientific world.

[p. 269]

[paragraph continues] Moreover, the answer to his problem was intelligently presented in those notes. In this manner Dr. Gates completed over 200 patents, which had been begun, but not completed, by "half-baked" brains. Evidence of the truth of this statement is in the United States Patent Office.

Dr. Gates earned his living by "sitting for ideas" for individuals and corporations. Some of the largest corporations in America paid him substantial fees, by the hour, for "sitting for ideas."

The reasoning faculty is often faulty, because it is largely guided by one's accumulated experience. Not all knowledge, which one accumulates through "experience," is accurate. Ideas received through the creative faculty are much more reliable, for the reason that they come from sources more reliable than any which are available to the reasoning faculty of the mind.

The major difference between the genius and the ordinary "crank" inventor, may be found in the fact that the genius works through his faculty of creative imagination, while the "crank" knows nothing of this faculty. The scientific inventor (such as Mr. Edison, and Dr. Gates), makes use of both the synthetic and the creative faculties of imagination.

For example, the scientific inventor, or "genius," begins an invention by organizing and combining the known ideas, or principles accumulated through experience, through the synthetic faculty (the reasoning faculty). If he finds this accumulated knowledge to be insufficient for the completion of his invention, he then draws upon the sources of

[p. 270]

knowledge available to him through his creative faculty. The method by which he does this varies with the individual, but this is the sum and substance of his procedure:

        1.

       HE STIMULATES   HIS MIND SO THAT IT VIBRATES ON A HIGHER-THAN-AVERAGE PLANE, using one or   more of the ten mind stimulants or some other stimulant of his choice.

     
      2.

       HE CONCENTRATES   upon the known factors (the finished part) of his invention, and creates in   his mind a perfect picture of unknown factors (the unfinished part), of his invention.   He holds this picture in mind until it has been taken over by the   subconscious mind, then relaxes by clearing his mind of ALL thought, and   waits for his answer to "flash" into his mind.

     
 Sometimes the results are both definite and immediate. At other times, the results are negative, depending upon the state of development of the "sixth sense," or creative faculty.

Mr. Edison tried out more than 10,000 different combinations of ideas through the synthetic faculty of his imagination before he "tuned in" through the creative faculty, and got the answer which perfected the incandescent light. His experience was similar when he produced the talking machine.

There is plenty of reliable evidence that the faculty of creative imagination exists. This evidence is available through accurate analysis of men who have become leaders in their respective callings, without having had extensive educations. Lincoln was a notable example of a great leader

[p. 271]

who achieved greatness, through the discovery, and use of his faculty of creative imagination. He discovered, and began to use this faculty as the result of the stimulation of love which he experienced after he met Anne Rutledge, a statement of the highest significance, in connection with the study of the source of genius.

The pages of history are filled with the records of great leaders whose achievements may be traced directly to the influence of women who aroused the creative faculties of their minds, through the stimulation of sex desire. Napoleon Bonaparte was one of these. When inspired by his first wife, Josephine, he was irresistible and invincible. When his "better judgment" or reasoning faculty prompted him to put Josephine aside, he began to decline. His defeat and St. Helena were not far distant.

If good taste would permit, we might easily mention scores of men, well known to the American people, who climbed to great heights of achievement under the stimulating influence of their wives, only to drop back to destruction AFTER money and power went to their heads, and they put aside the old wife for a new one. Napoleon was not the only man to discover that sex influence, from the right source, is more powerful than any substitute of expediency, which may be created by mere reason.

The human mind responds to stimulation!

Among the greatest, and most powerful of these stimuli is the urge of sex. When harnessed and transmuted, this driving force is capable of lifting men into that higher sphere of thought which enables

[p. 272]

them to master the sources of worry and petty annoyance which beset their pathway on the lower plane.

Unfortunately, only the genii have made the discovery. Others have accepted the experience of sex urge, without discovering one of its major potentialities--a fact which accounts for the great number of "others" as compared to the limited number of genii.

For the purpose of refreshing the memory, in connection with the facts available from the biographies of certain men, we here present the names of a few men of outstanding achievement, each of whom was known to have been of a highly sexed nature. The genius which was their's, undoubtedly found its source of power in transmuted sex energy:

        GEORGE   WASHINGTON

NAPOLEON BONAPARTE

WILLIAM   SHAKESPEARE

ABRAHAM LINCOLN

RALPH WALDO   EMERSON

ROBERT BURNS

       THOMAS   JEFFERSON

ELBERT HUBBARD

ELBERT H. GARY

OSCAR WILDE

WOODROW WILSON

JOHN H.   PATTERSON

ANDREW JACKSON

ENRICO CARUSO

     
  

Your own knowledge of biography will enable you to add to this list. Find, if you can, a single man, in all history of civilization, who achieved outstanding success in any calling, who was not driven by a well developed sex nature.

[p. 273]

If you do not wish to rely upon biographies of men not now living, take inventory of those whom you know to be men of great achievement, and see if you can find one among them who is not highly sexed.

Sex energy is the creative energy of all genii. There never has been, and never will be a great leader, builder, or artist lacking in this driving force of sex.

Surely no one will misunderstand these statements to mean that ALL who are highly sexed are genii! Man attains to the status of a genius ONLY when, and IF, he stimulates his mind so that it draws upon the forces available, through the creative faculty of the imagination. Chief among the stimuli with which this "stepping up" of the vibrations may be produced is sex energy. The mere possession of this energy is not sufficient to produce a genius. The energy must be transmuted from desire for physical contact, into some other form of desire and action, before it will lift one to the status of a genius.

Far from becoming genii, because of great sex desires, the majority of men lower themselves, through misunderstanding and misuse of this great force, to the status of the lower animals.

WHY MEN SELDOM SUCCEED BEFORE FORTY

I discovered, from the analysis of over 25,000 people, that men who succeed in an outstanding way, seldom do so before the age of forty, and more often they do not strike their real pace until they are well beyond the age of fifty. This fact was so

[p. 274]

astounding that it prompted me to go into the study of its cause most carefully, carrying the investigation over a period of more than twelve years.

This study disclosed the fact that the major reason why the majority of men who succeed do not begin to do so before the age of forty to fifty, is their tendency to DISSIPATE their energies through over indulgence in physical expression of the emotion of sex. The majority of men never learn that the urge of sex has other possibilities, which far transcend in importance, that of mere physical expression. The majority of those who make this discovery, do so after having wasted many years at a period when the sex energy is at its height, prior to the age of forty-five to fifty. This usually is followed by noteworthy achievement.

The lives of many men up to, and sometimes well past the age of forty, reflect a continued dissipation of energies, which could have been more profitably turned into better channels. Their finer and more powerful emotions are sown wildly to the four winds. Out of this habit of the male, grew the term, "sowing his wild oats."

The desire for sexual expression is by far the strongest and most impelling of all the human emotions, and for this very reason this desire, when harnessed and transmuted into action, other than that of physical expression, may raise one to the status of a genius.

One of America's most able business men frankly admitted that his attractive secretary was responsible for most of the plans he created. He admitted that her presence lifted him to heights of creative

[p. 275]

imagination, such as he could experience under no other stimulus.

One of the most successful men in America owes most of his success to the influence of a very charming young woman, who has served as his source of inspiration for more than twelve years. Everyone knows the man to whom this reference is made, but not everyone knows the REAL SOURCE of his achievements.

History is not lacking in examples of men who attained to the status of genii, as the result of the use of artificial mind stimulants in the form of alcohol and narcotics. Edgar Allen Poe wrote the "Raven" while under the influence of liquor, "dreaming dreams that mortal never dared to dream before." James Whitcomb Riley did his best writing while under the influence of alcohol. Perhaps it was thus he saw "the ordered intermingling of the real and the dream, the mill above the river, and the mist above the stream." Robert Burns wrote best when intoxicated, "For Auld Lang Syne, my dear, we'll take a cup of kindness yet, for Auld Lang Syne."

But let it be remembered that many such men have destroyed themselves in the end. Nature has prepared her own potions with which men may safely stimulate their minds so they vibrate on a plane that enables them to tune in to fine and rare thoughts which come from--no man knows where! No satisfactory substitute for Nature's stimulants has ever been found.

It is a fact well known to psychologists that there is a very close relationship between sex desires and

[p. 276]

spiritual urges--a fact which accounts for the peculiar behavior of people who participate in the orgies known as religious "revivals," common among the primitive types.

The world is ruled, and the destiny of civilization is established, by the human emotions. People are influenced in their actions, not by reason so much as by "feelings." The creative faculty of the mind is set into action entirely by emotions, and not by cold reason. The most powerful of all human emotions is that of sex. There are other mind stimulants, some of which have been listed, but no one of them, nor all of them combined, can equal the driving power of sex.

A mind stimulant is any influence which will either temporarily, or permanently, increase the vibrations of thought. The ten major stimulants, described, are those most commonly resorted to. Through these sources one may commune with Infinite Intelligence, or enter, at will, the storehouse of the subconscious mind, either one's own, or that of another person, a procedure which is all there is of genius.

A teacher, who has trained and directed the efforts of more than 30,000 sales people, made the astounding discovery that highly sexed men are the most efficient salesmen. The explanation is, that the factor of personality known as "personal magnetism" is nothing more nor less than sex energy. Highly sexed people always have a plentiful supply of magnetism. Through cultivation and understanding, this vital force may be drawn upon and used to great advantage in the relationships between

[p. 277]

people. This energy may be communicated to others through the following media:

        1.

       The hand-shake.   The touch of the hand indicates, instantly, the presence of magnetism, or the   lack of it.

     
      2.

       The tone of   voice. Magnetism, or sex energy, is the factor with which the voice may be   colored, or made musical and charming.

     
      3.

       Posture and   carriage of the body. Highly sexed people move briskly, and with grace and   ease.

     
      4.

       The vibrations   of thought. Highly sexed people mix the emotion of sex with their thoughts,   or may do so at will, and in that way, may influence those around them.

     
      5.

       Body adornment.   People who are highly sexed are usually very careful about their personal   appearance. They usually select clothing of a style becoming to their   personality, physique, complexion, etc.

     
 When employing salesmen, the more capable sales manager looks for the quality of personal magnetism as the first requirement of a salesman. People who lack sex energy will never become enthusiastic nor inspire others with enthusiasm, and enthusiasm is one of the most important requisites in salesmanship, no matter what one is selling.

The public speaker, orator, preacher, lawyer, or salesman who is lacking in sex energy is a "flop," as far as being able to influence others is concerned. Couple with this the fact, that most people can be influenced only through an appeal to their emotions,

[p. 278]

and you will understand the importance of sex energy as a part of the salesman's native ability. Master salesmen attain the status of mastery in selling, because they, either consciously, or unconsciously, transmute the energy of sex into SALES ENTHUSIASM! In this statement may be found a very practical suggestion as to the actual meaning of sex transmutation.

The salesman who knows how to take his mind off the subject of sex, and direct it in sales effort with as much enthusiasm and determination as he would apply to its original purpose, has acquired the art of sex transmutation, whether he knows it or not. The majority of salesmen who transmute their sex energy do so without being in the least aware of what they are doing, or how they are doing it.

Transmutation of sex energy calls for more will power than the average person cares to use for this purpose. Those who find it difficult to summon will-power sufficient for transmutation, may gradually acquire this ability. Though this requires will-power, the reward for the practice is more than worth the effort.

The entire subject of sex is one with which the majority of people appear to be unpardonably ignorant. The urge of sex has been grossly misunderstood, slandered, and burlesqued by the ignorant and the evil minded, for so long that the very word sex is seldom used in polite society. Men and women who are known to be blessed--yes, BLESSED--with highly sexed natures, are usually looked upon as being people who will bear watching.

[p. 279]

[paragraph continues] Instead of being called blessed, they are usually called cursed.

Millions of people, even in this age of enlightenment, have inferiority complexes which they developed because of this false belief that a highly sexed nature is a curse. These statements, of the virtue of sex energy, should not be construed as justification for the libertine. The emotion of sex is a virtue ONLY when used intelligently, and with discrimination. It may be misused, and often is, to such an extent that it debases, instead of enriches, both body and mind. The better use of this power is the burden of this chapter.

It seemed quite significant to the author, when he made the discovery that practically every great leader, whom he had the privilege of analyzing, was a man whose achievements were largely inspired by a woman. In many instances, the "woman in the case" was a modest, self-denying wife, of whom the public had heard but little or nothing. In a few instances, the source of inspiration has been traced to the "other woman." Perhaps such cases may not be entirely unknown to you.

Intemperance in sex habits is just as detrimental as intemperance in habits of drinking and eating. In this age in which we live, an age which began with the world war, intemperance in habits of sex is common. This orgy of indulgence may account for the shortage of great leaders. No man can avail himself of the forces of his creative imagination, while dissipating them. Man is the only creature on earth which violates Nature's purpose in this connection. Every other animal indulges its sex

[p. 280]

nature in moderation, and with purpose which harmonizes with the laws of nature. Every other animal responds to the call of sex only in "season." Man's inclination is to declare "open season."

Every intelligent person knows that stimulation in excess, through alcoholic drink and narcotics, is a form of intemperance which destroys the vital organs of the body, including the brain. Not every person knows, however, that over indulgence in sex expression may become a habit as destructive and as detrimental to creative effort as narcotics or liquor.

A sex-mad man is not essentially different than a dope-mad man! Both have lost control over their faculties of reason and will-power. Sexual overindulgence may not only destroy reason and willpower, but it may also lead to either temporary, or permanent insanity. Many cases of hypochondria (imaginary illness) grow out of habits developed in ignorance of the true function of sex.

From these brief references to the subject, it may be readily seen that ignorance on the subject of sex transmutation, forces stupendous penalties upon the ignorant on the one hand, and withholds from them equally stupendous benefits, on the other.

Widespread ignorance on the subject of sex is due to the fact that the subject has been surrounded with mystery and beclouded by dark silence. The conspiracy of mystery and silence has had the same effect upon the minds of young people that the psychology of prohibition had. The result has been increased curiosity, and desire to acquire more

[p. 281]

knowledge on this "verboten" subject; and to the shame of all lawmakers, and most physicians--by training best qualified to educate youth on that subject--information has not been easily available.

Seldom does an individual enter upon highly creative effort in any field of endeavor before the age of forty. The average man reaches the period of his greatest capacity to create between forty and sixty. These statements are based upon analysis of thousands of men and women who have been carefully observed. They should be encouraging to those who fail to arrive before the age of forty, and to those who become frightened at the approach of "old age," around the forty-year mark. The years between forty and fifty are, as a rule, the most fruitful. Man should approach this age, not with fear and trembling, but with hope and eager anticipation.

If you want evidence that most men do not begin to do their best work before the age of forty, study the records of the most successful men known to the American people, and you will find it. Henry Ford had not "hit his pace" of achievement until he had passed the age of forty. Andrew Carnegie was well past forty before he began to reap the reward of his efforts. James J. Hill was still running a telegraph key at the age of forty. His stupendous achievements took place after that age. Biographies of American industrialists and financiers are filled with evidence that the period from forty to sixty is the most productive age of man.

Between the ages of thirty and forty, man begins to learn (if he ever learns), the art of sex transmutation.

[p. 282]

[paragraph continues] This discovery is generally accidental, and more often than otherwise, the man who makes it is totally unconscious of his discovery. He may observe that his powers of achievement have increased around the age of thirty-five to forty, but in most cases, he is not familiar with the cause of this change; that Nature begins to harmonize the emotions of love and sex in the individual, between the ages of thirty and forty, so that he may draw upon these great forces, and apply them jointly as stimuli to action.

Sex, alone, is a mighty urge to action, but its forces are like a cyclone--they are often uncontrollable. When the emotion of love begins to mix itself with the emotion of sex, the result is calmness of purpose, poise, accuracy of judgment, and balance. What person, who has attained to the age of forty, is so unfortunate as to be unable to analyze these statements, and to corroborate them by his own experience?

When driven by his desire to please a woman, based solely upon the emotion of sex, a man may be, and usually is, capable of great achievement, but his actions may be disorganized, distorted, and totally destructive. When driven by his desire to please a woman, based upon the motive of sex alone, a man may steal, cheat, and even commit murder. But when the emotion of LOVE is mixed with the emotion of sex, that same man will guide his actions with more sanity, balance, and reason.

Criminologists have discovered that the most hardened criminals can be reformed through the influence of a woman's love. There is no record of

[p. 283]

a criminal having been reformed solely through the sex influence. These facts are well known, but their cause is not. Reformation comes, if at all, through the heart, or the emotional side of man, not through his head, or reasoning side. Reformation means, "a change of heart." It does not mean a "change of head." A man may, because of reason, make certain changes in his personal conduct to avoid the consequences of undesirable effects, but GENUINE REFORMATION comes only through a change of heart--through a DESIRE to change.

Love, Romance, and Sex are all emotions capable of driving men to heights of super achievement. Love is the emotion which serves as a safety valve, and insures balance, poise, and constructive effort. When combined, these three emotions may lift one to an altitude of a genius. There are genii, however, who know but little of the emotion of love. Most of them may be found engaged in some form of action which is destructive, or at least, not based upon justice and fairness toward others. If good taste would permit, a dozen genii could be named in the field of industry and finance, who ride ruthlessly over the rights of their fellow men. They seem totally lacking in conscience. The reader can easily supply his own list of such men.

The emotions are states of mind. Nature has provided man with a "chemistry of the mind" which operates in a manner similar to the principles of chemistry of matter. It is a well known fact that, through the aid of chemistry of matter, a chemist may create a deadly poison by mixing certain elements, none of which are--in themselves--

[p. 284]

harmful in the right proportions. The emotions may, likewise, be combined so as to create a deadly poison. The emotions of sex and jealousy, when mixed, may turn a person into an insane beast.

The presence of any one or more of the destructive emotions in the human mind, through the chemistry of the mind, sets up a poison which may destroy one's sense of justice and fairness. In extreme cases, the presence of any combination of these emotions in the mind may destroy one's reason.

The road to genius consists of the development, control, and use of sex, love, and romance. Briefly, the process may be stated as follows:

Encourage the presence of these emotions as the dominating thoughts in one's mind, and discourage the presence of all the destructive emotions. The mind is a creature of habit. It thrives upon the dominating thoughts fed it. Through the faculty of will-power, one may discourage the presence of any emotion, and encourage the presence of any other. Control of the mind, through the power of will, is not difficult. Control comes from persistence, and habit. The secret of control lies in understanding the process of transmutation. When any negative emotion presents itself in one's mind, it can be transmuted into a positive, or constructive emotion, by the simple procedure of changing one's thoughts.

THERE IS NO OTHER ROAD TO GENIUS THAN THROUGH VOLUNTARY SELF EFFORT! A man may attain to great heights of financial or business achievement, solely by the

[p. 285]

driving force of sex energy, but history is filled with evidence that he may, and usually does, carry with him certain traits of character which rob him of the ability to either hold, or enjoy his fortune. This is worthy of analysis, thought, and meditation, for it states a truth, the knowledge of which may be helpful to women as well as men. Ignorance of this has cost thousands of people their privilege of HAPPINESS, even though they possessed riches.

The emotions of love and sex leave their unmistakable marks upon the features. Moreover, these signs are so visible, that all who wish may read them. The man who is driven by the storm of passion, based upon sex desires alone, plainly advertises that fact to the entire world, by the expression of his eyes, and the lines of his face. The emotion of love, when mixed with the emotion of sex, softens, modifies, and beautifies the facial expression. No character analyst is needed to tell you this--you may observe it for yourself.

The emotion of love brings out, and develops, the artistic and the aesthetic nature of man. It leaves its impress upon one's very soul, even after the fire has been subdued by time and circumstance.

Memories of love never pass. They linger, guide, and influence long after the source of stimulation has faded. There is nothing new in this. Every person, who has been moved by GENUINE LOVE, knows that it leaves enduring traces upon the human heart. The effect of love endures, because love is spiritual in nature. The man who cannot be stimulated to great heights of achievement by love,

[p. 286]

is hopeless--he is dead, though he may seem to live.

Even the memories of love are sufficient to lift one to a higher plane of creative effort. The major force of love may spend itself and pass away, like a fire which has burned itself out, but it leaves behind indelible marks as evidence that it passed that way. Its departure often prepares the human heart for a still greater love.

Go back into your yesterdays, at times, and bathe your mind in the beautiful memories of past love. It will soften the influence of the present worries and annoyances. It will give you a source of escape from the unpleasant realities of life, and maybe--who knows?--your mind will yield to you, during this temporary retreat into the world of fantasy, ideas, or plans which may change the entire financial or spiritual status of your life.

If you believe yourself unfortunate, because you have "loved and lost," perish the thought. One who has loved truly, can never lose entirely. Love is whimsical and temperamental. Its nature is ephemeral, and transitory. It comes when it pleases, and goes away without warning. Accept and enjoy it while it remains, but spend no time worrying about its departure. Worry will never bring it back.

Dismiss, also, the thought that love never comes but once. Love may come and go, times without number, but there are no two love experiences which affect one in just the same way. There may be, and there usually is, one love experience which leaves a deeper imprint on the heart than all the others, but all love experiences are beneficial, except

[p. 287]

to the person who becomes resentful and cynical when love makes its departure.

There should be no disappointment over love, and there would be none if people understood the difference between the emotions of love and sex. The major difference is that love is spiritual, while sex is biological. No experience, which touches the human heart with a spiritual force, can possibly be harmful, except through ignorance, or jealousy.

Love is, without question, life's greatest experience. It brings one into communion with Infinite Intelligence. When mixed with the emotions of romance and sex, it may lead one far up the ladder of creative effort. The emotions of love, sex, and romance, are sides of the eternal triangle of achievement-building genius. Nature creates genii through no other force.

Love is an emotion with many sides, shades, and colors. The love which one feels for parents, or children is quite different from that which one feels for one's sweetheart. The one is mixed with the emotion of sex, while the other is not.

The love which one feels in true friendship is not the same as that felt for one's sweetheart, parents, or children, but it, too, is a form of love.

Then, there is the emotion of love for things inanimate, such as the love of Nature's handiwork. But the most intense and burning of all these various kinds of love, is that experienced in the blending of the emotions of love and sex. Marriages, not blessed with the eternal affinity of love, properly balanced and proportioned, with sex, cannot be happy ones--and seldom endure. Love, alone, will

[p. 288]

not bring happiness in marriage, nor will sex alone. When these two beautiful emotions are blended, marriage may bring about a state of mind, closest to the spiritual that one may ever know on this earthly plane.

When the emotion of romance is added to those of love and sex, the obstructions between the finite mind of man and Infinite Intelligence are removed. Then a genius has been born!

What a different story is this, than those usually associated with the emotion of sex. Here is an interpretation of the emotion which lifts it out of the commonplace, and makes of it potter's clay in the hands of God, from which He fashions all that is beautiful and inspiring. It is an interpretation which would, when properly understood, bring harmony out of the chaos which exists in too many marriages. The disharmonies often expressed in the form of nagging, may usually be traced to lack of knowledge on the subject of sex. Where love, romance and the proper understanding of the emotion and function of sex abide, there is no disharmony between married people.

Fortunate is the husband whose wife understands the true relationship between the emotions of love, sex, and romance. When motivated by this holy triumvirate, no form of labor is burdensome, because even the most lowly form of effort takes on the nature of a labor of love.

It is a very old saying that "a man's wife may either make him or break him," but the reason is not always understood. The "making" and "breaking" is the result of the wife's understanding, or

[p. 289]

lack of understanding of the emotions of love, sex, and romance.

Despite the fact that men are polygamous, by the very nature of their biological inheritance, it is true that no woman has as great an influence on a man as his wife, unless he is married to a woman totally unsuited to his nature. If a woman permits her husband to lose interest in her, and become more interested in other women, it is usually because of her ignorance, or indifference toward the subjects of sex, love, and romance. This statement presupposes, of course, that genuine love once existed between a man and his wife. The facts are equally applicable to a man who permits his wife's interest in him to die.

Married people often bicker over a multitude of trivialities. If these are analyzed accurately, the real cause of the trouble will often be found to be indifference, or ignorance on these subjects.

Man's greatest motivating force is his desire to please woman! The hunter who excelled during prehistoric days, before the dawn of civilization, did so, because of his desire to appear great in the eyes of woman. Man's nature has not changed in this respect. The "hunter" of today brings home no skins of wild animals, but he indicates his desire for her favor by supplying fine clothes, motor cars, and wealth. Man has the same desire to please woman that he had before the dawn of civilization. The only thing that has changed, is his method of pleasing. Men who accumulate large fortunes, and attain to great heights of power and fame, do so, mainly, to satisfy their desire to please women.

[p. 290]

[paragraph continues] Take women out of their lives, and great wealth would be useless to most men. It is this inherent desire of man to please woman, which gives woman the power to make or break a man.

The woman who understands man's nature and tactfully caters to it, need have no fear of competition from other women. Men may be "giants" with indomitable will-power when dealing with other men, but they are easily managed by the women of their choice.

Most men will not admit that they are easily influenced by the women they prefer, because it is in the nature of the male to want to be recognized as the stronger of the species. Moreover, the intelligent woman recognizes this "manly trait" and very wisely makes no issue of it.

Some men know that they are being influenced by the women of their choice--their wives, sweethearts, mothers or sisters--but they tactfully refrain from rebelling against the influence because they are intelligent enough to know that NO MAN IS HAPPY OR COMPLETE WITHOUT THE MODIFYING INFLUENCE OF THE RIGHT WOMAN. The man who does not recognize this important truth deprives himself of the power which has done more to help men achieve success than all other forces combined.

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 291]

          

          

CHAPTER 12

   

THE SUBCONSCIOUS MIND

THE CONNECTING LINK

The Eleventh Step   toward Riches

       

     
    

THE SUBCONSCIOUS MIND consists of a field of consciousness, in which every impulse of thought that reaches the objective mind through any of the five senses, is classified and recorded, and from which thoughts may be recalled or withdrawn as letters may be taken from a filing cabinet.

It receives, and files, sense impressions or thoughts, regardless of their nature. You may VOLUNTARILY plant in your subconscious mind any plan, thought, or purpose which you desire to translate into its physical or monetary equivalent. The subconscious acts first on the dominating desires which have been mixed with emotional feeling, such as faith.

Consider this in connection with the instructions given in the chapter on DESIRE, for taking the six steps there outlined, and the instructions given in the chapter on the building and execution of plans, and you will understand the importance of the thought conveyed.

THE SUBCONSCIOUS MIND WORKS DAY AND NIGHT. Through a method of procedure, unknown to man, the subconscious mind draws upon the forces of Infinite Intelligence for the power with which it voluntarily transmutes one's desires into their physical equivalent, making use,

[p. 292]

always of the most practical media by which this end may be accomplished.

You cannot entirely control your subconscious mind, but you can voluntarily hand over to it any plan, desire, or purpose which you wish transformed into concrete form. Read, again, instructions for using the subconscious mind, in the chapter on autosuggestion.

There is plenty of evidence to support the belief that the subconscious mind is the connecting link between the finite mind of man and Infinite Intelligence. It is the intermediary through which one may draw upon the forces of Infinite Intelligence at will. It, alone, contains the secret process by which mental impulses are modified and changed into their spiritual equivalent. It, alone, is the medium through which prayer may be transmitted to the source capable of answering prayer.

The possibilities of creative effort connected with the subconscious mind are stupendous and imponderable. They inspire one with awe.

I never approach the discussion of the subconscious mind without a feeling of littleness and inferiority due, perhaps, to the fact that man's entire stock of knowledge on this subject is so pitifully limited. The very fact that the subconscious mind is the medium of communication between the thinking mind of man and Infinite Intelligence is, of itself, a thought which almost paralyzes one's reason.

After you have accepted, as a reality, the existence of the subconscious mind, and understand its possibilities, as a medium for transmuting your

[p. 293]

[paragraph continues] DESIRES into their physical or monetary equivalent, you will comprehend the full significance of the instructions given in the chapter on DESIRE. You will also understand why you have been repeatedly admonished to MAKE YOUR DESIRES CLEAR, AND TO REDUCE THEM TO WRITING. You will also understand the necessity of PERSISTENCE in carrying out instructions.

The thirteen principles are the stimuli with which you acquire the ability to reach, and to influence your subconscious mind. Do not become discouraged, if you cannot do this upon the first attempt. Remember that the subconscious mind may be voluntarily directed only through habit, under the directions given in the chapter on FAITH. You have not yet had time to master faith. Be patient. Be persistent.

A good many statements in the chapters on faith and auto-suggestion will be repeated here, for the benefit of YOUR subconscious mind. Remember, your subconscious mind functions voluntarily, whether you make any effort to influence it or not. This, naturally, suggests to you that thoughts of fear and poverty, and all negative thoughts serve as stimuli to your subconscious mind, unless, you master these impulses and give it more desirable food upon which it may feed.

The subconscious mind will not remain idle! If you fail to plant DESIRES in your subconscious mind, it will feed upon the thoughts which reach it as the result of your neglect. We have already explained that thought impulses, both negative and positive are reaching the subconscious mind continuously,

[p. 294]

from the four sources which were mentioned in the chapter on Sex Transmutation.

For the present, it is sufficient if you remember that you are living daily, in the midst of all manner of thought impulses which are reaching your subconscious mind, without your knowledge. Some of these impulses are negative, some are positive. You are now engaged in trying to help shut off the flow of negative impulses, and to aid in voluntarily influencing your subconscious mind, through positive impulses of DESIRE.

When you achieve this, you will possess the key which unlocks the door to your subconscious mind. Moreover, you will control that door so completely, that no undesirable thought may influence your subconscious mind.

Everything which man creates, BEGINS in the form of a thought impulse. Man can create nothing which he does not first conceive in THOUGHT. Through the aid of the imagination, thought impulses may be assembled into plans. The imagination, when under control, may be used for the creation of plans or purposes that lead to success in one's chosen occupation.

All thought impulses, intended for transmutation into their physical equivalent, voluntarily planted in the subconscious mind, must pass through the imagination, and be mixed with faith. The "mixing" of faith with a plan, or purpose, intended for submission to the subconscious mind, may be done ONLY through the imagination.

From these statements, you will readily observe that voluntary use of the subconscious mind calls

[p. 295]

for coordination and application of all the principles.

Ella Wheeler Wilcox gave evidence of her understanding of the power of the subconscious mind when she wrote:

"You never can tell what a thought will do
   In bringing you hate or love--
 For thoughts are things, and their airy wings
   Are swifter than carrier doves.
 They follow the law of the universe--
   Each thing creates its kind,
 And they speed O'er the track to bring you back
   Whatever went out from your mind."

Mrs. Wilcox understood the truth, that thoughts which go out from one's mind, also imbed themselves deeply in one's subconscious mind, where they serve as a magnet, pattern, or blueprint by which the subconscious mind is influenced while translating them into their physical equivalent. Thoughts are truly things, for the reason that every material thing begins in the form of thought-energy.

The subconscious mind is more susceptible to influence by impulses of thought mixed with "feeling" or emotion, than by those originating solely in the reasoning portion of the mind. In fact, there is much evidence to support the theory, that ONLY emotionalized thoughts have any ACTION influence upon the subconscious mind. It is a well known fact that emotion or feeling, rules the majority of people. If it is true that the subconscious mind responds more quickly to, and is influenced

[p. 296]

more readily by thought impulses which are well mixed with emotion, it is essential to become familiar with the more important of the emotions. There are seven major positive emotions, and seven major negative emotions. The negatives voluntarily inject themselves into the thought impulses, which insure passage into the subconscious mind. The positives must be injected, through the principle of auto-suggestion, into the thought impulses which an individual wishes to pass on to his subconscious mind. (Instructions have been given in the chapter on auto-suggestion.)

These emotions, or feeling impulses, may be likened to yeast in a loaf of bread, because they constitute the ACTION element, which transforms thought impulses from the passive to the active state. Thus may one understand why thought impulses, which have been well mixed with emotion, are acted upon more readily than thought impulses originating in "cold reason."

You are preparing yourself to influence and control the "inner audience" of your subconscious mind, in order to hand over to it the DESIRE for money, which you wish transmuted into its monetary equivalent. It is essential, therefore, that you understand the method of approach to this "inner audience." You must speak its language, or it will not heed your call. It understands best the language of emotion or feeling. Let us, therefore describe here the seven major positive emotions, and the seven major negative emotions, so that you may draw upon the positives, and avoid the negatives, when giving instructions to your subconscious mind.

[p. 297]

THE SEVEN MAJOR POSITIVE EMOTIONS

          The emotion of   DESIRE
   The emotion of FAITH
   The emotion of LOVE
   The emotion of SEX
   The emotion of ENTHUSIASM
   The emotion of ROMANCE
   The emotion of HOPE

     
    

There are other positive emotions, but these are the seven most powerful, and the ones most commonly used in creative effort. Master these seven emotions (they can be mastered only by USE), and the other positive emotions will be at your command when you need them. Remember, in this connection, that you are studying a book which is intended to help you develop a "money consciousness" by filling your mind with positive emotions. One does not become money conscious by filling one's mind with negative emotions.

THE SEVEN MAJOR NEGATIVE EMOTIONS
 (To be avoided)

          The emotion of   FEAR
   The emotion of JEALOUSY
   The emotion of HATRED
   The emotion of REVENGE
   The emotion of GREED
   The emotion of SUPERSTITION
   The emotion of ANGER

     
    

Positive and negative emotions cannot occupy the mind at the same time. One or the other must dominate. It is your responsibility to make sure

[p. 298]

that positive emotions constitute the dominating influence of your mind. Here the law of HABIT will come to your aid. Form the habit of applying and using the positive emotions! Eventually, they will dominate your mind so completely, that the negatives cannot enter it.

Only by following these instructions literally, and continuously, can you gain control over your subconscious mind. The presence of a single negative in your conscious mind is sufficient to destroy all chances of constructive aid from your subconscious mind.

If you are an observing person, you must have noticed that most people resort to prayer ONLY after everything else has FAILED! Or else they pray by a ritual of meaningless words. And, because it is a fact that most people who pray, do so ONLY AFTER EVERYTHING ELSE HAS FAILED, they go to prayer with their minds filled with FEAR and DOUBT, which are the emotions the subconscious mind acts upon, and passes on to Infinite Intelligence. Likewise, that is the emotion which Infinite Intelligence receives, and ACTS UPON.

If you pray for a thing, but have fear as you pray, that you may not receive it, or that your prayer will not be acted upon by Infinite Intelligence, your prayer will have been in vain.

Prayer does, sometimes, result in the realization of that for which one prays. If you have ever had the experience of receiving that for which you prayed, go back in your memory, and recall your actual STATE OF MIND, while you were praying,

[p. 299]

and you will know, for sure, that the theory here described is more than a theory.

The time will come when the schools and educational institutions of the country will teach the "science of prayer." Moreover, then prayer may be, and will be reduced to a science. When that time comes, (it will come as soon as mankind is ready for it, and demands it), no one will approach the Universal Mind in a state of fear, for the very good reason that there will be no such emotion as fear. Ignorance, superstition, and false teaching will have disappeared, and man will have attained his true status as a child of Infinite Intelligence. A few have already attained this blessing.

If you believe this prophesy is far-fetched, take a look at the human race in retrospect. Less than a hundred years ago, men believed the lightning to be evidence of the wrath of God, and feared it. Now, thanks to the power of FAITH, men have harnessed the lightning and made it turn the wheels of industry. Much less than a hundred years ago, men believed the space between the planets to be nothing but a great void, a stretch of dead nothingness. Now, thanks to this same power of FAITH, men know that far from being either dead or a void, the space between the planets is very much alive, that it is the highest form of vibration known, excepting, perhaps, the vibration of THOUGHT. Moreover, men know that this living, pulsating, vibratory energy which permeates every atom of matter, and fills every niche of space, connects every human brain with every other human brain.

What reason have men to believe that this same

[p. 300]

energy does not connect every human brain with Infinite Intelligence?

There are no toll-gates between the finite mind of man and Infinite Intelligence. The communication costs nothing except Patience, Faith, Persistence, Understanding, and a SINCERE DESIRE to communicate. Moreover, the approach can be made only by the individual himself. Paid prayers are worthless. Infinite Intelligence does no business by proxy. You either go direct, or you do not communicate.

You may buy prayer books and repeat them until the day of your doom, without avail. Thoughts which you wish to communicate to Infinite Intelligence, must undergo transformation, such as can be given only through your own subconscious mind.

The method by which you may communicate with Infinite Intelligence is very similar to that through which the vibration of sound is communicated by radio. If you understand the working principle of radio, you of course, know that sound cannot be communicated through the ether until it has been "stepped up," or changed into a rate of vibration which the human ear cannot detect. The radio sending station picks up the sound of the human voice, and "scrambles," or modifies it by stepping up the vibration millions of times. Only in this way, can the vibration of sound be communicated through the ether. After this transformation has taken place, the ether "picks up" the energy (which originally was in the form of vibrations of sound), carries that energy to radio receiving stations, and these receiving sets "step" that energy back down

[p. 301]

to its original rate of vibration so it is recognized as sound.

The subconscious mind is the intermediary, which translates one's prayers into terms which Infinite Intelligence can recognize, presents the message, and brings back the answer in the form of a definite plan or idea for procuring the object of the prayer. Understand this principle, and you will know why mere words read from a prayer book cannot, and will never serve as an agency of communication between the mind of man and Infinite Intelligence.

Before your prayer will reach Infinite Intelligence (a statement of the author's theory only), it probably is transformed from its original thought vibration into terms of spiritual vibration. Faith is the only known agency which will give your thoughts a spiritual nature. FAITH and FEAR make poor bedfellows. Where one is found, the other cannot exist.

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 302]

          

          

CHAPTER 13

   

THE BRAIN

A BROADCASTING AND RECEIVING STATION FOR THOUGHT

The Twelfth Step   toward Riches

       

     
    

MORE than twenty years ago, the author, working in conjunction with the late Dr. Alexander Graham Bell, and Dr. Elmer R. Gates, observed that every human brain is both a broadcasting and receiving station for the vibration of thought.

Through the medium of the ether, in a fashion similar to that employed by the radio broadcasting principle, every human brain is capable of picking up vibrations of thought which are being released by other brains.

In connection with the statement in the preceding paragraph, compare, and consider the description of the Creative Imagination, as outlined in the chapter on Imagination. The Creative Imagination is the "receiving set" of the brain, which receives thoughts, released by the brains of others. It is the agency of communication between one's conscious, or reasoning mind, and the four sources from which one may receive thought stimuli.

When stimulated, or "stepped up" to a high rate of vibration, the mind becomes more receptive to the vibration of thought which reaches it through the ether from outside sources. This "stepping up" process takes place through the positive emotions, or the negative emotions. Through the emotions, the vibrations of thought may be increased.

[p. 303]

Vibrations of an exceedingly high rate are the only vibrations picked up and carried, by the ether, from one brain to another. Thought is energy travelling at an exceedingly high rate of vibration. Thought, which has been modified or "stepped up" by any of the major emotions, vibrates at a much higher rate than ordinary thought, and it is this type of thought which passes from one brain to another, through the broadcasting machinery of the human brain.

The emotion of sex stands at the head of the list of human emotions, as far as intensity and driving force are concerned. The brain which has been stimulated by the emotion of sex, vibrates at a much more rapid rate than it does when that emotion is quiescent or absent.

The result of sex transmutation, is the increase of the rate of vibration of thoughts to such a pitch that the Creative Imagination becomes highly receptive to ideas, which it picks up from the ether. On the other hand, when the brain is vibrating at a rapid rate, it not only attracts thoughts and ideas released by other brains through the medium of the ether, but it gives to one's own thoughts that "feeling" which is essential before those thoughts will be picked up and acted upon by one's subconscious mind.

Thus, you will see that the broadcasting principle is the factor through which you mix feeling, or emotion with your thoughts and pass them on to your subconscious mind.

The subconscious mind is the "sending station" of the brain, through which vibrations of thought are

[p. 304]

broadcast. The Creative Imagination is the "receiving set," through which the vibrations of thought are picked up from the ether.

Along with the important factors of the subconscious mind, and the faculty of the Creative Imagination, which constitute the sending and receiving sets of your mental broadcasting machinery, consider now the principle of auto-suggestion, which is the medium by which you may put into operation your "broadcasting" station.

Through the instructions described in the chapter on auto-suggestion, you were definitely informed of the method by which DESIRE may be transmuted into its monetary equivalent.

Operation of your mental "broadcasting" station is a comparatively simple procedure. You have but three principles to bear in mind, and to apply, when you wish to use your broadcasting station--the SUBCONSCIOUS MIND, CREATIVE IMAGINATION, and AUTO-SUGGESTION. The stimuli through which you put these three principles into action have been described--the procedure begins with DESIRE.

THE GREATEST FORCES ARE "INTANGIBLE"

The depression brought the world to the very border-line of understanding of the forces which are intangible and unseen. Through the ages which have passed, man has depended too much upon his physical senses, and has limited his knowledge to physical things, which he could see, touch, weigh, and measure.

We are now entering the most marvelous of all

[p. 305]

ages--an age which will teach us something of the intangible forces of the world about us. Perhaps we shall learn, as we pass through this age, that the 'other self" is more powerful than the physical self we see when we look into a mirror.

Sometimes men speak lightly of the intangibles--the things which they cannot perceive through any of their five senses, and when we hear them, it should remind us that all of us are controlled by forces which are unseen and intangible.

The whole of mankind has not the power to cope with, nor to control the intangible force wrapped up in the rolling waves of the oceans. Man has not the capacity to understand the intangible force of gravity, which keeps this little earth suspended in mid-air, and keeps man from falling from it, much less the power to control that force. Man is entirely subservient to the intangible force which comes with a thunder storm, and he is just as helpless in the presence of the intangible force of electricity--nay, he does not even know what electricity is, where it comes from, or what is its purpose!

Nor is this by any means the end of man's ignorance in connection with things unseen and intangible. He does not understand the intangible force (and intelligence) wrapped up in the soil of the earth--the force which provides him with every morsel of food he eats, every article of clothing he wears, every dollar he carries in his pockets.

THE DRAMATIC STORY OF THE BRAIN

Last, but not least, man, with all of his boasted culture and education, understands little or nothing

[p. 306]

of the intangible force (the greatest of all the intangibles) of thought. He knows but little concerning the physical brain, and its vast network of intricate machinery through which the power of thought is translated into its material equivalent, but he is now entering an age which shall yield enlightenment on the subject. Already men of science have begun to turn their attention to the study of this stupendous thing called a brain, and, while they are still in the kindergarten stage of their studies, they have uncovered enough knowledge to know that the central switchboard of the human brain, the number of lines which connect the brain cells one with another, equal the figure one, followed by fifteen million ciphers.

"The figure is so stupendous," said Dr. C. Judson Herrick, of the University of Chicago, "that astronomical figures dealing with hundreds of millions of light years, become insignificant by comparison. . . . It has been determined that there are from 10,000,000,000 to 14,000,000,000 nerve cells in the human cerebral cortex, and we know that these are arranged in definite patterns. These arrangements are not haphazard. They are orderly. Recently developed methods of electro-physiology draw off action currents from very precisely located cells, or fibers with micro-electrodes, amplify them with radio tubes, and record potential differences to a millionth of a volt."

It is inconceivable that such a network of intricate machinery should be in existence for the sole purpose of carrying on the physical functions incidental to growth and maintenance of the physical

[p. 307]

body. Is it not likely that the same system, which gives billions of brain cells the media for communication one with another, provides, also the means of communication with other intangible forces?

After this book had been written, just before the manuscript went to the publisher, there appeared in the New York Times, an editorial showing that at least one great University, and one intelligent investigator in the field of mental phenomena, are carrying on an organized research through which conclusions have been reached that parallel many of those described in this and the following chapter. The editorial briefly analyzed the work carried on by Dr. Rhine, and his associates at Duke University, viz:--

"What is 'Telepathy'?

"A month ago we cited on this page some of the remarkable results achieved by Professor Rhine and his associates in Duke University from more than a hundred thousand tests to determine the existence of 'telepathy' and 'clairvoyance.' These results were summarized in the first two articles in Harpers Magazine. In the second which has now appeared, the author, E. H. Wright, attempts to summarize what has been learned, or what it seems reasonable to infer, regarding the exact nature of these 'extrasensory' modes of perception.

"The actual existence of telepathy and clairvoyance now seems to some scientists enormously probable as the result of Rhine's experiments. Various percipients were asked to name as many cards in a special pack as they could without looking

[p. 308]

at them and without other sensory access to them. About a score of men and women were discovered who could regularly name so many of the cards correctly that 'there was not one chance in many a million million of their having done their feats by luck or accident.'

"But how did they do them? These powers, assuming that they exist, do not seem to be sensory. There is no known organ for them. The experiments worked just as well at distances of several hundred miles as they did in the same room. These facts also dispose, in Mr. Wright's opinion, of the attempt to explain telepathy or clairvoyance through any physical theory of radiation. All known forms of radiant energy decline inversely as the square of the distance traversed. Telepathy and clairvoyance do not. But they do vary through physical causes as our other mental powers do. Contrary to widespread opinion, they do not improve when the percipient is asleep or half-asleep, but, on the contrary, when he is most wide-awake and alert. Rhine discovered that a narcotic will invariably lower a percipient's score, while a stimulant will always send it higher. The most reliable performer apparently cannot make a good score unless he tries to do his best.

"One conclusion that Wright draws with some confidence is that telepathy and clairvoyance are really one and the same gift. That is, the faculty that 'sees' a card face down on a table seems to be exactly the same one that 'reads' a thought residing only in another mind. There are several grounds for believing this. So far, for example, the two

[p. 309]

gifts have been found in every person who enjoys either of them. In every one so far the two have been of equal vigor, almost exactly. Screens, walls, distances, have no effect at all on either. Wright advances from this conclusion to express what he puts forward as no more than the mere 'hunch' that other extra-sensory experiences, prophetic dreams, premonitions of disaster, and the like, may also prove to be part of the same faculty. The reader is not asked to accept any of these conclusions unless he finds it necessary, but the evidence that Rhine has piled up must remain impressive."

In view of Dr. Rhine's announcement in connection with the conditions under which the mind responds to what he terms "extra-sensory" modes of perception, I now feel privileged to add to his testimony by stating that my associates and I have discovered what we believe to be the ideal conditions under which the mind can be stimulated so that the sixth sense described in the next chapter, can be made to function in a practical way.

The conditions to which I refer consist of a close working alliance between myself and two members of my staff. Through experimentation and practice, we have discovered how to stimulate our minds (by applying the principle used in connection with the "Invisible Counselors" described in the next chapter) so that we can, by a process of blending our three minds into one, find the solution to a great variety of personal problems which are submitted by my clients.

The procedure is very simple. We sit down at a conference table, clearly state the nature of the

[p. 310]

problem we have under consideration, then begin discussing it. Each contributes whatever thoughts that may occur. The strange thing about this method of mind stimulation is that it places each participant in communication with unknown sources of knowledge definitely outside his own experience.

If you understand the principle described in the chapter on the Master Mind, you of course recognize the round-table procedure here described as being a practical application of the Master Mind.

This method of mind stimulation, through harmonious discussion of definite subjects, between three people, illustrates the simplest and most practical use of the Master Mind.

By adopting and following a similar plan any student of this philosophy may come into possession of the famous Carnegie formula briefly described in the introduction. If it means nothing to you at this time, mark this page and read it again after you have finished the last chapter.

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 311]

          THE "depression" was a blessing in disguise. It reduced   the whole world to a new starting point that gives every one a new   opportunity.

     
   [p. 312]

          

          

CHAPTER 14

   

THE SIXTH SENSE

THE DOOR TO THE TEMPLE OF WISDOM

The Thirteenth Step   toward Riches

       

     
    

THE "thirteenth" principle is known as the SIXTH SENSE, through which Infinite Intelligence may, and will communicate voluntarily, without any effort from, or demands by, the individual.

This principle is the apex of the philosophy. It can be assimilated, understood, and applied ONLY by first mastering the other twelve principles.

The SIXTH SENSE is that portion of the subconscious mind which has been referred to as the Creative Imagination. It has also been referred to as the "receiving set" through which ideas, plans, and thoughts flash into the mind. The "flashes" are sometimes called "hunches" or "inspirations."

The sixth sense defies description! It cannot be described to a person who has not mastered the other principles of this philosophy, because such a person has no knowledge, and no experience with which the sixth sense may be compared. Understanding of the sixth sense comes only by meditation through mind development from within. The sixth sense probably is the medium of contact between the finite mind of man and Infinite Intelligence, and for this reason, it is a mixture of both the mental and the spiritual. It is believed to be the point at which the mind of man contacts the Universal Mind.

[p. 313]

After you have mastered the principles described in this book, you will be prepared to accept as truth a statement which may, otherwise, be incredible to you, namely:

Through the aid of the sixth sense, you will be warned of impending dangers in time to avoid them, and notified of opportunities in time to embrace them.

There comes to your aid, and to do your bidding, with the development of the sixth sense, a "guardian angel" who will open to you at all times the door to the Temple of Wisdom.

Whether or not this is a statement of truth, you will never know, except by following the instructions described in the pages of this book, or some similar method of procedure.

The author is not a believer in, nor an advocate of "miracles," for the reason that he has enough knowledge of Nature to understand that Nature never deviates from her established laws. Some of her laws are so incomprehensible that they produce what appear to be "miracles." The sixth sense comes as near to being a miracle as anything I have ever experienced, and it appears so, only because I do not understand the method by which this principle is operated.

This much the author does know--that there is a power, or a First Cause, or an Intelligence, which permeates every atom of matter, and embraces every unit of energy perceptible to man--that this Infinite Intelligence converts acorns into oak trees, causes water to flow down hill in response to the law of gravity, follows night with day, and winter

[p. 314]

with summer, each maintaining its proper place and relationship to the other. This Intelligence may, through the principles of this philosophy, be induced to aid in transmuting DESIRES into concrete, or material form. The author has this knowledge, because he has experimented with it--and has EXPERIENCED IT.

Step by step, through the preceding chapters, you have been led to this, the last principle. If you have mastered each of the preceding principles, you are now prepared to accept, without being skeptical, the stupendous claims made here. If you have not mastered the other principles, you must do so before you may determine, definitely, whether or not the claims made in this chapter are fact or fiction.

While I was passing through the age of "hero-worship" I found myself trying to imitate those whom I most admired. Moreover, I discovered that the element of FAITH, with which I endeavored to imitate my idols, gave me great capacity to do so quite successfully.

I have never entirely divested myself of this habit of hero-worship, although I have passed the age commonly given over to such. My experience has taught me that the next best thing to being truly great, is to emulate the great, by feeling and action, as nearly as possible.

Long before I had ever written a line for publication, or endeavored to deliver a speech in public, I followed the habit of reshaping my own character, by trying to imitate the nine men whose lives and life-works had been most impressive to me. These nine men were, Emerson, Paine, Edison, Darwin,

[p. 315]

[paragraph continues] Lincoln, Burbank, Napoleon, Ford, and Carnegie. Every night, over a long period of years, I held an imaginary Council meeting with this group whom I called my "Invisible Counselors."

The procedure was this. Just before going to sleep at night, I would shut my eyes, and see, in my imagination, this group of men seated with me around my Council Table. Here I had not only an opportunity to sit among those whom I considered to be great, but I actually dominated the group, by serving as the Chairman.

I had a very DEFINITE PURPOSE in indulging my imagination through these nightly meetings. My purpose was to rebuild my own character so it would represent a composite of the characters of my imaginary counselors. Realizing, as I did, early in life, that I had to overcome the handicap of birth in an environment of ignorance and superstition, I deliberately assigned myself the task of voluntary rebirth through the method here described.

BUILDING CHARACTER THROUGH AUTO-SUGGESTION

Being an earnest student of psychology, I knew, of course, that all men have become what they are, because of their DOMINATING THOUGHTS AND DESIRES. I knew that every deeply seated desire has the effect of causing one to seek outward expression through which that desire may be transmuted into reality. I knew that self-suggestion is a powerful factor in building character, that it is, in fact, the sole principle through which character is builded.

With this knowledge of the principles of mind

[p. 316]

operation, I was fairly well armed with the equipment needed in rebuilding my character. In these imaginary Council meetings I called on my Cabinet members for the knowledge I wished each to contribute, addressing myself to each member in audible words, as follows:--

"Mr. Emerson, I desire to acquire from you the marvelous understanding of Nature which distinguished your life. I ask that you make an impress upon my subconscious mind, of whatever qualities you possessed, which enabled you to understand and adapt yourself to the laws of Nature. I ask that you assist me in reaching and drawing upon whatever sources of knowledge are available to this end.

"Mr. Burbank, I request that you pass on to me the knowledge which enabled you to so harmonize the laws of Nature that you caused the cactus to shed its thorns, and become an edible food. Give me access to the knowledge which enabled you to make two blades of grass grow where but one grew before, and helped you to blend the coloring of the flowers with more splendor and harmony, for you, alone, have successfully gilded the lily.

"Napoleon, I desire to acquire from you, by emulation, the marvelous ability you possessed to inspire men, and to arouse them to greater and more determined spirit of action. Also to acquire the spirit of enduring FAITH, which enabled you to turn defeat into victory, and to surmount staggering obstacles. Emperor of Fate, King of Chance, Man of Destiny, I salute you!

"Mr. Paine, I desire to acquire from you the freedom of thought and the courage and clarity with

[p. 317]

which to express convictions, which so distinguished you!

"Mr. Darwin, I wish to acquire from you the marvelous patience, and ability to study cause and effect, without bias or prejudice, so exemplified by you in the field of natural science.

"Mr. Lincoln, I desire to build into my own character the keen sense of justice, the untiring spirit of patience, the sense of humor, the human understanding, and the tolerance, which were your distinguishing characteristics.

"Mr. Carnegie, I am already indebted to you for my choice of a life-work, which has brought me great happiness and peace of mind. I wish to acquire a thorough understanding of the principles of organized effort, which you used so effectively in the building of a great industrial enterprise.

"Mr. Ford, you have been among the most helpful of the men who have supplied much of the material essential to my work. I wish to acquire your spirit of persistence, the determination, poise, and self-confidence which have enabled you to master poverty, organize, unify, and simplify human effort, so I may help others to follow in your footsteps.

"Mr. Edison, I have seated you nearest to me, at my right, because of the personal cooperation you have given me, during my research into the causes of success and failure. I wish to acquire from you the marvelous spirit of FAITH, with which you have uncovered so many of Nature's secrets, the spirit of unremitting toil with which you have so often wrested victory from defeat."

My method of addressing the members of the

[p. 318]

imaginary Cabinet would vary, according to the traits of character in which I was, for the moment, most interested in acquiring. I studied the records of their lives with painstaking care. After some months of this nightly procedure, I was astounded by the discovery that these imaginary figures became, apparently real.

Each of these nine men developed individual characteristics, which surprised me. For example, Lincoln developed the habit of always being late, then walking around in solemn parade. When he came, he walked very slowly, with his hands clasped behind him, and once in a while, he would stop as he passed, and rest his hand, momentarily, upon my shoulder. He always wore an expression of seriousness upon his face. Rarely did I see him smile. The cares of a sundered nation made him grave.

That was not true of the others. Burbank and Paine often indulged in witty repartee which seemed, at times, to shock the other members of the cabinet. One night Paine suggested that I prepare a lecture on "The Age of Reason," and deliver it from the pulpit of a church which I formerly attended. Many around the table laughed heartily at the suggestion. Not Napoleon! He drew his mouth down at the corners and groaned so loudly that all turned and looked at him with amazement. To him the church was but a pawn of the State, not to be reformed, but to be used, as a convenient inciter to mass activity by the people.

On one occasion Burbank was late. When he came, he was excited with enthusiasm, and explained that he had been late, because of an experiment

[p. 319]

he was making, through which he hoped to be able to grow apples on any sort of tree. Paine chided him by reminding him that it was an apple which started all the trouble between man and woman. Darwin chuckled heartily as he suggested that Paine should watch out for little serpents, when he went into the forest to gather apples, as they had the habit of growing into big snakes. Emerson observed--"No serpents, no apples," and Napoleon remarked, "No apples, no state!"

Lincoln developed the habit of always being the last one to leave the table after each meeting. On one occasion, he leaned across the end of the table, his arms folded, and remained in that position for many minutes. I made no attempt to disturb him. Finally, he lifted his head slowly, got up and walked to the door, then turned around, came back, and laid his hand on my shoulder and said, "My boy, you will need much courage if you remain steadfast in carrying out your purpose in life. But remember, when difficulties overtake you, the common people have common sense. Adversity will develop it."

One evening Edison arrived ahead of all the others. He walked over and seated himself at my left, where Emerson was accustomed to sit, and said, "You are destined to witness the discovery of the secret of life. When the time comes, you will observe that life consists of great swarms of energy, or entities, each as intelligent as human beings think themselves to be. These units of life group together like hives of bees, and remain together until they disintegrate, through lack of harmony.

[p. 320]

[paragraph continues] These units have differences of opinion, the same as human beings, and often fight among themselves. These meetings which you are conducting will be very helpful to you. They will bring to your rescue some of the same units of life which served the members of your Cabinet, during their lives. These units are eternal. THEY NEVER DIE! Your own thoughts and DESIRES serve as the magnet which attracts units of life, from the great ocean of life out there. Only the friendly units are attracted--the ones which harmonize with the nature of your DESIRES."

The other members of the Cabinet began to enter the room. Edison got up, and slowly walked around to his own seat. Edison was still living when this happened. It impressed me so greatly that I went to see him, and told him about the experience. He smiled broadly, and said, "Your dream was more a reality than you may imagine it to have been." He added no further explanation to his statement.

These meetings became so realistic that I became fearful of their consequences, and discontinued them for several months. The experiences were so uncanny, I was afraid if I continued them I would lose sight of the fact that the meetings were purely experiences of my imagination.

Some six months after I had discontinued the practice I was awakened one night, or thought I was, when I saw Lincoln standing at my bedside. He said, "The world will soon need your services. It is about to undergo a period of chaos which will cause men and women to lose faith, and become

[p. 321]

panic stricken. Go ahead with your work and complete your philosophy. That is your mission in life. If you neglect it, for any cause whatsoever, you will be reduced to a primal state, and be compelled to retrace the cycles through which you have passed during thousands of years."

I was unable to tell, the following morning, whether I had dreamed this, or had actually been awake, and I have never since found out which it was, but I do know that the dream, if it were a dream, was so vivid in my mind the next day that I resumed my meetings the following night.

At our next meeting, the members of my Cabinet all filed into the room together, and stood at their accustomed places at the Council Table, while Lincoln raised a glass and said, "Gentlemen, let us drink a toast to a friend who has returned to the fold."

After that, I began to add new members to my Cabinet, until now it consists of more than fifty, among them Christ, St. Paul, Galileo, Copernicus, Aristotle, Plato, Socrates, Homer, Voltaire, Bruno, Spinoza, Drummond, Kant, Schopenhauer, Newton, Confucius, Elbert Hubbard, Brann, , Wilson, and William James.

This is the first time that I have had the courage to mention this. Heretofore, I have remained quiet on the subject, because I knew, from my own attitude in connection with such matters, that I would be misunderstood if I described my unusual experience. I have been emboldened now to reduce my experience to the printed page, because I am now less concerned about what "they say" than I was

[p. 322]

in the years that have passed. One of the blessings of maturity is that it sometimes brings one greater courage to be truthful, regardless of what those who do not understand, may think or say.

Lest I be misunderstood, I wish here to state most emphatically, that I still regard my Cabinet meetings as being purely imaginary, but I feel entitled to suggest that, while the members of my Cabinet may be purely fictional, and the meetings existent only in my own imagination, they have led me into glorious paths of adventure, rekindled an appreciation of true greatness, encouraged creative endeavor, and emboldened the expression of honest thought.

Somewhere in the cell-structure of the brain, is located an organ which receives vibrations of thought ordinarily called "hunches." So far, science has not discovered where this organ of the sixth sense is located, but this is not important. The fact remains that human beings do receive accurate knowledge, through sources other than the physical senses. Such knowledge, generally, is received when the mind is under the influence of extraordinary stimulation. Any emergency which arouses the emotions, and causes the heart to beat more rapidly than normal may, and generally does, bring the sixth sense into action. Anyone who has experienced a near accident while driving, knows that on such occasions, the sixth sense often comes to one's rescue, and aids, by split seconds, in avoiding the accident.

These facts are mentioned preliminary to a statement of fact which I shall now make, namely, that

[p. 323]

during my meetings with the "Invisible Counselors" I find my mind most receptive to ideas, thoughts, and knowledge which reach me through the sixth sense. I can truthfully say that I owe entirely to my "Invisible Counselors" full credit for such ideas, facts, or knowledge as I received through "inspiration."

On scores of occasions, when I have faced emergencies, some of them so grave that my life was in jeopardy, I have been miraculously guided past these difficulties through the influence of my "Invisible Counselors."

My original purpose in conducting Council meetings with imaginary beings, was solely that of impressing my own subconscious mind, through the principle of auto-suggestion, with certain characteristics which I desired to acquire. In more recent years, my experimentation has taken on an entirely different trend. I now go to my imaginary counselors with every difficult problem which confronts me and my clients. The results are often astonishing, although I do not depend entirely on this form of Counsel.

You, of course, have recognized that this chapter covers a subject with which a majority of people are not familiar. The Sixth Sense is a subject that will be of great interest and benefit to the person whose aim is to accumulate vast wealth, but it need not claim the attention of those whose desires are more modest.

Henry Ford, undoubtedly understands and makes practical use of the sixth sense. His vast business and financial operations make it necessary for him

[p. 324]

to understand and use this principle. The late Thomas A. Edison understood and used the sixth sense in connection with the development of inventions, especially those involving basic patents, in connection with which he had no human experience and no accumulated knowledge to guide him, as was the case while he was working on the talking machine, and the moving picture machine.

Nearly all great leaders, such as Napoleon, , Joan of Arc, Christ, Buddha, Confucius, and Mohammed, understood, and probably made use of the sixth sense almost continuously. The major portion of their greatness consisted of their knowledge of this principle.

The sixth sense is not something that one can take off and put on at will. Ability to use this great power comes slowly, through application of the other principles outlined in this book. Seldom does any individual come into workable knowledge of the sixth sense before the age of forty. More often the knowledge is not available until one is well past fifty, and this, for the reason that the spiritual forces, with which the sixth sense is so closely related, do not mature and become usable except through years of meditation, self-examination, and serious thought.

No matter who you are, or what may have been your purpose in reading this book, you can profit by it without understanding the principle described in this chapter. This is especially true if your major purpose is that of accumulation of money or other material things.

The chapter on the sixth sense was included, because

[p. 325]

the book is designed for the purpose of presenting a complete philosophy by which individuals may unerringly guide themselves in attaining whatever they ask of life. The starting point of all achievement is DESIRE. The finishing point is that brand of KNOWLEDGE which leads to understanding--understanding of self, understanding of others, understanding of the laws of Nature, recognition and understanding of HAPPINESS.

This sort of understanding comes in its fullness only through familiarity with, and use of the principle of the sixth sense, hence that principle had to be included as a part of this philosophy, for the benefit of those who demand more than money.

Having read the chapter, you must have observed that while reading it, you were lifted to a high level of mental stimulation. Splendid! Come back to this again a month from now, read it once more, and observe that your mind will soar to a still higher level of stimulation. Repeat this experience from time to time, giving no concern as to how much or how little you learn at the time, and eventually you will find yourself in possession of a power that will enable you to throw off discouragement, master fear, overcome procrastination, and draw freely upon your imagination. Then you will have felt the touch of that unknown "something" which has been the moving spirit of every truly great thinker leader, artist, musician, writer, statesman. Then you will be in position to transmute your DESIRES into their physical or financial counterpart as easily as you may lie down and quit at the first sign of opposition.

[p. 326]

FAITH VS. FEAR!

Previous chapters have described how to develop FAITH, through Auto-suggestion, Desire and the Subconscious. The next chapter presents detailed instructions for the mastery of FEAR.

Here will be. found a full description of the six fears which are the cause of all discouragement, timidity, procrastination, indifference, indecision, and the lack of ambition, self-reliance, initiative, self-control, and enthusiasm.

Search yourself carefully as you study these six enemies, as they may exist only in your subconscious mind, where their presence will be hard to detect.

Remember, too, as you analyze the "Six Ghosts of Fear," that they are nothing but ghosts because they exist only in one's mind.

Remember, also, that ghosts--creations of uncontrolled imagination--have caused most of the damage people have done to their own minds, therefore, ghosts can be as dangerous as if they lived and walked on the earth in physical bodies.

The Ghost of the Fear of Poverty, which seized the minds of millions of people in 1929, was so real that it caused the worst business depression this country has ever known. Moreover, this particular ghost still frightens some of us out of our wits.

     
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 327]

          

          

CHAPTER 15

   

HOW TO OUTWIT THE SIX GHOSTS OF   FEAR

Take Inventory of Yourself, As You Read This Closing   Chapter, and Find out How Many of the "Ghosts" Are Standing in Your   Way

       

     
    

BEFORE you can put any portion of this philosophy into successful use, your mind must be prepared to receive it. The preparation is not difficult. It begins with study, analysis, and understanding of three enemies which you shall have to clear out. These are INDECISION, DOUBT, and FEAR!

The Sixth Sense will never function while these three negatives, or any of them remain in your mind. The members of this unholy trio are closely related; where one is found, the other two are close at hand.

INDECISION is the seedling of FEAR! Remember this, as you read. Indecision crystalizes into DOUBT, the two blend and become FEAR! The "blending" process often is slow. This is one reason why these three enemies are so dangerous. They germinate and grow without their presence being observed.

The remainder of this chapter describes an end which must be attained before the philosophy, as a whole, can be put into practical use. It also analyzes a condition which has, but lately, reduced huge numbers of people to poverty, and it states a

[p. 328]

truth which must be understood by all who accumulate riches, whether measured in terms of money or a state of mind of far greater value than money.

The purpose of this chapter is to turn the spotlight of attention upon the cause and the cure of the six basic fears. Before we can master an enemy, we must know its name, its habits, and its place of abode. As you read, analyze yourself carefully, and determine which, if any, of the six common fears have attached themselves to you.

Do not be deceived by the habits of these subtle enemies. Sometimes they remain hidden in the subconscious mind, where they are difficult to locate, and still more difficult to eliminate.

THE SIX BASIC FEARS

There are six basic fears, with some combination of which every human suffers at one time or another. Most people are fortunate if they do not suffer from the entire six. Named in the order of their most common appearance, they are:--

        The fear of   POVERTY

       

       at the bottom   of
   most of one's worries

     
      The fear of   CRITICISM

     
      The fear of ILL   HEALTH

     
      The fear of   LOSS OF LOVE OF SOMEONE

     
      The fear of OLD   AGE

     
      The fear of   DEATH

     
  

All other fears are of minor importance, they can be grouped under these six headings.

The prevalence of these fears, as a curse to the world, runs in cycles. For almost six years, while the depression was on, we floundered in the cycle

[p. 329]

of FEAR OF POVERTY. During the world-war, we were in the cycle of FEAR OF DEATH. Just following the war, we were in the cycle of FEAR OF ILL HEALTH, as evidenced by the epidemic of disease which spread itself all over the world.

Fears are nothing more than states of mind. One's state of mind is subject to control and direction. Physicians, as everyone knows, are less subject to attack by disease than ordinary laymen, for the reason that physicians DO NOT FEAR DISEASE. Physicians, without fear or hesitation, have been known to physically contact hundreds of people, daily, who were suffering from such contagious diseases as small-pox, without becoming infected. Their immunity against the disease consisted, largely, if not solely, in their absolute lack of FEAR.

Man can create nothing which he does not first conceive in the form of an impulse of thought. Following this statement, comes another of still greater importance, namely, MAN'S THOUGHT IMPULSES BEGIN IMMEDIATELY TO TRANSLATE THEMSELVES INTO THEIR PHYSICAL EQUIVALENT, WHETHER THOSE THOUGHTS ARE VOLUNTARY OR INVOLUNTARY. Thought impulses which are picked up through the ether, by mere chance (thoughts which have been released by other minds) may determine one's financial, business, professional, or social destiny just as surely as do the thought impulses which one creates by intent and design.

We are here laying the foundation for the presentation of a fact of great importance to the person

[p. 330]

who does not understand why some people appear to be "lucky" while others of equal or greater ability, training, experience, and brain capacity, seem destined to ride with misfortune. This fact may be explained by the statement that every human being has the ability to completely control his own mind, and with this control, obviously, every person may open his mind to the tramp thought impulses which are being released by other brains, or close the doors tightly and admit only thought impulses of his own choice.

Nature has endowed man with absolute control over but one thing, and that is THOUGHT. This fact, coupled with the additional fact that everything which man creates, begins in the form of a thought, leads one very near to the principle by which FEAR may be mastered.

If it is true that ALL THOUGHT HAS A TENDENCY TO CLOTHE ITSELF IN ITS PHYSICAL EQUIVALENT (and this is true, beyond any reasonable room for doubt), it is equally true that thought impulses of fear and poverty cannot be translated into terms of courage and financial gain.

The people of America began to think of poverty, following the Wall Street crash of 1929. Slowly, but surely that mass thought was crystalized into its physical equivalent, which was known as a "depression." This had to happen, it is in conformity with the laws of Nature.

THE FEAR OF POVERTY

There can be no compromise between POVERTY

[p. 331]

and RICHES! The two roads that lead to poverty and riches travel in opposite directions. If you want riches, you must refuse to accept any circumstance that leads toward poverty. (The word "riches" is here used in its broadest sense, meaning financial, spiritual, mental and material estates). The starting point of the path that leads to riches is DESIRE. In chapter one, you received full instructions for the proper use of DESIRE. In this chapter, on FEAR, you have complete instructions for preparing your mind to make practical use of DESIRE.

Here, then, is the place to give yourself a challenge which will definitely determine how much of this philosophy you have absorbed. Here is the point at which you can turn prophet and foretell, accurately, what the future holds in store for you. If, after reading this chapter, you are willing to accept poverty, you may as well make up your mind to receive poverty. This is one decision you cannot avoid.

If you demand riches, determine what form, and how much will be required to satisfy you. You know the road that leads to riches. You have been given a road map which, if followed, will keep you on that road. If you neglect to make the start, or stop before you arrive, no one will be to blame, but YOU. This responsibility is yours. No alibi will save you from accepting the responsibility if you now fail or refuse to demand riches of Life, because the acceptance calls for but one thing--incidentally, the only thing you can control--and that is a STATE OF MIND. A state of mind is something

[p. 332]

that one assumes. It cannot be purchased, it must be created.

Fear of poverty is a state of mind, nothing else! But it is sufficient to destroy one's chances of achievement in any undertaking, a truth which became painfully evident during the depression.

This fear paralyzes the faculty of reason, destroys the faculty of imagination, kills off self-reliance, undermines enthusiasm, discourages initiative, leads to uncertainty of purpose, encourages procrastination, wipes out enthusiasm and makes self-control an impossibility. It takes the charm from one's personality, destroys the possibility of accurate thinking, diverts concentration of effort, it masters persistence, turns the will-power into nothingness, destroys ambition, beclouds the memory and invites failure in every conceivable form; it kills love and assassinates the finer emotions of the heart, discourages friendship and invites disaster in a hundred forms, leads to sleeplessness, misery and unhappiness--and all this despite the obvious truth that we live in a world of over-abundance of everything the heart could desire, with nothing standing between us and our desires, excepting lack of a definite purpose.

The Fear of Poverty is, without doubt, the most destructive of the six basic fears. It has been placed at the head of the list, because it is the most difficult to master. Considerable courage is required to state the truth about the origin of this fear, and still greater courage to accept the truth after it has been stated. The fear of poverty grew out of man's inherited tendency to PREY UPON HIS FELLOW-MAN

[p. 333]

[paragraph continues] ECONOMICALLY. Nearly all animals lower than man are motivated by instinct, but their capacity to "think" is limited, therefore, they prey upon one another physically. Man, with his superior sense of intuition, with the capacity to think and to reason, does not eat his fellowman bodily, he gets more satisfaction out of "eating" him FINANCIALLY. Man is so avaricious that every conceivable law has been passed to safeguard him from his fellowman.

Of all the ages of the world, of which we know anything, the age in which we live seems to be one that is outstanding because of man's money-madness. A man is considered less than the dust of the earth, unless he can display a fat bank account; but if he has money--NEVER MIND HOW HE ACQUIRED IT--he is a "king" or a "big shot"; he is above the law, he rules in politics, he dominates in business, and the whole world about him bows in respect when he passes.

Nothing brings man so much suffering and humility as POVERTY! Only those who have experienced poverty understand the full meaning of this.

It is no wonder that man fears poverty. Through a long line of inherited experiences man has learned, for sure, that some men cannot be trusted, where matters of money and earthly possessions are concerned. This is a rather stinging indictment, the worst part of it being that it is TRUE.

The majority of marriages are motivated by the wealth possessed by one, or both of the contracting parties. It is no wonder, therefore, that the divorce courts are busy.

[p. 334]

So eager is man to possess wealth that he will acquire it in whatever manner he can--through legal methods if possible--through other methods if necessary or expedient.

Self-analysis may disclose weaknesses which one does not like to acknowledge. This form of examination is essential to all who demand of Life more than mediocrity and poverty. Remember, as you check yourself point by point, that you are both the court and the jury, the prosecuting attorney and the attorney for the defense, and that you are the plaintiff and the defendant, also, that you are on trial. Face the facts squarely. Ask yourself definite questions and demand direct replies. When the examination is over, you will know more about yourself. If you do not feel that you can be an impartial judge in this self-examination, call upon someone who knows you well to serve as judge while you cross-examine yourself. You are after the truth. Get it, no matter at what cost even, though it may temporarily embarrass you!

The majority of people, if asked what they fear most, would reply, "I fear nothing." The reply would be inaccurate, because few people realize that they are bound, handicapped, whipped spiritually and physically through some form of fear. So subtle and deeply seated is the emotion of fear that one may go through life burdened with it, never recognizing its presence. Only a courageous analysis will disclose the presence of this universal enemy. When you begin such an analysis, search deeply into your character. Here is a list of the symptoms for which you should look:

[p. 335]

SYMPTOMS OF THE FEAR OF POVERTY

        INDIFFERENCE.

       Commonly   expressed through lack of ambition; willingness to tolerate poverty;   acceptance of whatever compensation life may offer without protest; mental   and physical laziness; lack of initiative, imagination, enthusiasm and   self-control

     
      INDECISION.

       The habit of   permitting others to do one's thinking. Staying "on the fence."

     
      DOUBT.

       Generally   expressed through alibis and excuses designed to cover up, explain away, or   apologize for one's failures, sometimes expressed in the form of envy of   those who are successful, or by criticising them.

     
      WORRY.

       Usually   expressed by finding fault with others, a tendency to spend beyond one's   income, neglect of personal appearance, scowling and frowning; intemperance   in the use of alcoholic drink, sometimes through the use of narcotics;   nervousness, lack of poise, self-consciousness and lack of self-reliance.

     
      OVER-CAUTION.

       The habit of   looking for the negative side of every circumstance, thinking and talking of   possible failure instead of concentrating upon the means of succeeding.   Knowing all the roads to disaster, but never searching for the plans to avoid   failure. Waiting for "the right time" to begin putting ideas and   plans into action, until the waiting becomes a permanent habit. Remembering   those who have failed, and forgetting those who have

     
       

       [p. 336]

     
       

       succeeded.   Seeing the hole in the doughnut, but overlooking the doughnut. Pessimism,   leading to indigestion, poor elimination, autointoxication, bad breath and   bad disposition.

     
      PROCRASTINATION.

       The habit of   putting off until tomorrow that which should have been done last year.   Spending enough time in creating alibis and excuses to have done the job.   This symptom is closely related to over-caution, doubt and worry. Refusal to   accept responsibility when it can be avoided. Willingness to compromise   rather than put up a stiff fight. Compromising with difficulties instead of   harnessing and using them as stepping stones to advancement. Bargaining with   Life for a penny, instead of demanding prosperity, opulence, riches,   contentment and happiness. Planning what to do IF AND WHEN OVERTAKEN BY   FAILURE, INSTEAD OF BURNING ALL BRIDGES AND MAKING RETREAT IMPOSSIBLE.   Weakness of, and often total lack of self-confidence, definiteness of   purpose, self-control, initiative, enthusiasm, ambition, thrift and sound   reasoning ability. EXPECTING POVERTY INSTEAD OF DEMANDING RICHES. Association   with those who accept poverty instead of seeking the company of those who   demand and receive riches.

     
 MONEY TALKS!

Some will ask, "why did you write a book about money? Why measure riches in dollars, alone?" Some will believe, and rightly so, that there are

[p. 337]

other forms of riches more desirable than money. Yes, there are riches which cannot be measured in terms of dollars, but there are millions of people who will say, "Give me all the money I need, and I will find everything else I want."

The major reason why I wrote this book on how to get money is the fact that the world has but lately passed through an experience that left millions of men and women paralyzed with the FEAR OF POVERTY. What this sort of fear does to one was well described by Westbrook Pegler, in the New York World-Telegram, viz:

"Money is only clam shells or metal discs or scraps of paper, and there are treasures of the heart and soul which money cannot buy, but most people, being broke, are unable to keep this in mind and sustain their spirits. When a man is down and out and on the street, unable to get any job at all, something happens to his spirit which can be observed in the droop of his shoulders, the set of his hat, his walk and his gaze. He cannot escape a feeling of inferiority among people with regular employment, even though he knows they are definitely not his equals in character, intelligence or ability.

"These people--even his friends--feel, on the other hand, a sense of superiority and regard him, perhaps unconsciously, as a casualty. He may borrow for a time, but not enough to carry on in his accustomed way, and he cannot continue to borrow very long. But borrowing in itself, when a man is borrowing merely to live, is a depressing experience, and the money lacks the power of earned money to revive his spirits. Of course, none of this applies

[p. 338]

to bums or habitual ne'er-do-wells, but only to men of normal ambitions and self-respect.

"WOMEN CONCEAL DESPAIR.

"Women in the same predicament must be different. We somehow do not think of women at all in considering the down-and-outers. They are scarce in the breadlines, they rarely are seen begging on the streets, and they are not recognizable in crowds by the same plain signs which identify busted men. Of course, I do not mean the shuffling hags of the city streets who are the opposite number of the confirmed male bums. I mean reasonably young, decent and intelligent women. There must be many of them, but their despair is not apparent. Maybe they kill themselves.

"When a man is down and out he has time on his hands for brooding. He may travel miles to see a man about a job and discover that the job is filled or that it is one of those jobs with no base pay but only a commission on the sale of some useless knickknack which nobody would buy, except out of pity. Turning that down, he finds himself back on the street with nowhere to go but just anywhere. So he walks and walks. He gazes into store windows at luxuries which are not for him, and feels inferior and gives way to people who stop to look with an active interest. He wanders into the railroad station or puts himself down in the library to ease his legs and soak up a little heat, but that isn't looking for a job, so he gets going again. He may not know it, but his aimlessness would give him away even if the very lines of his figure did not. He may be well dressed in the clothes left over from the days

[p. 339]

when he had a steady job, but the clothes cannot disguise the droop.

"MONEY MAKES DIFFERENCE.

"He sees thousands of other people, bookkeepers or clerks or chemists or wagon hands, busy at their work and envies them from the bottom of his soul. They have their independence, their self-respect and manhood, and he simply cannot convince himself that he is a good man, too, though he argue it out and arrive at a favorable verdict hour after hour.

"It is just money which makes this difference in him. With a little money he would be himself again.

"Some employers take the most shocking advantage of people who are down and out. The agencies hang out little colored cards offering miserable wages to busted men--$12 a week, $15 a week. An $18 a week job is a plum, and anyone with $25 a week to offer does not hang the job in front of an agency on a colored card. I have a want ad clipped from a local paper demanding a clerk, a good, clean penman, to take telephone orders for a sandwich shop from 11 A.M. to 2 P.M. for $8 a month--not $8 a week but $8 a month. The ad says also, 'State religion.' Can you imagine the brutal effrontery of anyone who demands a good, clean penman for 11 cents an hour inquiring into the victim's religion? But that is what busted people are offered."

THE FEAR OF CRITICISM

Just how man originally came by this fear, no

[p. 340]

one can state definitely, but one thing is certain--he has it in a highly developed form. Some believe that this fear made its appearance about the time that politics became a "profession." Others believe it can be traced to the age when women first began to concern themselves with "styles" in wearing apparel.

This author, being neither a humorist nor a prophet, is inclined to attribute the basic fear of criticism to that part of man's inherited nature which prompts him not only to take away his fellowman's goods and wares, but to justify his action by CRITICISM of his fellowman's character. It is a well known fact that a thief will criticise the man from whom he steals--that politicians seek office, not by displaying their own virtues and qualifications, but by attempting to besmirch their opponents.

The fear of criticism takes on many forms, the majority of which are petty and trivial. Baldheaded men, for example, are bald for no other reason than their fear of criticism. Heads become bald because of the tight fitting bands of hats which cut off the circulation from the roots of the hair. Men wear hats, not because they actually need them, but mainly because "everyone is doing it." The individual falls into line and does likewise, lest some other individual CRITICISE him. Women seldom have bald heads, or even thin hair, because they wear hats which fit their heads loosely, the only purpose of the hats being adornment.

But, it must not be supposed that women are free from the fear of criticism. If any woman

[p. 341]

claims to be superior to man with reference to this fear, ask her to walk down the street wearing a hat of the vintage of 1890.

The astute manufacturers of clothing have not been slow to capitalize this basic fear of criticism, with which all mankind has been cursed. Every season the styles in many articles of wearing apparel change. Who establishes the styles? Certainly not the purchaser of clothing, but the manufacturer. Why does he change the styles so often? The answer is obvious. He changes the styles so he can sell more clothes.

For the same reason the manufacturers of automobiles (with a few rare and very sensible exceptions) change styles of models every season. No man wants to drive an automobile which is not of the latest style, although the older model may actually be the better car.

We have been describing the manner in which people behave under the influence of fear of criticism as applied to the small and petty things of life. Let us now examine human behavior when this fear affects people in connection with the more important events of human relationship. Take for example practically any person who has reached the age of "mental maturity" (from 35 to 40 years of age, as a general average), and if you could read the secret thoughts of his mind, you would find a very decided disbelief in most of the fables taught by the majority of the dogmatists and theologians a few decades back.

Not often, however, will you find a person who has the courage to openly state his belief on this

[p. 342]

subject. Most people will, if pressed far enough, tell a lie rather than admit that they do not believe the stories associated with that form of religion which held people in bondage prior to the age of scientific discovery and education.

Why does the average person, even in this day of enlightenment, shy away from denying his belief in the fables which were the basis of most of the religions a few decades ago? The answer is, "because of the fear of criticism." Men and women have been burned at the stake for daring to express disbelief in ghosts. It is no wonder we have inherited a consciousness which makes us fear criticism. The time was, and not so far in the past, when criticism carried severe punishments--it still does in some countries.

The fear of criticism robs man of his initiative, destroys his power of imagination, limits his individuality, takes away his self-reliance, and does him damage in a hundred other ways. Parents often do their children irreparable injury by criticising them. The mother of one of my boyhood chums used to punish him with a switch almost daily, always completing the job with the statement, "You'll land in the penitentiary before you are twenty." He was sent to a Reformatory at the age of seventeen.

Criticism is the one form of service, of which everyone has too much. Everyone has a stock of it which is handed out, gratis, whether called for or not. One's nearest relatives often are the worst offenders. It should be recognized as a crime (in reality it is a crime of the worst nature), for any

[p. 343]

parent to build inferiority complexes in the mind of a child, through unnecessary criticism. Employers who understand human nature, get the best there is in men, not by criticism, but by constructive suggestion. Parents may accomplish the same results with their children. Criticism will plant FEAR in the human heart, or resentment, but it will not build love or affection.

SYMPTOMS OF THE FEAR OF CRITICISM

This fear is almost as universal as the fear of poverty, and its effects are just as fatal to personal achievement, mainly because this fear destroys initiative, and discourages the use of imagination. The major symptoms of the fear are:

        SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS.

       Generally   expressed through nervousness, timidity in conversation and in meeting   strangers, awkward movement of the hands and limbs, shifting of the eyes.

     
      LACK OF POISE.

       Expressed   through lack of voice control, nervousness in the presence of others, poor posture   of body, poor memory.

     
      PERSONALITY.

       Lacking in   firmness of decision, personal charm, and ability to express opinions   definitely. The habit of side-stepping issues instead of meeting them   squarely. Agreeing with others without careful examination of their opinions.

     
      INFERIORITY   COMPLEX.

       The habit of   expressing self-approval by word of mouth and by actions, as a means of   covering up a feeling

     
       

       [p. 344]

     
       

       of inferiority.   Using "big words" to impress others, (often without knowing the   real meaning of the words). Imitating others in dress, speech and manners.   Boasting of imaginary achievements. This sometimes gives a surface appearance   of a feeling of superiority.

     
      EXTRAVAGANCE.

       The habit of   trying to "keep up with the Joneses," spending beyond one's income.

     
      LACK OF   INITIATIVE.

       Failure to   embrace opportunities for self-advancement, fear to express opinions, lack of   confidence in one's own ideas, giving evasive answers to questions asked by   superiors, hesitancy of manner and speech, deceit in both words and deeds.

     
      LACK OF   AMBITION.

       Mental and   physical laziness, lack of self-assertion, slowness in reaching decisions,   easily influenced by others, the habit of criticising others behind their   backs and flattering them to their faces, the habit of accepting defeat   without protest, quitting an undertaking when opposed by others, suspicious   of other people without cause, lacking in tactfulness of manner and speech,   unwillingness to accept the blame for mistakes.

     
 THE FEAR OF ILL HEALTH

This fear may be traced to both physical and social heredity. It is closely associated, as to its origin, with the causes of fear of Old Age and the fear of Death, because it leads one closely to the border of "terrible worlds" of which man knows not,

[p. 345]

but concerning which he has been taught some discomforting stories. The opinion is somewhat general, also, that certain unethical people engaged in the business of "selling health" have had not a little to do with keeping alive the fear of ill health.

In the main, man fears ill health because of the terrible pictures which have been planted in his mind of what may happen if death should overtake him. He also fears it because of the economic toll which it may claim.

A reputable physician estimated that 75% of all people who visit physicians for professional service are suffering with hypochondria (imaginary illness). It has been shown most convincingly that the fear of disease, even where there is not the slightest cause for fear, often produces the physical symptoms of the disease feared.

Powerful and mighty is the human mind! It builds or it destroys.

Playing upon this common weakness of fear of ill health, dispensers of patent medicines have reaped fortunes. This form of imposition upon credulous humanity became so prevalent some twenty years ago that Colliers' Weekly Magazine conducted a bitter campaign against some of the worst offenders in the patent medicine business.

During the "flu" epidemic which broke out during the world war, the mayor of New York City took drastic steps to check the damage which people were doing themselves through their inherent fear of ill health. He called in the newspaper men and said to them, "Gentlemen, I feel it necessary to ask you not to publish any scare headlines concerning

[p. 346]

the 'flu' epidemic. Unless you cooperate with me, we will have a situation which we cannot control." The newspapers quit publishing stories about the "flu," and within one month the epidemic had been successfully checked.

Through a series of experiments conducted some years ago, it was proved that people may be made ill by suggestion. We conducted this experiment by causing three acquaintances to visit the "victims," each of whom asked the question, "What ails you? You look terribly ill." The first questioner usually provoked a grin, and a nonchalant "Oh, nothing, I'm alright," from the victim. The second questioner usually was answered with the statement, "I don't know exactly, but I do feel badly." The third questioner was usually met with the frank admission that the victim was actually feeling ill.

Try this on an acquaintance if you doubt that it will make him uncomfortable, but do not carry the experiment too far. There is a certain religious sect whose members take vengeance upon their enemies by the "hexing" method. They call it "placing a spell" on the victim.

There is overwhelming evidence that disease sometimes begins in the form of negative thought impulse. Such an impulse may be passed from one mind to another, by suggestion, or created by an individual in his own mind.

A man who was blessed with more wisdom than this incident might indicate, once said "When anyone asks me how I feel, I always want to answer by knocking him down."

Doctors send patients into new climates for their

[p. 347]

health, because a change of "mental attitude" is necessary. The seed of fear of ill health lives in every human mind. Worry, fear, discouragement, disappointment in love and business affairs, cause this seed to germinate and grow. The recent business depression kept the doctors on the run, because every form of negative thinking may cause ill health.

Disappointments in business and in love stand at the head of the list of causes of fear of ill health. A young man suffered a disappointment in love which sent him to a hospital. For months he hovered between life and death. A specialist in suggestive therapeutics was called in. The specialist changed nurses, placing him in charge of a very charming young woman who began (by pre-arrangement with the doctor) to make love to him the first day of her arrival on the job. Within three weeks the patient was discharged from the hospital, still suffering, but with an entirely different malady. HE WAS IN LOVE AGAIN. The remedy was a hoax, but the patient and the nurse were later married. Both are in good health at the time of this writing.

SYMPTOMS OF THE FEAR OF ILL HEALTH

The symptoms of this almost universal fear are:

        AUTO-SUGGESTION.

       The habit of   negative use of self-suggestion by looking for, and expecting to find the   symptoms of all kinds of disease. "Enjoying" imaginary illness and   speaking of it as being real. The habit of trying all "fads" and   "isms" recommended by others as having therapeutic value. Talking   to others of operations,

     
       

       [p. 348]

     
       

       accidents and other   forms of illness. Experimenting with diets, physical exercises, reducing   systems, without professional guidance. Trying home remedies, patent   medicines and "quack" remedies.

     
      HYPOCHONDRIA.

       The habit of   talking of illness, concentrating the mind upon disease, and expecting its   appearance until a nervous break occurs. Nothing that comes in bottles can   cure this condition. It is brought on by negative thinking and nothing but   positive thought can affect a cure. Hypochondria, (a medical term for imaginary   disease) is said to do as much damage on occasion, as the disease one fears   might do. Most so-called cases of "nerves" come from imaginary   illness.

     
      EXERCISE.

       Fear of ill   health often interferes with proper physical exercise, and results in over-weight,   by causing one to avoid outdoor life.

     
      SUSCEPTIBILITY.

       Fear of ill   health breaks down Nature's body resistance, and creates a favorable   condition for any form of disease one may contact.

     
       

       The fear of ill   health often is related to the fear of Poverty, especially in the case of the   hypochondriac, who constantly worries about the possibility of having to pay   doctor's bills, hospital bills, etc. This type of person spends much time   preparing for sickness, talking about death, saving money for cemetery lots,   and burial expenses, etc.

     
       

       [p. 349]

     
      SELF-CODDLING.

       The habit of   making a bid for sympathy, using imaginary illness as the lure. (People often   resort to this trick to avoid work). The habit of feigning illness to cover   plain laziness, or to serve as an alibi for lack of ambition.

     
      INTEMPERANCE.

       The habit of   using alcohol or narcotics to destroy pains such as headaches, neuralgia,   etc., instead of eliminating the cause.

     
       

       The habit of reading   about illness and worrying over the possibility of being stricken by it. The   habit of reading patent medicine advertisements.

     
 THE FEAR OF LOSS OF LOVE

The original source of this inherent fear needs but little description, because it obviously grew out of man's polygamous habit of stealing his fellowman's mate, and his habit of taking liberties with her whenever he could.

Jealousy, and other similar forms of dementia praecox grow out of man's inherited fear of the loss of love of someone. This fear is the most painful of all the six basic fears. It probably plays more havoc with the body and mind than any of the other basic fears, as it often leads to permanent insanity.

The fear of the loss of love probably dates back to the stone age, when men stole women by brute force. They continue to steal females, but their technique has changed. Instead of force, they now use persuasion, the promise of pretty clothes, motor

[p. 350]

ears, and other "bait" much more effective than physical force. Man's habits are the same as they were at the dawn of civilization, but he expresses them differently.

Careful analysis has shown that women are more susceptible to this fear than men. This fact is easily explained. Women have learned, from experience, that men are polygamous by nature, that they are not to be trusted in the hands of rivals.

SYMPTOMS OF THE FEAR OF LOSS OF LOVE

The distinguishing symptoms of this fear are:--

        JEALOUSY.

       The habit of   being suspicious of friends and loved ones without any reasonable evidence of   sufficient grounds. (Jealousy is a form of dementia praecox which sometimes   becomes violent without the slightest cause). The habit of accusing wife or   husband of infidelity without grounds. General suspicion of everyone,   absolute faith in no one.

     
      FAULT FINDING.

       The habit of   finding fault with friends, relatives, business associates and loved ones   upon the slightest provocation, or without any cause whatsoever.

     
      GAMBLING.

       The habit of   gambling, stealing, cheating, and otherwise taking hazardous chances to   provide money for loved ones, with the belief that love can be bought. The   habit of spending beyond one's means, or incurring debts, to provide gifts for   loved ones, with the object of making a favorable showing. Insomnia,   nervousness, lack of persistence, weakness

     
       

       [p. 351]

     
       

       of will, lack   of self-control, lack of self-reliance, bad temper.

     
 THE FEAR OF OLD AGE

In the main, this fear grows out of two sources. First, the thought that old age may bring with it POVERTY. Secondly, and by far the most common source of origin, from false and cruel teachings of the past which have been too well mixed with "fire and brimstone," and other bogies cunningly designed to enslave man through fear.

In the basic fear of old age, man has two very sound reasons for his apprehension-one growing out of his distrust of his fellowman, who may seize whatever worldly goods he may possess, and the other arising from the terrible pictures of the world beyond, which were planted in his mind, through social heredity before he came into full possession of his mind.

The possibility of ill health, which is more common as people grow older, is also a contributing cause of this common fear of old age. Eroticism also enters into the cause of the fear of old age, as no man cherishes the thought of diminishing sex attraction.

The most common cause of fear of old age is associated with the possibility of poverty. "Poorhouse" is not a pretty word. It throws a chill into the mind of every person who faces the possibility of having to spend his declining years on a poor farm.

Another contributing cause of the fear of old age, is the possibility of loss of freedom and independence,

[p. 352]

as old age may bring with it the loss of both physical and economic freedom.

SYMPTOMS OF THE FEAR OF OLD AGE

The commonest symptoms of this fear are:

              

       The tendency to   slow down and develop an inferiority complex at the age of mental maturity,   around the age of forty, falsely believing one's self to be   "slipping" because of age. (The truth is that man's most useful   years, mentally and spiritually, are those between forty and sixty) .

     
       

       The habit of   speaking apologetically of one's self as "being old" merely because   one has reached the age of forty, or fifty, instead of reversing the rule and   expressing gratitude for having reached the age of wisdom and understanding.

     
       

        

     
       

       The habit of   killing off initiative, imagination, and self-reliance by falsely believing   one's self too old to exercise these qualities. The habit of the man or woman   of forty dressing with the aim of trying to appear much younger, and   affecting mannerisms of youth; thereby inspiring ridicule by both friends and   strangers.

     
 THE FEAR OF DEATH

To some this is the cruelest of all the basic fears. The reason is obvious. The terrible pangs of fear associated with the thought of death, in the majority

[p. 353]

of cases, may be charged directly to religious fanaticism. So-called "heathen" are less afraid of death than the more "civilized." For hundreds of millions of years man has been asking the still unanswered questions, "whence" and "whither." Where did I come from, and where am I going?

During the darker ages of the past, the more cunning and crafty were not slow to offer the answer to these questions, FOR A PRICE. Witness, now, the major source of origin of the FEAR OF DEATH.

"Come into my tent, embrace my faith, accept my dogmas, and I will give you a ticket that will admit you straightaway into heaven when you die," cries a leader of sectarianism. "Remain out of my tent," says the same leader, "and may the devil take you and burn you throughout eternity."

ETERNITY is a long time. FIRE is a terrible thing. The thought of eternal punishment, with fire, not only causes man to fear death, it often causes him to lose his reason. It destroys interest in life and makes happiness impossible.

During my research, I reviewed a book entitled "A Catalogue of the Gods," in which were listed the 30,000 gods which man has worshiped. Think of it! Thirty thousand of them, represented by everything from a crawfish to a man. It is little wonder that men have become frightened at the approach of death.

While the religious leader may not be able to provide safe conduct into heaven, nor, by lack of such provision, allow the unfortunate to descend into hell, the possibility of the latter seems so terrible

[p. 354]

that the very thought of it lays hold of the imagination in such a realistic way that it paralyzes reason, and sets up the fear of death.

In truth, NO MAN KNOWS, and no man has ever known, what heaven or hell is like, nor does any man know if either place actually exists. This very lack of positive knowledge opens the door of the human mind to the charlatan so he may enter and control that mind with his stock of legerdemain and various brands of pious fraud and trickery.

The fear of DEATH is not as common now as it was during the age when there were no great colleges and universities. Men of science have turned the spotlight of truth upon the world, and this truth is rapidly freeing men and women from this terrible fear of DEATH. The young men and young women who attend the colleges and universities are not easily impressed by "fire" and "brimstone." Through the aid of biology, astronomy, geology, and other related sciences, the fears of the dark ages which gripped the minds of men and destroyed their reason have been dispelled.

Insane asylums are filled with men and women who have gone mad, because of the FEAR OF DEATH.

This fear is useless. Death will come, no matter what anyone may think about it. Accept it as a necessity, and pass the thought out of your mind. It must be a necessity, or it would not come to all. Perhaps it is not as bad as it has been pictured.

The entire world is made up of only two things, ENERGY and MATTER. In elementary physics we learn that neither matter nor energy (the only

[p. 355]

two realities known to man) can be created nor destroyed. Both matter and energy can be transformed, but neither can be destroyed.

Life is energy, if it is anything. If neither energy nor matter can be destroyed, of course life cannot be destroyed. Life, like other forms of energy, may be passed through various processes of transition, or change, but it cannot be destroyed. Death is mere transition.

If death is not mere change, or transition, then nothing comes after death except a long, eternal, peaceful sleep, and sleep is nothing to be feared. Thus you may wipe out, forever, the fear of Death.

SYMPTOMS OF THE FEAR OF DEATH

The general symptoms of this fear are:

              

       The habit of   THINKING about dying instead of making the most of LIFE, due, generally, to   lack of purpose, or lack of a suitable occupation. This fear is more   prevalent among the aged, but sometimes the more youthful are victims of it.   The greatest of all remedies for the fear of death is a BURNING DESIRE FOR   ACHIEVEMENT, backed by useful service to others. A busy person seldom has   time to think about dying. He finds life too thrilling to worry about death.   Sometimes the fear of death is closely associated with the Fear of Poverty,   where one's death would leave loved ones poverty-stricken. In other cases,   the fear of death is caused by illness and the consequent breaking down of   physical body resistance. The commonest causes of the fear

     
       

       [p. 356]

     
       

       of death are:   ill-health, poverty, lack of appropriate occupation, disappointment over   love, insanity, religious fanaticism.

     
 OLD MAN WORRY

Worry is a state of mind based upon fear. It works slowly, but persistently. It is  and subtle. Step by step it "digs itself in" until it paralyzes one's reasoning faculty, destroys self-confidence and initiative. Worry is a form of sustained fear caused by indecision therefore it is a state of mind which can be controlled.

An unsettled mind is helpless. Indecision makes an unsettled mind. Most individuals lack the willpower to reach decisions promptly, and to stand by them after they have been made, even during normal business conditions. During periods of economic unrest (such as the world recently experienced), the individual is handicapped, not alone by his inherent nature to be slow at reaching decisions, but he is influenced by the indecision of others around him who have created a state of "mass indecision."

During the depression the whole atmosphere, all over the world, was filled with "Fearenza" and "Worryitis," the two mental disease germs which began to spread themselves after the Wall Street frenzy in 1929. There is only one known antidote for these germs; it is the habit of prompt and firm DECISION. Moreover, it is an antidote which every individual must apply for himself.

We do not worry over conditions, once we have reached a decision to follow a definite line of action.

[p. 357]

[paragraph continues] I once interviewed a man who was to be electrocuted two hours later. The condemned man was the calmest of some eight men who were in the death-cell with him. His calmness prompted me to ask him how it felt to know that he was going into eternity in a short while. With a smile of confidence on his face, he said, "It feels fine. Just think, brother, my troubles will soon be over. I have had nothing but trouble all my life. It has been a hardship to get food and clothing. Soon I will not need these things. I have felt fine ever since I learned FOR CERTAIN that I must die. I made up my mind then, to accept my fate in good spirit."

As he spoke he devoured a dinner of proportions sufficient for three men, eating every mouthful of the food brought to him, and apparently enjoying it as much as if no disaster awaited him. DECISION gave this man resignation to his fate! Decision can also prevent one's acceptance of undesired circumstances.

The six basic fears become translated into a state of worry, through indecision. Relieve yourself, forever of the fear of death, by reaching a decision to accept death as an inescapable event. Whip the fear of poverty by reaching a decision to get along with whatever wealth you can accumulate WITHOUT WORRY. Put your foot upon the neck of the fear of criticism by reaching a decision NOT TO WORRY about what other people think, do, or say. Eliminate the fear of old age by reaching a decision to accept it, not as a handicap, but as a great blessing which carries with it wisdom, self-control, and understanding not known to youth.

[p. 358]

[paragraph continues] Acquit yourself of the fear of ill health by the decision to forget symptoms. Master the fear of loss of love by reaching a decision to get along without love, if that is necessary.

Kill the habit of worry, in all its forms, by reaching a general, blanket decision that nothing which life has to offer is worth the price of worry. With this decision will come poise, peace of mind, and calmness of thought which will bring happiness.

A man whose mind is filled with fear not only destroys his own chances of intelligent action, but, he transmits these destructive vibrations to the minds of all who come into contact with him, and destroys, also their chances.

Even a dog or a horse knows when its master lacks courage; moreover, a dog or a horse will pick up the vibrations of fear thrown off by its master, and behave accordingly. Lower down the line of intelligence in the animal kingdom, one finds this same capacity to pick up the vibrations of fear. A honey-bee immediately senses fear in the mind of a person--for reasons unknown, a bee will sting the person whose mind is releasing vibrations of fear, much more readily than it will molest the person whose mind registers no fear.

The vibrations of fear pass from one mind to another just as quickly and as surely as the sound of the human voice passes from the broadcasting station to the receiving set of a radio--and BY THE SELF-SAME MEDIUM.

Mental telepathy is a reality. Thoughts pass from one mind to another, voluntarily, whether or not this fact is recognized by either the person re-

[p. 359]

leasing the thoughts, or the persons who pick up those thoughts.

The person who gives expression, by word of mouth, to negative or destructive thoughts is practically certain to experience the results of those words in the form of a destructive "kick-back." The release of destructive thought impulses, alone, without the aid of words, produces also a "kickback" in more ways than one. First of all, and perhaps most important to be remembered, the person who releases thoughts of a destructive nature, must suffer damage through the breaking down of the faculty of creative imagination. Secondly, the presence in the mind of any destructive emotion develops a negative personality which repels people, and often converts them into antagonists. The third source of damage to the person who entertains or releases negative thoughts, lies in this significant fact--these thought-impulses are not only damaging to others, but they IMBED THEMSELVES IN THE SUBCONSCIOUS MIND OF THE PERSON RELEASING THEM, and there become a part of his character.

One is never through with a thought, merely by releasing it. When a thought is released, it spreads in every direction, through the medium of the ether, but it also plants itself permanently in the subconscious mind of the person releasing it.

Your business in life is, presumably to achieve success. To be successful, you must find peace of mind, acquire the material needs of life, and above all, attain HAPPINESS. All of these evidences of success begin in the form of thought impulses.

[p. 360]

You may control your own mind, you have the power to feed it whatever thought impulses you choose. With this privilege goes also the responsibility of using it constructively. You are the master of your own earthly destiny just as surely as you have the power to control your own thoughts. You may influence, direct, and eventually control your own environment, making your life what you want it to be--or, you may neglect to exercise the privilege which is yours, to make your life to order, thus casting yourself upon the broad sea of "Circumstance" where you will be tossed hither and yon, like a chip on the waves of the ocean.

THE DEVIL'S WORKSHOP

THE SEVENTH BASIC EVIL

In addition to the Six Basic Fears, there is another evil by which people suffer. It constitutes a rich soil in which the seeds of failure grow abundantly. It is so subtle that its presence often is not detected. This affliction cannot properly be classed as a fear. IT IS MORE DEEPLY SEATED AND MORE OFTEN FATAL THAN ALL OF THE SIX FEARS. For want of a better name, let us call this evil SUSCEPTIBILITY TO NEGATIVE INFLUENCES.

Men who accumulate great riches always protect themselves against this evil! The poverty stricken never do! Those who succeed in any calling must prepare their minds to resist the evil. If you are reading this philosophy for the purpose of accumulating riches, you should examine yourself very

[p. 361]

carefully, to determine whether you are susceptible to negative influences. If you neglect this self-analysis, you will forfeit your right to attain the object of your desires.

Make the analysis searching. After you read the questions prepared for this self-analysis, hold yourself to a strict accounting in your answers. Go at the task as carefully as you would search for any other enemy you knew to be awaiting you in ambush and deal with your own faults as you would with a more tangible enemy.

You can easily protect yourself against highway robbers, because the law provides organized cooperation for your benefit, but the "seventh basic evil" is more difficult to master, because it strikes when you are not aware of its presence, when you are asleep, and while you are awake. Moreover, its weapon is intangible, because it consists of merely--a STATE OF MIND. This evil is also dangerous because it strikes in as many different forms as there are human experiences. Sometimes it enters the mind through the well-meant words of one's own relatives. At other times, it bores from within, through one's own mental attitude. Always it is as deadly as poison, even though it may not kill as quickly.

HOW TO PROTECT YOURSELF AGAINST NEGATIVE INFLUENCES

To protect yourself against negative influences, whether of your own making, or the result of the activities of negative people around you, recognize that you have a WILL-POWER, and put it into

[p. 362]

constant use, until it builds a wall of immunity against negative influences in your own mind.

Recognize the fact that you, and every other human being, are, by nature, lazy, indifferent, and susceptible to all suggestions which harmonize with your weaknesses.

Recognize that you are, by nature, susceptible to all the six basic fears, and set up. habits for the purpose of counteracting all these fears.

Recognize that negative influences often work on you through your subconscious mind, therefore they are difficult to detect, and keep your mind closed against all people who depress or discourage you in any way.

Clean out your medicine chest, throw away all pill bottles, and stop pandering to colds, aches, pains and imaginary illness.

Deliberately seek the company of people who influence you to THINK AND ACT FOR YOURSELF.

Do not EXPECT troubles as they have a tendency not to disappoint.

Without doubt, the most common weakness of all human beings is the habit of leaving their minds open to the negative influence of other people. This weakness is all the more damaging, because most people do not recognize that they are cursed by it, and many who acknowledge it, neglect or refuse to correct the evil until it becomes an uncontrollable part of their daily habits.

To aid those who wish to see themselves as they really are, the following list of questions has been prepared. Read the questions and state your answers

[p. 363]

aloud, so you can hear your own voice. This will make it easier for you to be truthful with yourself.

SELF-ANALYSIS TEST QUESTIONS

Do you complain often of "feeling bad," and if so, what is the cause?

Do you find fault with other people at the slightest provocation?

Do you frequently make mistakes in your work, and if so, why?

Are you sarcastic and offensive in your conversation?

Do you deliberately avoid the association of anyone, and if so, why?

Do you suffer frequently with indigestion? If so, what is the cause?

Does life seem futile and the future hopeless to you? If so, why?

Do you like your occupation? If not, why? Do you often feel self-pity, and if so why? Are you envious of those who excel you?

To which do you devote most time, thinking of SUCCESS, or of FAILURE?

Are you gaining or losing self-confidence as you grow older?

Do you learn something of value from all mistakes? Are you permitting some relative or acquaintance to worry you? If so, why?

Are you sometimes "in the clouds" and at other times in the depths of despondency?

Who has the most inspiring influence upon you? What is the cause?

[p. 364]

Do you tolerate negative or discouraging influences which you can avoid?

Are you careless of your personal appearance? If so, when and why?

Have you learned how to "drown your troubles" by being too busy to be annoyed by them?

Would you call yourself a "spineless weakling" if you permitted others to do your thinking for you?

Do you neglect internal bathing until auto-intoxication makes you ill-tempered and irritable?

How many preventable disturbances annoy you, and why do you tolerate them?

Do you resort to liquor, narcotics, or cigarettes to "quiet your nerves"? If so, why do you not try will-power instead?

Does anyone "nag" you, and if so, for what reason? Do you have a DEFINITE MAJOR PURPOSE, and if so, what is it, and what plan have you for achieving it?

Do you suffer from any of the Six Basic Fears? If so, which ones?

Have you a method by which you can shield yourself against the negative influence of others? Do you make deliberate use of auto-suggestion to make your mind positive?

Which do you value most, your material possessions, or your privilege of controlling your own thoughts?

Are you easily influenced by others, against your own judgment?

Has today added anything of value to your stock of knowledge or state of mind?

[p. 365]

Do you face squarely the circumstances which make you unhappy, or sidestep the responsibility?

Do you analyze all mistakes and failures and try to profit by them or, do you take the attitude that this is not your duty?

Can you name three of your most damaging weaknesses? What are you doing to correct them? Do you encourage other people to bring their worries to you for sympathy?

Do you choose, from your daily experiences, lessons or influences which aid in your personal advancement?

Does your presence have a negative influence on other people as a rule?

What habits of other people annoy you most?

Do you form your own opinions or permit yourself to be influenced by other people?

Have you learned how to create a mental state of mind with which you can shield yourself against all discouraging influences?

Does your occupation inspire you with faith and hope?

Are you conscious of possessing spiritual forces of sufficient power to enable you to keep your mind free from all forms of FEAR?

Does your religion help you to keep your own mind positive?

Do you feel it your duty to share other people's worries? If so, why?

If you believe that "birds of a feather flock together" what have you learned about yourself by studying the friends whom you attract?

What connection, if any, do you see between the

[p. 366]

people with whom you associate most closely, and any unhappiness you may experience?

Could it be possible that some person whom you consider to be a friend is, in reality, your worst enemy, because of his negative influence on your mind?

By what rules do you judge who is helpful and who is damaging to you?

Are your intimate associates mentally superior or inferior to you?

How much time out of every 24 hours do you devote to:

          a. your   occupation
   b. sleep
   c. play and relaxation
   d. acquiring useful knowledge
   e. plain waste

     
   Who among your acquaintances,

          a. encourages   you most
   b. cautions you most
   c. discourages you most
   d. helps you most in other ways

     
   What is your greatest worry? Why do you tolerate it?

When others offer you free, unsolicited advice, do you accept it without question, or analyze their motive?

What, above all else, do you most DESIRE? Do you intend to acquire it? Are you willing to

[p. 367]

subordinate all other desires for this one? How much time daily do you devote to acquiring it?

Do you change your mind often? If so, why? Do you usually finish everything you begin?

Are you easily impressed by other people's business or professional titles, college degrees, or wealth? Are you easily influenced by what other people think or say of you?

Do you cater to people because of their social or financial status?

Whom do you believe to be the greatest person living? In what respect is this person superior to yourself?

How much time have you devoted to studying and answering these questions? (At least one day is necessary for the analysis and the answering of the entire list.)

 

If you have answered all these questions truthfully, you know more about yourself than the majority of people. Study the questions carefully, come back to them once each week for several months, and be astounded at the amount of additional knowledge of great value to yourself, you will have gained by the simple method of answering the questions truthfully. If you are not certain concerning the answers to some of the questions, seek the counsel of those who know you well, especially those who have no motive in flattering you, and see yourself through their eyes. The experience will be astonishing.

You have ABSOLUTE CONTROL over but one

[p. 368]

thing, and that is your thoughts. This is the most significant and inspiring of all facts known to man! It reflects man's Divine nature. This Divine prerogative is the sole means by which you may control your own destiny. If you fail to control your own mind, you may be sure you will control nothing else.

If you must be careless with your possessions, let it be in connection with material things. Your mind is your spiritual estate! Protect and use it with the care to which Divine Royalty is entitled. You were given a WILL-POWER for this purpose.

Unfortunately, there is no legal protection against those who, either by design or ignorance, poison the minds of others by negative suggestion. This form of destruction should be punishable by heavy legal penalties, because it may and often does destroy one's chances of acquiring material things which are protected by law.

Men with negative minds tried to convince Thomas A. Edison that he could not build a machine that would record and reproduce the human voice, "because" they said, "no one else had ever produced such a machine." Edison did not believe them. He knew that the mind could produce ANYTHING THE MIND COULD CONCEIVE AND BELIEVE, and that knowledge was the thing that lifted the great Edison above the common herd.

Men with negative minds told F. W. Woolworth, he would go "broke" trying to run a store on five and ten cent sales. He did not believe them. He knew that he could do anything, within reason, if he backed his plans with faith. Exercising his right to keep other men's negative suggestions out of his

[p. 369]

mind, he piled up a fortune of more than a hundred million dollars.

Men with negative minds told George Washington he could not hope to win against the vastly superior forces of the British, but he exercised his Divine right to BELIEVE, therefore this book was published under the protection of the Stars and Stripes, while the name of Lord Cornwallis has been all but forgotten.

Doubting Thomases scoffed scornfully when Henry Ford tried out his first crudely built automobile on the streets of Detroit. Some said the thing never would become practical. Others said no one would pay money for such a contraption. FORD SAID, "I'LL BELT THE EARTH WITH DEPENDABLE MOTOR CARS," AND HE DID! His decision to trust his own judgment has already piled up a fortune far greater than the next five generations of his descendents can squander. For the benefit of those seeking vast riches, let it be remembered that practically the sole difference between Henry Ford and a majority of the more than one hundred thousand men who work for him, is this--FORD HAS A MIND AND CONTROLS IT, THE OTHERS HAVE MINDS WHICH THEY DO NOT TRY TO CONTROL.

Henry Ford has been repeatedly mentioned, because he is an astounding example of what a man with a mind of his own, and a will to control it, can accomplish. His record knocks the foundation from under that time-worn alibi, "I never had a chance." Ford never had a chance, either, but he CREATED AN OPPORTUNITY AND BACKED IT WITH

[p. 370]

[paragraph continues] PERSISTENCE UNTIL IT MADE HIM RICHER THAN CROESUS.

Mind control is the result of self-discipline and habit. You either control your mind or it controls you. There is no half-way compromise. The most practical of all methods for controlling the mind is the habit of keeping it busy with a definite purpose, backed by a definite plan. Study the record of any man who achieves noteworthy success, and you will observe that he has control over his own mind, moreover, that he exercises that control and directs it toward the attainment of definite objectives. Without this control, success is not possible.

"FIFTY-SEVEN" FAMOUS ALIBIS

By Old Man IF

People who do not succeed have one distinguishing trait in common. They know all the reasons for failure, and have what they believe to be air-tight alibis to explain away their own lack of achievement.

Some of these alibis are clever, and a few of them are justifiable by the facts. But alibis cannot be used for money. The world wants to know only one thing--HAVE YOU ACHIEVED SUCCESS?

A character analyst compiled a list of the most commonly used alibis. As you read the list, examine yourself carefully, and determine how many of these alibis, if any, are your own property. Remember, too, the philosophy presented in this book makes every one of these alibis obsolete.

IF I didn't have a wife and family . . .

IF I had enough "pull" . . .

[p. 371]

IF I had money . . .

IF I had a good education . . .

IF I could get a job . . .

IF I had good health . . .

IF I only had time . . .

IF times were better . . .

IF other people understood me . . .

IF conditions around me were only different . . .

IF I could live my life over again . . .

IF I did not fear what "THEY" would say . . .

IF I had been given a chance . . .

IF I now had a chance . . .

IF other people didn't "have it in for me" . . .

IF nothing happens to stop me . . .

IF I were only younger . . .

IF I could only do what I want . . .

IF I had been born rich . . .

IF I could meet "the right people" . . .

IF I had the talent that some people have . . .

IF I dared assert myself . . .

IF I only had embraced past opportunities . . .

IF people didn't get on my nerves . . .

IF I didn't have to keep house and look after the children . . .

IF I could save some money . . .

IF the boss only appreciated me . . .

IF I only had somebody to help me . . .

IF my family understood me . . .

IF I lived in a big city . . .

IF I could just get started . . .

IF I were only free . . .

IF I had the personality of some people . . .

IF I were not so fat . . .

[p. 372]

IF my talents were known .. *

IF I could just get a "break" . . .

IF I could only get out of debt . . .

IF I hadn't failed . . .

IF I only knew how . . .

IF everybody didn't oppose me . . .

IF I didn't have so many worries . . .

IF I could marry the right person . . .

IF people weren't so dumb . . .

IF my family were not so extravagant . . .

IF I were sure of myself . . .

IF luck were not against me . . .

IF I had not been born under the wrong star . . .

IF it were not true that "what is to be will be" . . .

IF I did not have to work so hard . . .

IF I hadn't lost my money . . .

IF I lived in a different neighborhood . . .

IF I didn't have a "past" . . .

IF I only had a business of my own . . .

IF other people would only listen to me . . .

        IF * * * and   this is the greatest of them all * * *

     
        

       I had the   courage to see myself as I really am, I would find out what is wrong with me, and correct it, then I might have   a chance to profit by my mistakes and learn something from the experience of   others, for I know that there is something WRONG with me, or I would now be   where I WOULD HAVE BEEN IF I had   spent more time analyzing my weaknesses, and less time building alibis to   cover them.

     
  

Building alibis with which to explain away failure is a national pastime. The habit is as old as the

[p. 373]

human race, and is fatal to success! Why do people cling to their pet alibis? The answer is obvious. They defend their alibis because THEY CREATE them! A man's alibi is the child of his own imagination. It is human nature to defend one's own brain-child.

Building alibis is a deeply rooted habit. Habits are difficult to break, especially when they provide justification for something we do. Plato had this truth in mind when he said, "The first and best victory is to conquer self. To be conquered by self is, of all things, the most shameful and vile."

Another philosopher had the same thought in mind when he said, "It was a great surprise to me when I discovered that most of the ugliness I saw in others, was but a reflection of my own nature."

"It has always been a mystery to me," said Elbert Hubbard, "why people spend so much time deliberately fooling themselves by creating alibis to cover their weaknesses. If used differently, this same time would be sufficient to cure the weakness, then no alibis would be needed."

In parting, I would remind you that "Life is a checkerboard, and the player opposite you is TIME. If you hesitate before moving, or neglect to move promptly, your men will be wiped off the board by TIME. You are playing against a partner who will not tolerate INDECISION!"

Previously you may have had a logical excuse for not having forced Life to come through with whatever you asked, but that alibi is now obsolete, because you are in possession of the Master Key that unlocks the door to Life's bountiful riches.

[p. 374]

The Master Key is intangible, but it is powerful! It is the privilege of creating, in your own mind, a BURNING DESIRE for a definite form of riches. There is no penalty for the use of the Key, but there is a price you must pay if you do not use it. The price is FAILURE. There is a reward of stupendous proportions if you put the Key to use. It is the satisfaction that comes to all who conquer self and force Life to pay whatever is asked.

The reward is worthy of your effort. Will you make the start and be convinced?

"If we are related," said the immortal Emerson, "we shall meet." In closing, may I borrow his thought, and say, "If we are related, we have, through these pages, met."

THE END

 

    
Think and Grow Rich, by Napoleon Hill [1938], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 375]

  

THIS STANDING ARMY

  

IS AT YOUR SERVICE

  

It Will Bring You Fame, Fortune, Peace of Mind or Whatever You Demand of Life!

In this picture you see the most powerful army on earth. Observe the emphasis on the word POWERFUL. This army is standing at attention, ready to do the bidding of any person who will command it. It is YOUR army if you will take charge of it.

These soldiers are labelled: DEFINITE CHIEF AIM; HABIT OF SAVING; SELF CONFIDENCE; IMAGINATION; INITIATIVE; LEADERSHIP; ENTHUSIASM; SELF CONTROL; DOING MORE THAN PAID FOR; PLEASING PERSONALITY; ACCURATE THOUGHT; CONCENTRATION; CO-OPERATION; FAILURE; TOLERANCE; GOLDEN RULE; THE MASTER MIND.

A long, searching study of the lives of 500 great American men and women--as well as actual endorsement

[p. 376]

from nationally known leaders--proves that these are the basic principles upon which all true and lasting success is built.

POWER comes from organized effort. You see in this picture--in these "soldiers"--the forces which enter into all organized effort. Master these sixteen forces or personal qualities and you may have whatever you want in life.

A FEW WORDS FROM THE PUBLISHERS

And it is because we are going to help you TO master these forces that the publishers of "THINK AND GROW RICH" want to have a little chat with you. For over fifty years "Ralston" has supplied hundreds of thousands--yes, probably millions of ambitious men and women with home study books that bring Health, Wealth, Power and Happiness.

We have many unusual, private, exciting Instruction Books Embracing all Human Powers. From time to time we will extend an invitation to you to read these courses. But for the time being, let us concentrate upon the inspiring message that Napoleon Hill, author of "THINK AND GROW RICH" has for you. So great a business man and master of success as John Wanamaker, merchant prince of New York and Philadelphia, said:--

"If I had a young son I would insist that he read every word of the "LAW OF SUCCESS" by Napoleon Hill, and the books by Dr. . . . . . . . These two men are, perhaps, the most inspirational writers in the world. I know your 17 fundamentals of success are sound because I have been applying them in my business for more than 30 years."

[p. 377]

NAPOLEON HILL HAS WRITTEN A POST GRADUATE COURSE FOR YOU

It is because we sincerely feel that every reader of this book should go on into this post graduate course, known as THE LAW OF SUCCESS, that we take the liberty here of giving a few brief side lights upon this brilliant work.

The LAW OF SUCCESS presents, for the first time in the history of the world, the true Philosophy upon which all lasting success is built. Ideas, when translated into intelligent plans of action, are the beginning of all successful achievement. So the Law of Success proceeds to show you how to create practical ideas for every human need.

It does it in easy-to-understand lessons.

Napoleon Hill spent the better part of twenty-five years in perfecting this Philosophy of Success. During the long years he has worked on it, some parts or the whole of it, have been reviewed and praised by many of the greatest Americans of our times.

Among them are included four Presidents of the United States, Theodore Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson, Warren G. Harding, Wm. H. Taft; Thomas Edison, Luther Burbank, Wm. J. Wrigley, Alexander Graham Bell, Judge E. H. Gary, Cyrus H. K. Curtis, Edward Bok, E. M. Statler--dozens of glowing names in Politics, Finance, Education, Invention.

ANDREW CARNEGIE STARTED IT

Over twenty-five years ago, Napoleon Hill, then a young special investigator for a nationally known

[p. 378]

business magazine, was sent to interview Andrew Carnegie. During that interview Carnegie slyly dropped a hint of a certain master power he used; a magic law of the human mind--a little known psychological principle--which was amazing in its power.

Carnegie suggested to Hill that upon that principle he could build the philosophy of all personal success--whether it be measured in terms of Money, Power, Position, Prestige, Influence, Accumulation of Wealth.

That part of the interview never went into Hill's magazine. But it did launch the young author upon over twenty years of research. And today we open to YOU the discovery and methods of using the revolutionary force which Carnegie quietly hinted at. The thrilling methods of using it are now taught in eight textbooks known as THE LAW OF SUCCESS.

In the trail of the LAW OF SUCCESS lessons come accomplishments, not mere entertainment and time-killing diversion. There come larger businesses, bigger bank accounts, fatter pay envelopes; small, struggling enterprises given new life and power to grow; low-pay employees shown how to gain advancement by leaps and bounds.

It is impossible in this small space to give any real idea of the inspiring, revealing lessons in the eight textbooks of LAW OF SUCCESS. But, you will realize that a wonderful treat is in store for you when you read what some American leaders have said, who saw parts of the philosophy while in process of creation. (also see two pages at front of book.)

[p. 379]

"Allow me to express my appreciation of the compliment you have paid me in sending the original manuscript of the Law of Success. I can see you have spent a great deal of time and thought in its preparation. Your philosophy is sound and you are to be congratulated for sticking to your work over so long a period of years. Your students will be amply rewarded for their labor."

(World's Greatest Inventor) THOS. A. EDISON

"Your work and mine are peculiarly akin. I am helping the laws of Nature to create more perfect specimens of vegetation while you are using those same laws through The Law of Success to build more perfect specimens of thinkers."

(World Famous Scientist) LUTHER BURBANK

"Certainly I will supply you with the information you request. This I consider to be not only a duty, but it is a pleasure as well. You are laboring in behalf of the people who have neither the time nor the inclination to ferret out the causes of failure and success."

(Former President of the U. S.) THEODORE ROOSEVELT

"Our entire business policy, in the management of our hotels, is based upon the 17 fundamentals of The Law of Success, of which I am a student."

(Founder of Great Hotel System) E. M. STATLER

"I feel greatly indebted for the privilege of reading your Law of Success philosophy. If I had had this fifty years ago, I suppose I could have accomplished

[p. 380]

all that I have done in less than half the time. I sincerely hope the world will discover and reward you."

(Steamship Magnate: The Dollar Lines) ROBERT DOLLAR

"Napoleon Hill has produced what I believe to be the first practical philosophy of achievement. Its major distinguishing feature is the simplicity in which it has been presented."

(Leland Stanford University) DAVID STARR JORDAN

"The best evidence of the soundness of the Law of Success, with which I am personally acquainted is the noteworthy achievement of Mr. Curtis, who has built one of the greatest publishing businesses in the world by applying the principles of this philosophy." 

(Former Editor: Ladies Home Journal) EDWARD BOK

"You may say for Mr. Rockefeller that he endorses Mr. Hill's 17 fundamental principles of success, and that he recommends them to those who are seeking the highway to achievement."

Secretary to JOHN D. ROCKEFELLER

EVIDENCE THAT MONEY COULD NOT BUY

The foregoing is evidence and praise seldom accorded any course of education. Money could not buy such letters of endorsement from men who are, or have been, leaders of our times.

Millions of books have been written to amuse, to entertain, to help you while away your idle hours.

[p. 381]

[paragraph continues] But here in the LAW OF SUCCESS are eight vibrating, power-radiating books that shape your destiny, enrich your future, and turn your hopes and dreams into solid success-realities,

Don't waste your own precious years blindly searching for the hidden road to the heights. Profit by the dearly bought experience of America's leaders. Over 500 great and prominent men of America were minutely analyzed--their methods, motives, strategy--to find out the secrets that put them on top.

No matter whether you are rich or poor--you have one asset as great as the richest man living--and that is TIME. But with each setting sun you become one day older, and have one day less in which to attain the success and wealth you desire. Thousands of progressive people throughout the North American continent have realized this mighty truth, and have sought the help so clearly and inspiringly taught in Napoleon Hill's "LAW OF SUCCESS."

You cannot afford to let day after day slip into eternity, without getting possession of this course. You will profit greatly from the lessons in THINK AND GROW RICH. You will take even more brilliant and gratifying rewards from the LAW OF SUCCESS. The cost is trifling; the benefits are tremendous.

    


===== BOOK: th1.txt =====


    
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

Thrice-Greatest Hermes 

Studies in Hellenistic Theosophyand Gnosis 

Being a Translation of the Extant Sermons and Fragments of the Trismegistic Literature, with Prolegomena, Commentaries, and Notes 

By

G. R. S. Mead 

Volume I.--Prolegomena

London and Benares

The Theosophical Publishing Society 

[1906]

Prepared for sacred-texts.com, January 2009. This text is in the public domain because it was published prior to 1922.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

Preface

THESE volumes, complete in themselves as a series ofstudies in a definite body of tradition, are intended toserve ultimately as a small contribution to the preparation of the way leading towards a solution of the vastproblems involved in the scientific study of the Originsof the Christian Faith. They might thus perhaps bedescribed as the preparation of materials to serve forthe historic, mythic, and mystic consideration of theOrigins of Christianity,--where the term "mythic" isused in its true sense of inner, typical, sacred and"logic," as opposed to the external processioning ofphysical events known as "historic," and where theterm "mystic" is used as that which pertains toinitiation and the mysteries. 

The serious consideration of the matter contained inthese pages will, I hope, enable the attentive reader tooutline in his mind, however vaguely, some smallportion of the environment of infant Christianity, andallow him to move a few steps round the cradle ofChristendom. 

Though the material that we have collected, has, asto its externals, been tested, as far as our hands arecapable of the work, by the methods of scholarship andcriticism, it has nevertheless at the same time beenallowed ungrudgingly to show itself the outward 

[p. vi]

expression of a truly vital endeavour of immenseinterest and value to all who are disposed to makefriends with it. For along this ray of the Trismegistictradition we may allow ourselves to be drawn backwards in time towards the holy of holies of theWisdom of Ancient Egypt. The sympathetic studyof this material may well prove an initiatory processtowards an understanding of that Archaic Gnosis. 

And, therefore, though these volumes are intended toshow those competent to judge that all has been setforth in decency according to approved methods ofmodern research, they are also designed for those whoare not qualified to give an opinion on such matters,but who are able to feel and think with the writers ofthese beautiful tractates. 

The following abbreviations have been used foreconomy of space: 

C. H. = Corpus Hermeticum. 

D. J. L. = Mead (G. R. S.), Did Jesus Live 100 B.C.? An Enquiryinto the Talmud Jesus Stories, the Toldoth Jeschu, andSome Curious Statements of Epiphanius: being a Contribution to the Study of Christian Origins (London, 1903). 

F. F. F. = Mead (G. R. S.), Fragments of a Faith Forgotten. SomeShort Sketches among the Gnostics, mainly of the FirstTwo Centuries: a Contribution to the Study of ChristianOrigins based on the most recently recovered Materials(London, 1900; 2nd ed. 1906). 

G. = Gaisford (T.), Joannis Stobaei Florilegium (Oxford, 1822), 4vols.; Io. Stob. Ec. Phys. et Ethic. Libri Duo (Oxford,1850), 2 vols. 

H. = Hense (O.), I. Stob. Anth. Lib. Tert. (Berlin, 1894), 1 vol.,incomplete. 

K. K. = "The Virgin of the World" (Kore Kosmoy). 

M. = Meineke (A.), Joh. Stob. Flor. (Leipzig, 1855, 1856), 3 vols.;Joh. Stob. Ec. Phys. et Ethic. Lib. Duo (Leipzig, 1860), 2 vols. 

P. = Parthey (G.), Hermetis Trismegisti Poemander ad Fidem Codicum Manu Scriptorum recognovit (Berlin, 1854). 

Pat. = Patrizzi (F.), Nova de Universis Philosophia (Venice, 1593). 

P. S. A. = "The Perfect Sermon, or Asclepius." 

[p. vii]

R. = Reitzenstein (R.), Poimandres: Studien zur griechisch-agyptischen und fruchristlichen Literatur (Leipzig, 1904).Ri. = Richter (M. C. E.), Philonis Judaei Opera Omnia, in Bibliotheca Sacra Patrum Ecclesiae Graecorum (Leipzig, 1828-1830), 8 vols. 

S. I. H. = "The Sermon of Isis to Horus."

W. = Wachsmuth (C.), Io. Stob. Anthologii Lib. Duo Priores . . . Ec. Phys. et Ethic. (Berlin, 1884), 2 vols. 

G. R. S. M. 

CHELSEA, 1906. 

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. viii]

[p. ix]

Contents

 PREFACE

 <page v>

 I. THE REMAINS OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE

 <page 1>-<page 16>

      Writer and Reader

 <page 1>

      The Extant Trismegistic Literature

 <page 3>

      The Original MS. of our Corpus

 <page 6>

      Texts and Translations

 <page 8>

 II. THE HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION

 <page 17>-<page 46>

      The Chief Points of Interrogation

 <page 17>

      The Opinions of the Humanists

 <page 18>

      The First Doubt

 <page 20>

      The Launching of the Theory of Plagiarism

 <page 21>

      The Only Argument Adduced

 <page 22>

      The Theory of Hilgers

 <page 25>

      The German Theory of Neoplatonic "Syncretismus" 

 <page 26>

      The French Theory of Egyptian Origin 

 <page 27>

      The Views of Menard 

 <page 27>

      English Encyclopaedism 

 <page 33>

      Chambers' Opinion 

 <page 34>

      German Encyclopaedism 

 <page 35>

      A Recent Article by Granger 

 <page 36>

      Reitzenstein and the Dawn of Right Views 

 <page 40>

      A Key to Egypt's Wisdom 

 <page 44>

      The Answers to our Questions 

 <page 44>

 III. THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM

 <page 47>-<page 81>

      Thoth-Tehuti

 <page 47>

      Thoth according to Pietschmann

 <page 48>

      The Three Grades of the Egyptian Mysteries

 <page 50>

      Thoth according to Reitzenstein

 <page 51>

      Thoth according to Budge

 <page 52>

      His Deific Titles 

 <page 53>

      His Symbols and Name

 <page 54>

      The Shrine of Thoth

 <page 56>

      Thoth and his Company of Eight

 <page 57>

      The "House of the Net"

 <page 58>

      Thoth the Logos

 <page 63>

      The Words of Thoth

 <page 63>

      Thoth and the Osirified

 <page 65>

      Thoth the Measurer

 <page 66>

      The Title "Thrice-greatest"

 <page 66>

      The Supremacy of Thoth

 <page 67>

      The Views of a Scholar-Mystic

 <page 68>

      The Spiritual Nature of the Inner Tradition of Egyptian Wisdom

 <page 69>

      The Holy Land of Egypt and its Initiates

 <page 70>

      Thoth the Initiator

 <page 71>

      Some of the Doctrines of Initiation

 <page 73>

      The Temples of Initiation

 <page 74>

      The Mystery of the Birth of Horus

 <page 75>

      "The Book of the Master"

 <page 77>

      The Steps of the Path

 <page 79>

      An Illuminative Study

 <page 80>

 IV. THE POPULAR THEURGIC HERMES-CULT IN THE GREEK MAGIC PAPYRI

 <page 82>-<page 98>

      The "Religion of Hermes"

 <page 82>

      i. An Invocation to Hermes as the Good Mind

 <page 84>

      ii. An Invocation to Lord Hermes

 <page 86>

      iii. An Invocation to Lord Hermes

 <page 87>

      iv. An Invocation to Thoth as Logos

 <page 90>

      v. An Invocation to Hermes as the Spiritual Light

 <page 90>

      vi. The Mystic Rite of the Flame

 <page 93>

      vii. A Prayer of Consecration

 <page 97>

 V. THE MAIN SOURCE OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE ACCORDING TO MANETHO HIGH PRIEST OF EGYPT

 <page 99>-<page 127>

      Hermes at the Beginning of the Hellenistic Period

 <page 99>

      Petosiris and Nechepso

 <page 100>

      Manetho the Beloved of Thoth

 <page 102>

      The Letter of Manetho to Ptolemy Philadelphus

 <page 103>

      The Importance of Manetho's Statement in his "Sothis"

 <page 105>

      Is "Sothis" a Forgery?

 <page 107>

      The Arguments of Encyclopaedism refuted

 <page 108>

      The Seriadic Land

 <page 110>

      The Stelae of Hermes

 <page 112>

      The Sons of Seth-Hermes

 <page 113>

      The Epithet "Thrice-greatest"

 <page 116>

      The Clue of Griffiths

 <page 118>

      The Earliest Trismegistic Literature

 <page 121>

      Philo Byblius

 <page 122>

      Are his "Phoenician Histories" a Forgery?

 <page 123>

      Sanchuniathon and the "Books of Hermes"

 <page 124>

 VI. AN EGYPTIAN PROTOTYPE OF THE MAIN FEATURES OF THE PoeMANDRES' COSMOGONY

 <page 128>-<page 138>

      The Higher Criticism of the "Poemandres"

 <page 128>

      A Prototype of its Cosmogenesis

 <page 129>

      A Praise-giving to Ptah

 <page 131>

      Ptah-Thoth the Wise One

 <page 132>

      Egyptian Syncretism 1000 B.C.

 <page 135>

      The Doctrine of "Poemandres" Compared with that of its Prototype

 <page 136>

      The Man-Doctrine

 <page 138>

 VII. THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES

 <page 139>-<page 198>

      The Gnostic Tradition

 <page 139>

      The "Philosophumena" of Hippolytus

 <page 140>

      The Naassenes

 <page 141>

      Analysis of Hippolytus' Account of the Naassene Document

 <page 142>

      Hippolytus' Introduction

 <page 146>

      The Material for the Recovery of the Original Hellenistic Document

 <page 148>

      Hippolytus' Conclusion

 <page 186>

      Conclusion of Analysis

 <page 192>

      The Hellenist Commentator

 <page 193>

      The Jewish and Christian Overwriters

 <page 194>

      Zosimus and the Anthropos-Doctrine

 <page 196>

      Philo of Alexandria on the Man-Doctrine

 <page 197>

 VIII. PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA AND THE HELLENISTIC THEOLOGY

 <page 199>-<page 254>

      Concerning Philo and his Method

 <page 199>

      The Great Importance of his Writings

 <page 204>

      Concerning the Mysteries

 <page 205>

      Concerning the Sacred Marriage

 <page 216>

      Concerning the Logos

 <page 225>

      The Son of God

 <page 226>

      The True High Priest

 <page 227>

      The Elder and Younger Sons of God

 <page 229>

      Yet God is One

 <page 230>

      The Logos is Life and Light

 <page 231>

      The Divine Vision

 <page 233>

      The Sons of God on Earth

 <page 233>

      The City of God

 <page 235>

      God's Shadow

 <page 236>

      The Mother-City of Refuge

 <page 237>

      The True Shepherd

 <page 238>

      The Apostles of God

 <page 239>

      The Ladder of the "Words"

 <page 239>

      The Logos the Spiritual Sun

 <page 241>

      The Disciples of the Logos

 <page 243>

      The River of the Divine Reason

 <page 244>

      Jerusalem Above

 <page 245>

      The Logos is as Manna and Coriander Seed

 <page 246>

      The Logos is the Pupil of God's Eye

 <page 247>

      "Man shall not Live by Bread Alone"

 <page 248>

      The Logos-Mediator

 <page 249>

      The Yoga of Plotinus

 <page 251>

      The Race of God

 <page 253>

 IX. PLUTARCH: CONCERNING THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS

 <page 255>-<page 368>

      Foreword

 <page 255>

      Concerning Isis and Osiris

 <page 261>-<page 366>

      Address to Klea concerning Gnosis and the Search for Truth

 <page 261>

      The Art of Knowing and of Divinising

 <page 262>

      The True Initiates of Isis

 <page 263>

      Why the Priests are Shaven and wear Linen

 <page 265>

      Of the Refraining from Flesh and Salt and Superfluities

 <page 267>

      On the Drinking of Wine

 <page 268>

      On Fish Taboos

 <page 269>

      The Onion and Pig Taboos

 <page 271>

      The Kings, the Riddles of the Priests and the Meaning of Amoun

 <page 273>

      Of the Greek Disciples of Egyptians and of Pythagoras and his Symbols

 <page 274>

      Advice to Klea concerning the Hidden Meaning of the Myths

 <page 276>

      The Mystery-Myth

 <page 278>

      The Undermeaning, a Reflexion of a Certain Reason

 <page 291>

      Concerning the Tombs of Osiris

 <page 292>

      Concerning the Theory of Evemerus

 <page 295>

      The Theory of the Daimones

 <page 298>

      Concerning Sarapis

 <page 301>

      Concerning Typhon

 <page 304>

      The Theory of the Physicists

 <page 307>

      Concerning Osiris and Dionysus

 <page 310>

      The Theory of the Physicists Resumed

 <page 312>

      The Theory of the Mathematici

 <page 318>

      The Theory of the Dualists

 <page 328>

      The Proper Reason according to Plutarch

 <page 333>

      The Symbolism of the Sistrum

 <page 344>

      The True "Logos" again according to Plutarch

 <page 345>

      Against the Weather and Vegetation God Theories

 <page 346>

      Concerning the Worship of Animals and Totemism

 <page 353>

      Concerning the Sacred Robes

 <page 361>

      Concerning Incense

 <page 363>

      Afterword

 <page 367>

 X. "HERMAS" AND "HERMES"

 <page 369>-<page 386>

      An Anticipation

 <page 369>

      The Higher Criticism of "The Shepherd of Hermas"

 <page 370>

      The Introduction of the "Pastoral Hermas"

 <page 370>

      Comparison with our "Poemandres"

 <page 371>

      The Popular Symbolic Representation of the Shepherd

 <page 372>

      The Name "Hermas"

 <page 374>

      An Early Form of the "Poemandres"

 <page 374>

      The Holy Mount

 <page 375>

      "Gnostic" Elements

 <page 376>

      The Vices and Virtues

 <page 377>

      The Early Date of the Original "Hermas"

 <page 378>

      The Dependence Theory to be used with Caution

 <page 379>

      The Visions of Crates

 <page 380>

      The General Christian "Many" and the Gnostic "Few"

 <page 382>

      The Story of Abbot Olympius

 <page 384>

      A Final Word

 <page 385>

 XI. CONCERNING THE AeON-DOCTRINE

 <page 387>-<page 412>

      The Scope of our Essay

 <page 387>

      The Orphic Tradition of the Genesis of the World Egg

 <page 388>

      Commentary

 <page 392>

      The Sethian Gnosis

 <page 393>

      The Mithriac Aeon

 <page 399>

      Probable Date of Origin of the Hellenistic Aeon-Doctrine

 <page 401>

      Abraxas

 <page 402>

      The Feast of the Aeon

 <page 403>

      The Quintessence and the Monad

 <page 403>

      The Aeon in Plato

 <page 404>

      Concerning the Hellenistic Origin of Aeonology

 <page 405>

      The Aeon the Logos

 <page 406>

      The Roman Saeculum Cult derived from Egypt

 <page 407>

      The Aeonic Immensities of Egypt

 <page 407>

      A Song of Praise to the Aeon

 <page 408>

      The Demiurgic Aeon

 <page 410>

      The Aeon in Theurgic Literature

 <page 410>

 XII. THE SEVEN ZONES AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS

 <page 413>-<page 428>

      Macrobius on "The Descent of the Soul from the Heights of Cosmos to the Depths of Earth"

 <page 413>

      The Tradition of Servius

 <page 418>

      Criticism of the Evidence

 <page 419>

      The "Ophite" Hebdomad

 <page 421>

      The Simpler Form of the Trismegistic Gnosis

 <page 423>

      Concerning Leviathan and Behemoth

 <page 423>

      The "Fence of Fire"

 <page 427>

 XIII. PLATO: CONCERNING METEMPSYCHOSIS

 <page 429>-<page 436>

      The Soul and her Mysteries in the "Phaedrus"

 <page 429>

      Plotinus on Metempsychosis

 <page 434>

      Proclus on the Descent of Souls into Irrational Natures

 <page 435>

 XIV. THE VISION OF ER

 <page 437>-<page 449>

      Er Son of Armenius

 <page 437>

      From the Mysteries

 <page 438>

      The Cylinder

 <page 439>

      The Vision

 <page 440>

      Commentary

 <page 448>

 XV. CONCERNING THE CRATER OR CUP

 <page 450>-<page 456>

      The Crater in Plato

 <page 450>

      In "Orpheus," Macrobius, and Proclus

 <page 451>

      The Vision of Aridaeus

 <page 452>

      The Origin of the Symbol to be sought in Orphic Tradition

 <page 456>

 XVI. THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES

 <page 457>-<page 481>

      Ptah, Sekhet and I-em-hetep (Asclepius)

 <page 457>

      Nefer-Tem

 <page 458>

      Imhotep-Imuth-Asclepius

 <page 459>

      Thath-Tat

 <page 461>

      The Incarnations of Thoth

 <page 463>

      The Disciples of Lord Hermes in Petosiris and Nechepso

 <page 464>

      Tosothros-Asclepius

 <page 465>

      Imuth-Asclepius the Master-Mason and Poet

 <page 466>

      Aesculapius the Healer

 <page 467>

      Asclepius in Trismegistic Tradition

 <page 469>

      Concerning Ammon

 <page 471>

      Prophet and King

 <page 472>

      Amenhotep-Asclepius

 <page 473>

      The Sacred Group of Four

 <page 474>

      James, John and Peter

 <page 475>

      The Triad of Disciples

 <page 476>

      Chnum the Good Daimon

 <page 477>

      Osiris Disciple of Agathodaimon the Thrice-greatest

 <page 478>

      Logos-Mind the Good Daimon

 <page 478>

      Chnum Good Mind the Aeon

 <page 480>

      Isis, Lady of Wisdom, Disciple of Thrice-greatest Hermes

 <page 481>

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xvi]

Was he one or many, merging
    Name and fame in one, 
Like a stream, to which, converging, 
    Many streamlets run?

 . . . . . . 

Who shall call his dreams fallacious? 
    Who has searched or sought 
All the unexplored and spacious 
    Universe of thought? 

Who in his own skill confiding, 
    Shall with rule and line 
Mark the border-land dividing 
    Human and divine? 

Trismegistus! Three times greatest! 
    How thy name sublime 
Has descended to this latest 
    Progeny of time! 

LONGFELLOW, Hermes Trismegistus. [*1]

 

Footnotes

^xvi:1 This poem is dated January 1882. Chambers (p. 155, n.) says: "It is noteworthy that the last poem of Longfellow was a lyrical ode in celebration of Hermes Trismegistus."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

Thrice-Greatest Hermes

I

THE REMAINS OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 

WRITER AND READER 

LITTLE did I think when, years ago, I began to translate some of the Trismegistic tractates, that the undertaking would finally grow into these volumes. My sole object then was to render the more important of these beautiful theosophic treatises into an English that might, perhaps, be thought in some small way worthy of the Greek originals. I was then more attracted by the sermons themselves than by the manifold problems to which they gave rise; I found greater pleasure in the spiritual atmosphere they created, than in the critical considerations which insistently imposed themselves upon my mind, as I strove to realise their importance for the history of the development of religious ideas in the Western world. 

And now, too, when I take pen in hand to grapple with the difficulties of "introduction" for those who will be good enough to follow my all-insufficient labours, it is to the tractates themselves that I turn again and again for refreshment in the task; and every time I turn to them I am persuaded that the best of them are worthy of all the labour a man can bestow upon them. 

[p. 2]

Though it is true that the form of these volumes, with their Prolegomena and Commentaries and numerous notes, is that of a technical treatise, it has nevertheless been my aim to make them throughout accessible to the general reader, even to the man of one language who, though no scholar himself, may yet be deeply interested in such studies. These volumes must, therefore, naturally fall short of the precision enjoyed by the works of technical specialists which are filled with direct quotations from a number of ancient and modern tongues; on the other hand, they have the advantage of appealing to a larger public, while at the same time the specialist is given every indication for controlling the statements and translations. 

Nor should the general reader be deterred by an introductory volume under the imposing sub-title of Prolegomena, imagining that these chapters are necessarily of a dull, critical nature, for the subjects dealt with are of immense interest in themselves (at least they seem so to me), and are supplementary to the Trismegistic sermons, frequently adding material of a like nature to that in our tractates. 

Some of these Prolegomena have grown out of the Commentaries, for I found that occasionally subjects lent themselves to such lengthy digressions that they could be removed to the Prolegomena to the great advantage of the Commentary. The arrangement of the material thus accumulated, however, has proved a very difficult task, and I have been able to preserve but little logical sequence in the chapters; but this is owing mainly to the fact that the extant Trismegistic literature itself is preserved to us in a most chaotic fashion, and I as yet see no means of inducing any sure order into this chaos. 

[p. 3]

THE EXTANT TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE

To distinguish our writings both from the Egyptian "Books of Thoth" and the Hermes Prayers of the popular Egyptian cult, as found in the Greek Magic Papyri, and also from the later Hermetic Alchemical literature, I have adopted the term Trismegistic literature in place of the usual designation Hermetic. 

Of this Greek Trismegistic literature proper, much is lost; that which remains to us, of which I have endeavoured to gather together every fragment and scrap, falls under five heads: 

A. The Corpus Hermeticum. 
B. The Perfect Sermon, or the Asclepius. 
C. Excerpts by Stobaeus. 
D. References and Fragments in the Fathers. 
E. References and Fragments in the Philosophers. 

A. The Corpus Hermeticum includes what has, previous to Reitzenstein, [*1] been known as the "Poimandres" [*2] collection of fourteen Sermons and the "Definitions of Asclepius." 

B. The Perfect Sermon, or the Asclepius, is no longer extant in Greek, but only in an Old Latin version. 

C. There are twenty-seven Excerpts, from otherwise lost Sermons, by John Stobaeus, a Pagan scholar of the 

[p. 4]

end of the fifth or beginning of the sixth century, who was an immense reader and made a most valuable collection of extracts from Greek authors, though studiously avoiding every Christian writer. Some of these Excerpts are of great length, especially those from the Sermon entitled "The Virgin of the World"; these twenty-seven Excerpts are exclusive of extracts from Sermons still preserved in our Corpus. 

D. From the Church Fathers we obtain many references and twenty-five short Fragments, otherwise unknown to us, and considerably widening our acquaintance with the scope of the literature. 

E. From Zosimus and Fulgentius we obtain three Fragments, and from the former and Iamblichus, and Julian the Emperor-Philosopher, we obtain a number of valuable references. 

Such are what at first sight may appear to be the comparatively scanty remains of what was once an exceedingly abundant literature. But when we remember that this literature was largely reserved and kept secret, we cannot but congratulate ourselves that so much has been preserved; indeed, as we shall see later on, but for the lucky chance of a Hermetic apologist selecting some of the sermons to exemplify the loyal nature of the Trismegistic teaching with respect to kings and rulers, we should be without any Hermetic Corpus at all, and dependent solely on our extracts and fragments. 

But even with our Hermetic Corpus before us we should never forget that we have only a fraction of the Trismegistic literature--the flotsam and jetsam, so to say, of a once most noble vessel that sailed the seas of human endeavour, and was an ark of refuge to many a pious and cultured soul. 

References to lost writings of the School will meet 

[p. 5]

us abundantly in the course of our studies, and some attempt will be made later on to form a notion of the main types of the literature. 

As for the rest of the so-called Hermetic works, medico-mathematical, astrological and medico-astrological, and alchemical, and for a list of the many inventions attributed to the Thrice-greatest--inventions as numerous as, and almost identical with, those attributed to Orpheus by fond posterity along the line of "pure" Hellenic tradition--I would refer the student to the Bibliotheca Graeca of Joannes Albertus Fabricius. [*1] 

For the Alchemical and Mediaeval literature the two magnificent works of Berthelot (M. P. E.) are indispensable--namely, Collection des anciens Alchimistes grecs (Paris, 1888), and La Chimie au Moyen Age (Paris, 1893). 

In close connection with the development of this form of "Hermetic" tradition must be taken the Hermes writings and traditions among the Arabs. See Beausobre's Histoire Critique de Manichee et du Manicheisme (Amsterdam, 1734), i. 326; also Fleischer (H. L.), Hermes Trismegislus an die menschliche Seele, Arabisch und Deutsch (Leipzig, 1870); Bardenhewer (O.), Hermetis Trismegisti qui apud Arabes fertur de Castigatione Animae Liber (Bonn, 1873); and especially R. Pietschmann, the pupil of Georg Ebers, who devotes the fourth part of his treatise, entitled Hermes Trismegistus nach agyptischen und orientalischen Uberlieferungen (Leipzig, 1875), to a consideration of the Hermes tradition, "Bei Syrern und Araben." 

[p. 6]

Reitzenstein treats very briefly of the development of this later Hermetic literature on pp. 188-200 of his Poimandres. [*1] 

THE ORIGINAL MS. OF OUR CORPUS 

From the fragmentary nature of the remains of the Trismegistic literature that have come down to us, it will be at once seen that a critical text of them is a complicated undertaking; for, apart from the Corpus, the texts have to be collected from the works of many authors. This, however, has never yet been done in any critical fashion; so that a translator has first of all to find the best existing critical texts of these authors from which to make his version. This, I hope, I have succeeded in doing; but even so, numerous obscurities still remain in the texts of the excerpts, fragments, and quotations, and it is highly desirable that some scholar specially acquainted with our literature should collect all these together in one volume, and work over the labours of specialists on the texts of Stobaeus and the Fathers, with the added equipment of his own special knowledge. 

Even the text of our Corpus is still without a thoroughly critical edition; for though Reitzenstein has done this work most admirably for C. H., i., xiii. (xiv.), and (xvi.)-(xviii.), basing himself on five MSS. and the printed texts of the earlier editions, he has not thought fit to give us a complete text. 

A list of the then known MSS. is given in Harles' edition of Fabricius' Bibliotheca Graeca (pp. 51, 52); while Parthey gives notes on the only two MSS. he used in his edition of fourteen of the Sermons of 

[p. 7]

our Corpus. It is, however, generally believed that there may be other MSS. hidden away in Continental libraries. 

All prior work on the MSS., however, is entirely superseded by Reitzenstein in his illuminating "History of the Text" (pp. 319-327), in which we have the whole matter set forth with the thoroughness that characterises the best German scholarship. 

From him we learn that we owe the preservation of our Hermetic Corpus to a single MS. that was found in the eleventh century in a sad condition. Whole quires and single leaves were missing, both at the beginning (after ch. i.) and the end (after ch. xvi.); even in the remaining pages, especially in the last third, the writing was in a number of places no longer legible. 

In this condition the MS. came into the hands of Michael Psellus, the great reviver of Platonic studies at Byzantium, probably at the time when his orthodoxy was being called into question. Psellus thought he would put these writings into circulation again, but at the same time guard himself against the suspicion that their contents corresponded with his own conclusions. This accounts for the peculiar scholion to C. H., i. 18, which seems at first pure monkish denunciation of Poemandres as the Devil in disguise to lead men from the truth, while the conclusion of it betrays so deep an interest in the contents that it must have been more than purely philological. 

And that such an interest was aroused in the following centuries at Byzantium, may be concluded from the fact that the last three chapters, which directly justify polytheism or rather Heathendom, were omitted in a portion of the MSS., and only that part of the Corpus received a wider circulation which corresponded 

[p. 8]

with what might be regarded at first sight as a Neoplatonism assimilated to Christianity. The text was reproduced with thoughtless exactitude, so that though its tradition is extraordinarily bad, it is uniform, and we can recover with certainty the copy of Psellus from the texts of the fourteenth century. 

These Trismegistic Sermons obtained a larger field of operation with the growth of Humanism in the West. Georgius Gemistus Pletho, in the latter part of the fourteenth and beginning of the fifteenth century, brought Neoplatonism from Byzantium into Italy as a kind of religion and made a deep impression on Cosimo Medici; and Marsiglio Ficino, who was early selected by the latter as the head of the future Academy, must have made his Latin translation of our Corpus, which appeared in 1463, to serve as the first groundwork of this undertaking. Cosimo had the Greek text brought from Bulgaria (Macedonia) by a monk, Fra Lionardo of Pistoja, and it is still in the Medicean Library. 

It was not, however, till the middle of the sixteenth century that the Greek text was printed; and meantime, with the great interest taken in these writings by the Humanists, a large number of MSS. arose which sought to make the text more understandable or more elegant; such MSS. are of no value for the tradition of the text. 

TEXTS AND TRANSLATIONS 

We will now proceed to give some account of the texts and translations of the Trismegistic writings, a bibliographical labour which the general reader will most probably skip, but which the real student will appreciate at its proper value. [*1] 

[p. 9]

The best account of the texts and translations up to 1790 is that of Harles, who has entirely rewritten the account of Fabricius (op. cit., pp. 52 ff.). [*1] 

The editio princeps was not a text but a Latin translation by Marsiglio Ficino (Marsilius Ficinus), published in quarto in 1471. [*2] Both the name of the publisher and place of publication are lacking, but the British Museum catalogue inserts them in parenthesis as "G. de Lisa, Treviso," presumably on the authority of Harles. This translation consisted of the so-called "Poemandres," in fourteen chapters, that is to say fourteen treatises, under the general title, Mercurii Trismegisti Liber de Potestate et Sapientia Dei (or The Book of Mercury Trismegist concerning the Power and Wisdom of God). The enormous popularity of this work is seen by the fact of the very numerous editions (for a book of that time) through which it ran. No less than twenty-two editions have appeared, the first eight of them in the short space of a quarter of a century. [*3] 

In 1548 there appeared an Italian translation of Ficinus' Latin version of the "Poemandres" collection, entitled Il Pimandro di Mercurio Trismegisto, done into Florentine by Tommaso Benci, printed at Florence in 12mo. A second edition was printed at Florence in 1549 in 8vo, with numerous improvements by Paitoni. 

[p. 10]

The first Greek text was printed at Paris, in 1554, by Adr. Turnebus; it included the "Poemandres" and "The Definitions of Asclepius," to which the Latin version of Ficino was appended. The title is, Mercurii Trismegisti Poemander seu de Potestate ac Sapientia Divina: Aesculapii Definitiones ad Ammonem Regem; the Greek was edited by P. Angelo da Barga (Angelus Vergecius). 

In 1557 appeared the first French translation by Gabriel du Preau, at Paris, with a lengthy title, Deux Livres de Mercure Trismegiste Hermes tres ancien Theologien, et excellant Philozophe. L'un de la puissance et sapience de Dieu. L'autre de la volonte de Dieu. Auecq'un Dialogue de Loys Lazarel, poete Chrestien, intitule le Bassin d'Hermes. 

This seems to be simply a translation of an edition of Ficinus' Latin version published at Paris by Henr. Stephanus in 1505, to which a certain worthy, Loys Lazarel, who further rejoiced in the agnomen of Septempedanus, appended a lucubration of his own of absolutely no value, [*1] for the title of Estienne's edition runs: Pimander Mercurii Liber de Sapientia et Potestate Dei. Asclepius, ejusdem Mercurii Liber de Voluntate Divina. Item Crater Hermetis a Lazarelo Septempedano. 

In 1574 Franciscus Flussas Candalle reprinted at Bourdeaux, in 4to, Turnebus' Greek text, which he emended, with the help of the younger Scaliger and other Humanists, together with a Latin translation, under the title, Mercurii Trismegisti Pimander sive Poemander. This text is still of critical service to-day. 

This he followed with a French translation, printed in 1579, also at Bourdeaux in folio, and bearing the title, Le Pimandre de Mercure Trismegiste de la Philosophie

[p. 11]

[paragraph continues] Chrestienne, Cognoissance du Verb Divin, et de l'Excellence des Oeuvres de Dieu. This we are assured is translated "de l'exemplaire Grec, avec collation de tres-amples commentaires," [*1] all of which is followed by the full name and titles of Flussas, to wit, "Francois Monsieur de Foix, de la famille de Candalle, Captal de Buchs, etc., Evesque d'Ayre, etc.," the whole being dedicated to "Marguerite de France, Roine de Navarre." 

Twelve years later Franciscus Patricius (Cardinal Francesco Patrizzi) printed an edition of the text of the Sermons of the Corpus, of "The Asclepius," and also of most of the Extracts and of some of the Fragments; he, however, has arranged them all in a quite arbitrary fashion, and has as arbitrarily altered the text, which generally followed that of Turnebus and Candalle, in innumerable places. To this he appended a Latin translation, in which he emended the versions of Ficino and de Foix, as he tells us, in no less than 1040 places. These were included in his Nova de Universis Philosophia, printed at Ferrara, in folio, 1591, and again at Venice by R. Meiettus, in 1593, as an appendix to his Nov. de Un. Phil., now increased to fifty books. 

This Latin translation of Patrizzi was printed apart, together with the Chaldaean Oracles, at Hamburg in 12mo, also, in 1593, under the title Magia Philosophica. The latter edition bears the subscription on the title-page, "jam nunc primum ex Biblioteca Ranzoviana e tenebris eruta," which Harles explains as a reprint by plain Henr. Ranzou, who is, however, described in the volume itself as "produx." It seems to have been again reprinted at Hamburg in 1594 in 8vo. 

Meantime the Carmelite, Hannibal Rossellus, [*2] had 

[p. 12]

been laboriously engaged for many years on an edition of the "Poemandres" with most elaborate commentaries. This was printed at Cracow by Lazarus, in six volumes in folio, from 1585 to 1590. Rossel treats of philosophy, theology, the Pope, the scriptures, and all disciplines in his immanibus commentariis, inepte as some say, while others bestow on him great praise. His title is Pymander Mercurii Trismegisti. This was reprinted with the text and translation of de Foix in folio at Cologne in 1630, under the title Divinus Pimander Hermetis Mercurii Trismegisti. 

Hitherto nothing had been done in England, but in 1611 an edition of Ficinus' translation was printed in London. This was followed by what purports to be a translation of the "Poemandres" from Arabic, [*1] "by that learned Divine, Doctor Everard," as the title-page sets forth. It was printed in London in 1650 in 8vo, with a preface by "J. F.," and bears the title The Divine Pymander of Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus, in xvii. Books. Translated formerly out of the Arabick into Greek [!] and thence into Latin, and Dutch, and now out of the Original into English. There was a second edition of Everard's version printed at London in 1657, in 12mo. There are also reprints of the 1650 edition by Fryar of Bath, with an introduction by Hargrave Jennings, in 1884; [*2] by P. B. Randolph, Toledo, Ohio, 1889; and by the Theosophical Publishing Society, in the Collectanea Hermetica, edited by W. Wynn Westcott, in 1893. 

To what Dutch translation Everard refers I cannot discover, for the only one known to me is that printed 

[p. 13]

at Amsterdam in 1652 in 12mo. It is a translation of Patrizzi's text, and bears the title, Sestien Boecken van den Hermes Trismegistus. . . . uyt het Griecx ghebracht . . . met eene . . . Voorede uyt het Latijn von F. Patricius in de welcke hij bewijst dat desen . . . Philosoph heeft gebleoyt voor Moyses, etc. Harles says nothing of this edition, but speaks of one printed at Amsterdam in 1643 in 4to, by Nicholas van Rauenstein, but I can find no other trace of it. 

The first German translation was by a certain Alethophilus, and was printed at Hamburg in 1706 (8vo) under the title Hermetis Trismegisti Erkantnuss der Natur, etc., containing seventeen pieces; this was reprinted at Stuttgart in 1855, in a curious collection by J. Schieble, entitled Kleiner Wunder-Schauplatz. [*1]  The title reads Hermetis Trismegisti Einleitung in's hochste Wissen von Erkentniss der Natur und der darin sich offenbarenden grossen Grottes, with an appendix concerning the person of Hermes, etc. 

But why Schieble should have reprinted Alethophilus' translation is not clear, when in 1781 a new translation into German, with critical notes and valuable suggestions for emending the text, had appeared by Dieterich Tiedemann (Berlin and Stettin, in 8vo), entitled Hermes Trismegists Poemander, oder von der gottlichen Macht und Weisheit, a rare book which, already in 1827, Baumgarten-Crusius [*2] laments 

[p. 14]

as almost unfindable in the republic of letters, and of which the British Museum possesses no copy. [*1] 

It is remarkable that of a work which exhausted so many editions in translation and was evidently received with such great enthusiasm, there have been so few editions of the text, and that for two centuries and a quarter [*2] no attempt was made to collate the different MSS. and editions, until in 1854 Gustav Parthey printed a critical text of the fourteen pieces of "Poemandres," at Berlin, under the title Hermetis Trismegisti Poemander, to which he appended a Latin translation based on the original version of Ficino successively revised by de Foix and Patrizzi. Parthey's promise to edit reliqua Hermetis scripta has not been fulfilled, and no one else has so far attempted this most necessary task. 

Reitzenstein's (p. 322) opinion of Parthey's text, however, is very unfavourable. In the first place, Parthey took Patrizzi's arbitrary alterations as a true tradition of the text; in the second, he himself saw neither of the MSS. on which he says he relies. The first of these was very carelessly copied for him and carelessly used by him; while the second, which was copied by D. Hamm, is very corrupt owing to very numerous "corrections" and interpolations by a later hand--all of which Parthey has adopted as ancient readings. His text, therefore, concludes Reitzenstein, is doubly falsified--a very discouraging judgment for lovers of accuracy. 

In 1866 there appeared at Paris, in 8vo, a complete translation in French of the Trismegistic treatises and 

[p. 15]

fragments by Louis Menard, entitled Hermes Trismegiste, preceded by an interesting study on the origin of the Hermetic books, of which a second edition was printed in 1867. This is beyond question the most sympathetic version that we at present possess. 

Everard's version of the "Poemandres" being reprinted in 1884 by Fryar of Bath, the rest of the treatises were retranslated by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland from Menard's French version (including his notes), and appeared in 1885 (in 4to), published by Fryar, but bearing a publisher's name in India, under the general title The Hermetic Works: The Virgin of the World of Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus. Meantime, in 1882, J. D. Chambers had published (at Edinburgh, in 8vo) a crabbed and slavishly literal translation of the "Poemandres," together with the Excerpts from Stobaeus and the Notices of Hermes in the Fathers, with an introductory Preface, under the title, The Theological and Philosophical Works of Hermes Trismegistus, Christian Neoplatonist. Indeed, the loose and erroneous version of Everard is far more comprehensible than this fantastically literal translation. 

For the last six years I have myself been publishing, in the pages of The Theosophical Review, translations of the Trismegistic Sermons and also a few of the studies now included in these Prolegomena; all of the former, however, have been now carefully revised, and the latter have for the most part been greatly enlarged and improved. 

Finally, in 1904, E. Reitzenstein of Strassburg published at Leipzig his illuminating study, Poimandres, in which he gives the critical text of C. H., i., xiii. (xiv.), (xvi.)-(xviii.), based on five MSS. and the best early printed editions, with all that minute care, knowledge of palaeography, and enthusiasm for philology which 

[p. 16]

characterises the best textual-critical work of modern scholarship. Why, however, Reitzenstein has not done the same good service for the whole of the Corpus as he has done for the selected sermons, is a mystery. He is the very man for the task, and the service he could render would be highly appreciated by many. 

So much, then, for the existing partial texts and translations of the extant Trismegistic literature. Of the translations with which I am acquainted, [*1] Everard's (1650), the favourite in England, because of its dignified English, is full of errors, mistranslations, and obscurities; it is hopeless to try to understand "Hermes" from this version. Chambers's translation (1882, from the text of Parthey) is so slavishly literal that it ceases to be English in many places, in others goes wide of the sense, and, in general, is exasperating. Menard's French translation (1866, also from Parthey's text) is elegant and sympathetic, but very free in many places; in fact, not infrequently quite emancipated from the text. The most literally accurate translation is Parthey's Latin version (based on the Latin translation of Ficino, as emended by Candalle and Patrizzi); but even in such literal rendering he is at fault at times, while in general no one can fully understand the Latin without the Greek. To translate "Hermes" requires not only a good knowledge of Greek, but also a knowledge of that Gnosis which he has not infrequently so admirably handed on to us. 

Footnotes

^3:1 Reitzenstein (R.), Poimandres: Studien zur griechisch-agyptischen und fruhchristlichen Literatur (Leipzig; 1904).

^3:2 Variously translated, or metamorphosed, as Poemandres, Poemander, Poemandre, Pymandar, Pimander, Pimandre, Pimandro. Already Patrizzi, in 1591, pointed out that only one treatise could be called by this title; but, in spite of this, the bad habit inaugurated by the editio princeps (in Latin translation) of Marsiglio Ficino has persisted to the last edition of the text by Parthey (1854) and the last translation by Chambers (1882).

^5:1 Vol. i., lib. i., cap. vii. See the fourth and last edition (Leipzig, 1790), with up to that time unedited supplements by Fabricius and G. C. Heumann, and very numerous and important additions by G. C. Harles.

^6:1 For the Hermetic writing in Pitra, Analecta Sacra et Classica, pt. ii., see R., pp. 16, n. 4, and 259, n. 1; and for reference to the Arabic literature, pp. 23, n. 5, and 172, n. 3.

^8:1 This study was published in the Theosophical Review, May 1899, and is independent of Reitzenstein's work.

^9:1 S. F. W. Hoffmann's Bibliographisches Lexicon der gesammten Litteratur der Griechen (2nd ed., Leipzig, 1839) simply copies Harles, while his appendix of "Erlauterungsschriften" is of no value.

^9:2 R. (p. 320), as we have seen, gives the date as 1463, but I have found no trace of this edition.

^9:3 The dates of these editions are as follows, though doubtless there were other editions of which we have lost record: 1471, '72, '81, '83, '91, '93, '94, '97; 1503, '05, '16, '22, '32, '49, '52, '54, '61, '70, '76, '77; 1611, '41. They were printed at Venice, Paris, Basle, Lyons, and London.

^10:1 The writer has painfully perused it, for, more fortunate than the British Museum, he possesses a copy of this rare work.

^11:1 These on perusal prove of little value.

^11:2 R. 322 calls him a Minorite.

^12:1 It is clear, however, that Everard translated from Ficinus' Latin version, and that the "Arabick" is a myth.

^12:2 Of which only 200 copies were issued to subscribers, as though, forsooth, they were to come into great "occult" secrets thereby.

^13:1 Part of the full title runs: K. W.-S. d. Wissenschaften, Mysterien, Theosophie, gottlichen und morgenlandischen Magie, Naturkrafte, hermet. u. magnet. Phil., Kabbala, u. and. hohern Kentnissen, and much more in the same strain, but I have no doubt the reader has already had enough of it. From 1855 to 1857 fourteen parts appeared, mostly taken up with German translations of Hermes, of Agrippa's Philosophia Occulta from the Latin, and of The Telescope of Zoroaster from the French.

^13:2 Op. inf. cit., p. 10.

^14:1 I have, therefore, not been able to avail myself of Tiedemann's labours. R. 322 speaks highly of them.

^14:2 The last edition prior to Parthey's was the reprint of Flussas' text, at Cologne in 1630, appended to Rossel's lucubrations.

^16:1 As already remarked, I have not been able to see a copy of the German of Tiedemann.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 17]

II

THE HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION

THE CHIEF POINTS OF INTERROGATION 

WE have now to consider the following interesting points: 

The early Church Fathers in general accepted the Trismegistic writings as exceedingly ancient and authoritative, and in their apologetic writings quote them in support of the main general positions of Christianity. 

In the revival of learning, for upwards of a century and a half, all the Humanists welcomed them with open arms as a most valuable adjunct to Christianity, and as being in accord with its doctrines; so much so that they laboured to substitute Trismegistus for Aristotle in the schools. 

During the last two centuries and a half, however, a body of opinion was gradually evolved, infinitesimal in its beginnings but finally well-nigh shutting out every other view, that these writings were Neoplatonic forgeries and plagiarisms of Christianity. 

Finally, with the dawn of the twentieth century, the subject has been rescued from the hands of opinion, and has begun to be established on the firm ground of historical and critical research, opening up problems of the greatest interest and importance for the history of Christian origins and their connection with Hellenistic

[p. 18]

theology and theosophy, and throwing a brilliant light on the development of Gnosticism. 

The first point will be brought out in detail in the volume in which a translation of all the passages and references to Thrice-greatest Hermes in the writings of the Church Fathers will be given; while the last will be made abundantly apparent, we hope, in the general course of our studies. The second and third points will now demand our immediate attention, especially the third, for we have endeavoured with great labour to become acquainted with all the "arguments" which have tended to build up this opinion; and unless we have to change all our ideas as to the time-frame of so-called Neoplatonism, we are entirely unconvinced; for we find that it has been evolved from unsupported assertions, and that not one single work exists which ventures in any satisfactory fashion to argue the question (most writers merely reasserting or echoing prior opinions), or in which the statements made may not as easily prove the priority of the Trismegistic school to the Neoplatonic as the reverse. 

We will then proceed to give some account of this chaos of contradictory opinions, picking out the most salient points. 

THE OPINIONS OF THE HUMANISTS 

That the early scholars of the revival of learning were all unanimously delighted with the Trismegistic writings, is manifest from the bibliography we have already given, and that they should follow the judgment of the ancient Fathers in the matter is but natural to expect; for them not only were the books prior to Christianity, but they were ever assured that Hermes 

[p. 19]

had been a really existent personality, like any of the Biblical worthies, such as Enoch and Noah (as was unquestionably believed in those days), and further, that he was prior to, or a contemporary of, Moses. [*1] 

Thus in the editio princeps of Ficino we read: "Whoever thou art who readest these things, whether grammarian, or rhetorician, or philosopher, or theologian, know thou that I am Hermes the Thrice-greatest, at whom wondered first the Egyptians and the other nations, and subsequently the ancient Christian theologians, in utter stupefaction at my doctrine rare of things divine." 

The opinion of Ficino, that the "writer" of the "Poemandres" tractates was one who had a knowledge both of Egyptian and Greek, is of interest as being that of a man uncontaminated by the infinite doubts with which the atmosphere of modern criticism is filled, and thus able to get a clean contact with his subject. 

Of the same mind were Loys Lazarel and du Preau, the first French translator; while the Italian Cardinal Patrizzi appends to his labours the following beautiful words (attributed by some to Chalcidius [*2]), which he puts in the mouth of Hermes: 

"Till now, my son, I, banished from my home, have lived expatriate in exile. Now safe and sound I seek my home once more. And when but yet a little while I shall have left thee, freed from these bonds of body, see that thou dost not mourn me as one dead. For I return to that supreme and happy state to which the universe's citizens will come when in the after-state. 

[p. 20]

[paragraph continues] For there the Only God is supreme lord, and He will fill His citizens with wondrous joy, compared to which the state down here which is regarded by the multitude as life, should rather be called death." [*1] 

Patrizzi believed that Hermes was contemporary with Moses, basing himself upon the opinion of Eusebius in his Chronicum, [*2] and thought that it would be to the greatest advantage of the Christian world, if such admirable and pious philosophy as was contained in the Trismegistic writings were substituted in the public schools for Aristotle, whom he regarded as overflowing with impiety. 

THE FIRST DOUBT 

And that such opinions were the only ones as late as 1630, is evident from the favour still shown to the voluminous commentaries of de Foix and Rossel. Nevertheless some fifty years previously, a hardy pioneer of scepticism had sturdily attacked the validity of the then universal Hermes tradition on one point at least--and that a fundamental one. For Patrizzi (p. 1a) declares that a certain Jo. Goropius Becanus was the first after so many centuries to dare to say that Hermes (as a single individual) never existed! But the worthy Goropius, who appears to have flourished about 1580, judging by an antiquarian treatise of his on the race and language of the "Cimbri or Germani" published at Amsterdam, had no followers as yet in a belief that is now universally accepted by all critical scholarship. But this has to do with the Hermes-saga and not directly with the question of the Trismegistic works, 

[p. 21]

and so we may omit for the present any reference to the host of contradictory opinions on "Hermes" which are found in all the writers to whom we are referring, and none of which, prior to the decipherment of the hieroglyphics, are of any particular value. 

THE LAUNCHING OF THE THEORY OF PLAGIARISM

It was about the middle of the seventeenth century that the theory of plagiarism and forgery was started. Ursin (Joh. Henr. Ursinus), a pastor of the Evangelical Church at Ratisbon, published at Nurnberg in 1661, a work, in the second part of which he treated of "Hermes Trismegistus and his Writings," [*1] and endeavoured to show that they were wholesale plagiarisms from Christianity, but his arguments were subjected to a severe criticism by Brucker some hundred years later. [*2] 

This extreme view of Ursin was subsequently modified into the subsidiary opinions that the Trismegistic works were composed by a half-Christian (semi-christiano) or interpolated by Christian overworking. 

The most distinguished name among the early holders of the former opinion is that of Isaac Casaubon, [*3] who dates these writings at the beginning of the second 

[p. 22]

century; Casaubon's opinions, however, were promptly refuted by Cudworth in his famous work The True Intellectual System of the Universe, the first edition of which was printed at London, in folio, 1678. [*1] Cudworth would have it, however, that Casaubon was right as far as the treatises entitled "The Shepherd of Men" and "The Secret Sermon on the Mountain" are concerned, and that these treatises were counterfeited by Christians since the time of Iamblichus--a very curious position to assume, since a number of the treatises themselves look back to this very "Shepherd" as the original document of the whole "Poemandres" cycle. 

But, indeed, so far we have no arguments, no really critical investigation, [*2] so that we need not detain the reader among these warring opinions, on which the cap was set by the violent outburst of Colberg in defence of orthodoxy against the Alchemists, Rosicrucians, Quakers, Anabaptists, Quietists, etc., of which fanatici, as he calls them, Hermes, he declares, was the Patriarch. [*3] 

THE ONLY ARGUMENT ADDUCED 

One might almost believe that Colberg was an incarnation of a Church Father continuing his ancient polemic against heresy; in any case the whole question of heresy 

[p. 23]

was now revived, and the eighteenth and nineteenth century criticism of the Trismegistic works almost invariably starts with this prejudice in mind and seeks (almost without exception) to father the Trismegistic writings on Neoplatonism, which it regards as the most powerful opponent of orthodoxy from the third century onwards. Harles (1790) gives the references to all the main factors in the evolution of this opinion during the eighteenth century; [*1] but the only argument that the century produced--indeed, the only argument that has ever been adduced--is that the doctrines of the Trismegistic writings are clearly Platonic, and that too of that type of mystical Platonism which was especially the characteristic of the teaching of Iamblichus at the end of the third century A.D., and which is generally called Neoplatonism; therefore, these writings were forged by the Neoplatonists to prop up dying Paganism against the ever more and more vigorous Christianity. We admit the premisses, but we absolutely deny the conclusion. But before pointing out the weakness of this conclusion of apologetic scholarship, we must deal with the literature on the subject in the last century. The eighteenth century produced no arguments in support of this conclusion beyond the main premisses which we have admitted. [*2] Has the nineteenth century 

[p. 24]

produced any others so as to justify the position taken up by the echoes of opinion in all the popular encyclopaedias with regard to these most valuable and beautiful treatises? [*1] 

If our encyclopaedias deign to rest their assertions on authority, they refer us to Fabricius (Harles) and Baumgarten-Crusius. We have already seen that Harles will not help us much; will the latter authority throw any more light on the subject? We are afraid not; for, instead of a bulky volume, we have before us a thin academical exercise of only 19 pp., [*2] in which the author puts forward the bare opinion that these books were invented by Porphyry and his school, and this mainly because he thinks that Orelli [*3] had proved the year before that the Cosmogony of Sanchoniathon was invented by the "Platonici." Moreover, was not Porphyry an enemy of Christ, for did he not write XV. Books against the Christians? All of which can scarcely be dignified with the name of argument, far less with that of proof. 

[p. 25]

THE THEORY OF HILGERS 

The same may be said of the short academical thesis of Hilgers, [*1] who first shows the weakness of Mohler's strange opinion [*2] that the author was a Christian who pretended to be a Pagan and inserted "errors" on purpose. Hilgers finally ends up with the lame conclusion that Christian doctrine was known to the author of the "Poemandres" cycle, especially the Gospel of "John" and Letters of Paul; but how it is possible to conjecture anything besides, he does not know. Of the possibility of the priority of the "Poemandres" to the writings of "John" and Paul, Hilgers does not seem to dream; nevertheless this is as logical a deduction as the one he draws from the points of contact between the two groups of literature. But Hilgers has got an axe of his own to grind, and a very blunt one at that; he thinks that "The Shepherd of Men" was written at the same time as "The Shepherd of Hermas," that simple product of what is called the sub-apostolic age--a document held in great respect by the early outer communities of General Christianity, and used for purposes of edification. Our "Shepherd," Hilgers thinks, was written in opposition to the Hermas document, but he can do nothing but point to the similarity of name as a proof of his hypothesis. This topsyturvy opinion we shall seek to reverse in a subsequent chapter on "'Hermes' and 'Hermas.'" 

As to the author of our "Shepherd," Hilgers thinks he has shown that "he was not a follower of the 

[p. 26]

doctrines of the Christ, but of the so-called Neoplatonists, and among these especially of Philo Judaeus"; in fact he seems, says Hilgers, to have been a Therapeut. [*1] 

THE GERMAN THEORY OF NEOPLATONIC "SYNCRETISMUS" 

Here we have the first appearance of another tendency; the more attention is bestowed upon the Trismegistic writings, the more it is apparent that they cannot be ascribed to Neoplatonism, if, as generally held, Neoplatonism begins with Ammonius Saccas, Plotinus, and Porphyry in the third century. Therefore, in this subject, and in this subject alone, we find a tendency in later writers to push back the Neoplatonists so as to include Philo Judaeus, who flourished in the first half of the first century! On these lines we should soon get Neo-platonism back to Plato and Pythagoras, and so be forced to drop the "Neo" and return to the old honoured name of simple "Platonici." 

But already by this time in Germany the theory of Neoplatonic Syncretismus to prop up sinking Heathendom against rising Christianity had become crystallised, as may be seen from the article on "Hermes, Hermetische Schriften" in Pauly's famous Real Encyclopadie der classischen Alterthumswissenshaft (Stuttgart, 1844), where this position is assumed from the start. 

Parthey, however, in 1854, in his preface, ventures on no such opinion, but expresses a belief that we may even yet discover in Egypt a demotic text of the "Poemandres," which shows that he considered the original to have been written in Egyptian, and therefore not by a Neoplatonist. 

[p. 27]

THE FRENCH THEORY OF EGYPTIAN ORIGIN 

In France, moreover, the Egyptian paternity of the Trismegistic writings, and that too on very sensible lines, was asserted about the same time, namely, in 1858, by Artaud in his article on "Hermes Trismegiste," in Hoeffer's Nouvelle Biographie Generale, published at Paris by Messrs Firmin Didot. Artaud writes: 

"In the mystic sense Thoth or the Egyptian Hermes was the symbol of the Divine Mind; he was the incarnated Thought, the living Word--the primitive type of the Logos of Plato and the Word of the Christians. . . . 

"We have heard Champollion, the younger, giving expression to the formal opinion that the books of Hermes Trismegistus really contained the ancient Egyptian doctrine of which traces can be discovered from the hieroglyphics which cover the monuments of Egypt. Moreover, if these fragments themselves are examined, we find in them a theology sufficiently in accord with the doctrines set forth by Plato in his Timaeus--doctrines which are entirely apart from those of the other schools of Greece, and which were therefore held to have been derived by Plato from the temples of Egypt, when he went thither to hold converse with its priests." [*1] 

Artaud is also of the opinion that these Trismegistic treatises are translations from the Egyptian. 

THE VIEWS OF MENARD 

Nowadays, with our improved knowledge of Egyptology, this hypothesis has to be stated in far more 

[p. 28]

careful terms before it can find acceptance among the learned; nevertheless it was evidently the conviction of Deveria, who in a work of which he only succeeded in writing the first two pages, proposed to comment on the entire text of the Trismegistic Books from the point of view of an Egyptologist. For these Books, he declared, offered an almost complete exposition of the esoteric philosophy of ancient Egypt. [*1] 

But by far the most sympathetic and really intelligent account of the subject is that of Menard, [*2] who gives us a pleasant respite from the chorus of the German Neoplatonic syncretism theory. And though we do not by any means agree with all that he writes, it will be a relief to let in a breath of fresh air upon the general stuffiness of our present summary of opinions. 

The fragments of the Trismegistic literature which have reached us are the sole surviving remains of that "Egyptian philosophy" which arose from the congress of the religious doctrines of Egypt with the philosophical doctrines of Greece. In other words, what the works of Philo were to the sacred literature of the Jews, the Hermaica were to the Egyptian sacred writings. Legend and myth were allegorised and philosophised and replaced by vision and instruction. But who were the authors of this theosophic method? This question is of the greatest interest to us, for it is one of the factors in the solution of the problem of the literary evolution of Christianity, seeing that there are intimate points of contact of ideas between several of the Hermetic documents and certain Jewish and Christian writings, especially the opening verses of Genesis, the treatises of Philo, the fourth Gospel 

[p. 29]

[paragraph continues] (especially the Prologue), and beyond all the writings of the great Gnostic doctors Basilides and Valentinus. 

Such and similar considerations lead Menard to glance at the environment of infant Christianity and the various phenomena connected with its growth, and this he does from the point of view of an enlightened independent historical scholar. 

"Christianity," he writes, "did not fall like a thunderbolt into the midst of a surprised and startled world. It had its period of incubation, and while it was engaged in evolving the positive form of its dogmas, the problems of which it was seeking the solution were the subject of thought in Greece, Asia, and Egypt. Similar ideas were in the air and shaped themselves into all sorts of propositions. 

"The multiplicity of sects which have arisen in our own times under the name of socialism, can give but a faint idea of the marvellous intellectual chemistry which had established its principal laboratory at Alexandria. Humanity had set in the arena mighty philosophical and moral problems: the origin of evil, the destiny of the soul, its fall and redemption; the prize to be given was the government of the conscience. The Christian solution [*1] won, and caused the rest to be forgotten, sunk for the most part in the shipwreck of the past. Let us then, when we come across a scrap of the flotsam and jetsam, recognise in it the work of a beaten competitor and not of a plagiarist. Indeed, the triumph of Christianity was prepared by those very men who thought themselves its rivals, but who were only its forerunners. The title suits them, though many were contemporaries of the Christian era, while others were a little later; for the succession of a religion only dates from the day when it is accepted by the 

[p. 30]

nations, just as the reign of a claimant to the throne dates from his victory" (pp. ix., x.). 

Menard distinguishes three principal groups in the Trismegistic treatises, which he assigns to Jewish, Greek, and Egyptian influences. In them also he finds a link between Philo and the Gnostics. 

"Between the first Gnostic sects and the Hellenic Jews represented by Philo, a link is missing; this can be found in several of the Hermetic works, especially 'The Shepherd of Men' and 'The Sermon on the Mountain.' In them also will perhaps be found the reason of the differences, so often remarked upon, between the first three Gospels and the fourth" (p. xliv.). 

Next, the direction in which that "link" is to be looked for is more clearly shown, though here Menard is, I think, too precise when writing: 

"It seems certain that 'The Shepherd' came from that school of Therapeuts of Egypt, who have been often erroneously confounded with the Essenians of Syria and Palestine" (p. lvi). 

But "instead of the physical discipline of the Essenians, who, according to Philo, practised manual labour, put the product of their toil into the common fund, and reduced philosophy to ethics, and ethics to charity, the 'monasteries' of the Therapeuts contributed to Christian propaganda a far more Hellenised population, trained in abstract speculations and mystic allegories. From these tendencies, combined with the dogma of the incarnation, arose the Gnostic sects. 'The Shepherd' should be earlier than these schools" (p. lviii.). 

As to "The Sermon on the Mountain," "it can be placed, in order of ideas and date, between 'The Shepherd' and the first Gnostic schools; it should be 

[p. 31]

a little earlier than the founders of Gnosticism, Basilides, and Valentinus" (p. lxv.). 

If Gnosticism be taken with Menard to mean the Christianised theosophy of Basilides and Valentinus from the first quarter of the second century onwards, the oldest Trismegistic treatises are demonstrably earlier, for their Gnosticism is plainly a far simpler form; in fact, so much more simple that, if we could proceed on so crude an hypothesis as that of a straight-lined evolution, we should be forced to find room for intermediate forms of Gnosticism between them and the Basilidian and the Valentinian Gnosis. And of this Menard seems to be partly conscious when writing: "We can follow in the Hermetic books the destiny of this Judaeo-Egyptian Gnosis, which, during the first century, existed side by side with Christianity without allowing itself to be absorbed by it, passing insensibly from the Jewish school of Philo to the Greek school of Plotinus" (p. lxvii.). 

Menard here used the term Christianity for that tendency which afterwards was called Catholic or General Christianity, the body to which these very same Gnostics gave the principal dogmas of its subsequent theology. 

But if the Gnostics were Therapeuts, and the Trismegistic writers Therapeuts, why should Menard call them Jews, as he appears to do in his interesting question, "Where are the Jewish Therapeuts at the end of the second century?" Certainly Philo laboured to give his readers the impression that the Therapeuts were principally Jews, perhaps to win respect for his compatriots in his apology for his nation; but the Therapeuts were, evidently, on his own showing, drawn from all the nations and scattered abroad in very numerous communities, though many Jews were doubtless in 

[p. 32]

their ranks--indeed, Philo probably knew little about their communities other than the Mareotic. If, then, the term "Therapeut" will explain some of the phenomena presented by these writings, the combination "Jewish Therapeuts" will certainly not do so. The very answer of Menard himself to his question shows that even these Mareotic Therapeuts could not have been orthodox Jews, for the French scholar proceeds to surmise not only that, "some, converted to Christianity, became monks or Gnostics of the Basilidian or Valentinian school," but that "others more and more assimilated themselves to Paganism." 

And by "Paganism" our author says he does not mean "polytheism," for "at this period all admitted into the divine order of things a well-defined hierarchy with a supreme God at the head; only for some this supreme Deity was in the world, for others outside it" (p. lxxiv.). 

Menard's introduction meets with the general approval of Reitzenstein (p. 1), who characterises it as feinsinnige, and agrees that he has rightly appreciated many of the factors, especially from the theological side; he, however (p. 116, n. 2), dissents, and rightly dissents, from Menard as to any direct Jewish influence on the Trismegistic literature, and refuses to admit that the "Poemandres" can in any way be characterised as a Jewish-Gnostic writing. 

But the sensible views of Menard were impotent to check the crystallisation of the German theory, which was practically repeated by Zeller, [*1] and once more by 

[p. 33]

[paragraph continues] Pietschmann in his learned essay, [*1] based in part on A. G. Hoffmann's article "Hermes" in Ersch and Gruber's Allgemeine Encyclopadie der Wissenschaften und Kunste. [*2]  

An exception to this tendency, however, is to be found in the opinion of Aall; [*3] who, though he adduces no proof, would on general grounds place the composition of the Hermetic literature (though whether or not by this he means our extant Trismegistic sermons is not clear) as far back as the second century B.C., and would see in it an offshoot from the same stem which later on supplied the ground-conceptions of the Johannine theology. [*4] 

ENGLISH ENCYCLOPAeDISM 

In England, as we have seen, the subject, like so many others of a similar nature, has been almost entirely neglected, but with the encyclopaedic activity of the past generation we find it touched upon, and in the usual encyclopaedic fashion. The German position is assumed, without one word of proof or reference to any, as an "acquired fact of science"! The "last effort of expiring Heathendom" theory is trotted out with complacency and with that impressive air of official knowledge which makes the pronouncements of the family physician a law unto all its members, from baby to father--until the specialist is called in. And 

[p. 34]

unfortunately these ex cathedra encyclopaedic pronouncements are all the general reader will ever hear. This is the case with all those three indifferent articles in our current dictionaries of reference. [*1] We are assured that, "as all are generally agreed," the writings are Neoplatonic, and this without any qualification or definition of the term, and that too in dictionaries where the term "Neoplatonic," in articles on the subject, is applied solely to the "Chain" from Ammonius Saccas and Plotinus onwards. The presumption is plain that by Neoplatonic forgeries we are to understand a date of at earliest from the middle of the third century onwards. 

CHAMBERS'S OPINION 

And this although Justin Martyr (cir. 150 A.D.) bestows emphatic praise on these very same writings and classes their writer, "Hermes," among the "most ancient philosophers," a point which the German theorists and their English copiers have all discreetly shirked, but which, together with other considerations, has forced Chambers, in the preface to his translation (London, 1882), to give quite a new meaning to the term Neoplatonist, which he uses of Hermes in his title, [*2] and to declare that our Hermes is entitled "to 

[p. 35]

be considered the real founder of Neoplatonism." [*1]  Chambers would still, in spite of Justin's clear testimony, wedge in the earliest deposit of Trismegistic literature immediately between the time of composition of the new canonical books and Justin, and devotes nearly all his notes to fishing out every verse of the New Testament he can which bears the slightest resemblance to the Trismegistic text. [*2] But if we closely compare these so-called parallels, we are compelled to acknowledge that if there be any plagiarism it is not on the side of Hermes; nay, more, it is as plain as it can be that there is no verbal plagiarism at all, and that the similarity of ideas therefore pertains to quite another problem, for the distinctive dogmas of Common Christianity are entirely wanting; there is not a single word breathed of the historical Jesus, not a syllable concerning the nativity, the crucifixion, resurrection, ascension or coming of Christ to judgment, as Chambers admits. 

GERMAN ENCYCLOPAeDISM 

Let us now turn to the pronouncements of German encyclopaedism on the subject. F. A. Brockhaus' Conversations-Lexikon (Leipzig, 1884) does but repeat the old hypothesis. The Trismegistic writings are "the last monuments of Heathendom"; the writer, however, grudgingly takes in the date of Justin Martyr in the sentence, "presumably the majority of these writings belong to the second century," but not a word is breathed of how this conclusion is arrived at. 

A most valuable article, in fact far and away the 

[p. 36]

very best that has yet been done, containing innumerable references to all the articles in the most recent transactions of learned societies and to the papers in scientific periodicals, is that of Chr. Scherer on "Hermes," in W. H. Roscher's Aufuhrliches Lexikon der griechischen u. romischen Mythologie (Leipzig, 1884, etc.). Unfortunately this article deals solely with the Hermes of the Greeks, while for "Hermes Trismegistos" we are referred to "Thoth," an article which has not yet appeared. This brings our summary of opinions down to the close of the last century; we have probably omitted reference to some minor opinions, for no up-to-date bibliography exists on the subject, but we doubt that any work of importance has escaped our notice. 

A RECENT ARTICLE BY GRANGER

The most recent work done in England on the subject, in the present century, is an article by Frank Granger, [*1] who, in spite of some useful criticisms and suggestions on some points, is nevertheless in the main reactionary, and contends for a Christian origin of our most important tractates. The scope of his enquiry may be seen from his preliminary statement when he writes: 

"We shall have little difficulty in showing, as against Zeller, that the book [? our Corpus, or the first Sermon only] is in the main homogeneous and of Christian origin. Not only so, our discussion will bring us into contact with the later Greek culture as it developed amid Egyptian surroundings, and will raise several problems of considerable importance. Among other 

[p. 37]

things we shall have to trace the way in which Hermes passes over into Christian tradition, and how the Greek representations of Hermes furnished Christian art with one of its earliest motives. [*1] We shall further find in it a bridge by which we may pass over from Greek philosophy and science to modes of thought which are properly Christian. And yet the writer retains so much of the antique spirit that he can hardly be mistaken for an apologist of Paganism." 

When, however, Granger attempts to prove his case, he breaks down utterly, being able to point to little besides the popular phrase "increase and multiply." Towards the end of his enquiry, however, he sees that the traditional values of many factors will have to be altered by a study of our literature, as, for instance, when he writes: 

"The traditional estimate of Gnosticism, then, requires to be reconsidered, in the light of the Poemandres. It belongs to a time when religious definitions were still in the making--a time, therefore, when the limits of free discussion were not yet straitly drawn. Hence the various permutations of religious belief which we find in Irenaeus, Hippolytus, Tertullian, would not be admitted by their exponents to be in conflict with the Christian faith, but would rather be regarded as exhibiting new and fruitful applications of principles common to all. Ecclesiastical opinion ultimately settled down in one direction rather than another. But until this process was complete, each living system of belief might count upon a possible victory, [*2] and so, among others, the system which may be traced in the Poemandres. And the Poemandres is so far from being a merely heretical production, that 

[p. 38]

its relation to orthodox belief may fairly be indicated by saying that it answers to the earlier intellectual position of Clement of Alexandria." [*1] 

We should say rather that the difficulties in which our essayist is evidently involved by his hypothesis of Christian origin, would be considerably lessened by accepting the evidence on all hands which a more extended study of the Trismegistic and allied literatures affords, and by treating what he refers to as Gnosticism without qualification as the Christianised Gnosis, and not as Gnosticised Christianity. 

We thus find Granger compelled, in keeping with the above, to guess the date of the "Poemandres" as towards the end of the second century; but even so, he feels dissatisfied with himself, for he has to add: "Nor does this date preclude us from finding occasional traces of even earlier material." 

However we may dissent from Granger's conclusions as to the "Poemandres," we agree with him in the importance he ascribes to the Gospel according to the Egyptians, in connection with which he writes [*2]:

"It is instructive to note that Salome, who plays so prominent a part in the Gospel according to the Egyptians, is the mother of St John, [*3] and that the same Gnostic circles in which this gospel is current were also those in which we hear for the first time of the Fourth Gospel. That is to say, the Fourth Gospel comes to us from the hands of the Alexandrine Gnostics. The system of Valentinus is really a somewhat fanciful

[p. 39]

commentary upon the opening chapters of St John's Gospel. [*1] Heracleon, the first great commentator [*2] upon St John, was both a Gnostic and at the same time was really the master of Origen, and through him helped to determine the development of the orthodox theology. Now, the key to the interpretation of the Fourth Gospel is to be found in the Gnostic ideas which underlie the Poemandres, ideas to which Heracleon furnishes the clue. But the commentators have refused the help which the Gnostics could give, and the Fourth Gospel has been consistently misunderstood owing to the exaggerated stress which has been laid upon the doctrine of the logos." 

I am not quite clear what the last sentence is intended to mean. Too great stress cannot be laid upon the doctrine of the Logos, for it is, as we shall show, the fundamental concept of Hellenistic theology; but too great stress can and has been laid upon the illegitimate claim that the Proem of the Fourth Gospel embodies a peculiarly Christian doctrine. 

Moreover, if the Fourth Gospel emerges in Alexandrine circles and is so essentially Gnostic, how can it be ascribed, as Granger appears to ascribe it, to "St John"? A very different conclusion seems to follow from Granger's premisses. 

The conclusion of the most recent study by English scholarship on our "Poemandres" is as follows: 

"The Poemandres, then, is a very striking exponent of the religious and philosophical ideas amid which 

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] Alexandrine theology arose. On the one hand it is in touch with Greek mythology and science; on the other, with Jewish and Christian literature. The author is more sober than most of his Gnostic contemporaries; he is a more consistent reasoner than Clement." [*1] 

But if, as we shall show, the date of the "Poemandres" must be pushed back demonstrably at least a hundred years, and if, as is exceedingly probable, it must go back still further, the whole problem is changed, and the relationship of all the factors alters proportionately. 

REITZENSTEIN AND THE DAWN OF RIGHT VIEWS 

But in the present century, by the publication of Reitzenstein's Poimandres, the whole subject has been placed on a different footing and brought into a clearer light. Reitzenstein attacks the problem of the Trismegistic writings from an entirely objective, historical, philological, and literary standpoint. Being entirely emancipated from any theological preconceptions, he is always careful to point out that his conclusions are based solely on critical research in the domain of philology proper; he cannot, however, refrain at times from adding (somewhat slily) that these results are of the deepest interest to the theologian--indeed, we might say highly embarrassing if the theologian happens to be a traditionalist. 

The general scope of Reitzenstein's essay may be gathered from his sub-title, "Studies in Greek-Egyptian and Early Christian Literature." Our Trismegistic writings form part of a large number of Greek written texts, the remains of a once exceedingly extensive Hellenistic theological literature; and by Hellenistic 

[p. 41]

theology is meant the blending of Greek and Oriental religious thought and experience. This Hellenistic theology was most strongly influenced by Egyptian conceptions and traditions. The Egyptian religion is known to have spread itself over the Hellenistic world, and every scholar will at once recall to mind how many Greek writers have treated expressly of the Egyptian religion, and how many passages in Greek literature refer to Egyptian beliefs, as compared with the very few which treat of Babylonian, Persian, or even Syrian. 

Nevertheless, the remains of this Hellenistic theological literature have never been treated as a whole from the point of view of philology; the cause of this has been the entire disregard of the subject by Christian theologians, coupled with the grotesque grounds on which the consideration of the Hellenistic-Egyptian religion is usually set aside--one famous theologian lately going so far as to assert that the Egyptian worship was despised on all sides, both by Jews and Greeks, as the lowest depth of human superstition. 

As then Egypt had a provably dominant position in Hellenistic literature, so also must she have had in some sort a correspondingly strong influence on Hellenistic culture, and consequently on the development of Hellenistic religious experience. The evidence of this is afforded by the Early Christian literature. 

We have, therefore, here in these Greek-Egyptian and Early Christian documents the possibility of methodical work, seeing that it is a question of the comparative study of two contemporaneous literatures; moreover, the language and typology of the Christian literature is bound to betray traces of the general Hellenistic theology of the time (pp. v., vi.). 

The study of Reitzenstein is thus a consideration of 

[p. 42]

our Trismegistic literature as a whole, and the analysis and comparison of two of the most typical sermons with other Hellenistic documents and with Early Christian writings. 

This he does with praiseworthy and painstaking industry, with great acumen and admirable scholarly equipment; but his work is of no service to any but scholars, and that, too, to scholars who are specialists. It is a work bristling with technicalities of every description, and crammed with untranslated texts. Indeed, Reitzenstein belongs to that school of philological purists who think it a loss of dignity to translate anything; this is a very convenient convention, and I myself have often wished that I could have availed myself of it when face to face with innumerable difficulties of translation. 

Reitzenstein, then, translates nothing, but busies himself with texts and the higher criticism of the subject. He, however, does not give us the text of our literature as a whole, or even of the Corpus Hermeticum, but only of four chapters and the fragments of a fifth. Moreover, the results of his investigations are very difficult to summarise; indeed, he nowhere summarises them himself in any certain fashion, his chapters being on the whole of the nature of studies in the Trismegistic literature rather than a complete exposition. 

Nevertheless these studies are, beyond comparison, the most important and suggestive work that has yet been done on the subject; and as I shall avail myself of his labours on so many occasions in the sequel, I cannot refrain from acknowledging here the special debt of gratitude which all lovers of our sermons must feel to him, for compelling the attention of scholars to the first importance of the Trismegistic literature in the 

[p. 43]

domain of the history of the development of religious thought in the first centuries. 

The general scope of his studies will be seen from the titles of the main chapters:--I. Age of the "Poimandres"; by "Poimandres" R.  means C. H., i. only. II. Analysis of the "Poimandres"; III. Fundamental Conception of the "Poimandres"; IV. "Poimandres" and the Egyptian Apocalyptic Literature; V. Expansion of the Hermetic Literature; VI. The Hermetic Corpus; VII. The Later "Poimandres" Document (The Prophet-Initiation). 

The theory of plagiarism from Christianity must for ever be abandoned. The whole literature is based on the "Poemandres" as its original gospel, and the original form of this scripture must be placed at least prior to the second century A.D. How much earlier it goes back we cannot at present say with any exactitude; before the beginning of the second century is the terminus ad quem--that is to say it cannot possibly be later than this; to seek, therefore, for traditional Christian thoughts in this document is henceforth deprived of any prospect of success (p. 36). 

Reitzenstein tells us (p. 2) that these writings in the first place interested him solely through their literary form, but that this interest became deepened as he gradually learned to value them as important records of that powerful religious movement which, like a flood, overflowed the West from the East, and, after preparing the way for Christianity, subsequently bore it along with it; the best and surest evidence of this religious revival is to be found in the literary form of Hellenistic theology. 

This in itself is of interest enough and to spare; and at a time when every scrap of contemporary literature is being so eagerly scanned for the smallest side-light it 

[p. 44]

can throw on the environment and development of Christian origins, it is amazing that the Trismegistic writings should have been hitherto so studiously neglected. 

A KEY TO EGYPT'S WISDOM 

But there is another and still more profoundly interesting side of the subject which we cannot expect to find treated in a purely philological, technical, and critical treatise. The more one studies the best of these mystical sermons, casting aside all prejudice, and trying to feel and think with the writers, the nearer one is conscious of approaching the threshold of what may well be believed to have been the true Adytum of the best in the mystery-traditions of antiquity. Innumerable are the hints of the greatnesses and immensities lying beyond that threshold--among other precious things the vision of the key to Egypt's wisdom, the interpretation of apocalypsis by the light of the sun-clear epopteia of the intelligible cosmos. 

Such greatnesses and such mysteries have a power and beauty which the most disreputable tradition of the texts through unknowing hands cannot wholly disguise, and they are still recognisable, even though thus clad in the rags of their once fair garments, by those who have eyes to see and ears to hear. 

But to return to the points we raised in the opening of this chapter. 

THE SUGGESTED ANSWERS TO OUR QUESTIONS

If we now re-state the problems we are considering in the interrogative form, we shall have to find answers to the following questions: 

Why did the early Church Fathers accept the 

[p. 45]

Trismegistic writings as exceedingly ancient and authoritative, and in their apologetic writings quote them in support of the main impersonal dogmas of Christianity? 

Why, in the revival of learning, for upwards of a century and a half did all the Humanists welcome them with open arms as a most valuable adjunct to Christianity, and as being in accord with its main doctrines, so much so that they laboured to substitute Trismegistus for Aristotle in the schools? 

Finally, why during the last two centuries and a half has a body of opinion been gradually evolved, infinitesimal in its beginnings, but well-nigh shutting out every other view, that these writings are Neoplatonic forgeries? 

The answers to these questions are simple:--The Church Fathers appealed to the authority of antiquity and to a tradition that had never been called in question, in order to show that they taught nothing fundamentally new--that, in brief, they taught on main points what Hermes had taught. They lived in days too proximate to that tradition to have ventured on bringing any charge of plagiarism and forgery against it without exposing themselves to a crushing rejoinder from men who were still the hearers of its "living voice" and possessors of its "written word." 

The scholars of the Renaissance naturally followed the unvarying tradition of antiquity, confirmed by the Fathers of the Church. 

Gradually, however, it was perceived that, if the old tradition were accepted, the fundamental originality of general Christian doctrines--that is to say, the philosophical basis of the Faith, as apart from the historical dogmas peculiar to it--could no longer be maintained. It, therefore, became imperatively necessary to discredit the ancient tradition by every possible 

[p. 46]

means. With what success this policy has been attended we have already seen; we have also reviewed this growth of opinion, and shown its baseless character and the straits to which its defenders have been put. 

From the clouds of this obscurantism the sun of Thrice-greatest Hermes and the radiance of his Gnosis have once more shone forth in the skies of humanistic enquiry and unprejudiced research. He is no longer to be called bastard, and plagiarist, and thief of other people's property, but must be regarded as a genuine teacher of men, handing on his own, and giving freely of his substance to all who will receive the gift. 

Footnotes

^19:1 For a list of those who thought Hermes was prior to Moses, and even identical with Joseph, or even Adam, see Harles, p. 49 ff. and notes.

^19:2 A Platonic philosopher who lived probably in the 4th century A.D.

^20:1 Op. cit., p. 3a.

^20:2 In which Patrizzi did but echo the opinion of his predecessors, such as Vergecius, the editor of the first edition of the Greek text, Candalle and many more.

^21:1 De Zoroastre Bactriano Hermete Trismegisto Sanchoniathone Phoenicio eorumque Scriptis, et Aliis contra Mosaicae Scripturae Antiquitatem; Exercitationes Familiares, pp. 73-180--a book now very scarce.

^21:2 Jacobi Bruckeri, Historia Critica Philosophiae (2nd ed., Leipzig, 1767), i. 252 ff. Lib. ii., cap. vii., "De Philosophia Aegyptiorum." See also Meiners' Versuch uber die Religionsgeschichte der altesten Volker besonders der Egyptier (Gottingen, 1775).

^21:3 De Rebus Sacris . . . Exercitationes ad Card. Baronii Prolegomena, i., n. 10 (London, 1614). Casaubon concludes that the whole book, i.e. the "Poemandres," is a pseudepigraph, the pure invention of some Christian or other, or perhaps better, of some semi-Christian (p. 56).

^22:1 See his dissertation on Hermes and the Hermetic writings in the edition of 1820, vol. ii., pp. 128-155.

^22:2 Though Reitzenstein (p. 1) speaks of the"schneidende Kritik" of Casaubon.

^22:3 Vol. i., p. 89, of the following amply entitled work, Das Platonisch-Hermetisches [sic] Christenthum, begriffend die historische Erzehlung vom Ursprung und vielerley Secten der heutigen Fanatischen Theologie, unterm Namen der Paracelsisten, Weigelianer, Rosencreutzer, Quaker, Bohmisten, Wiedertauffer, Bourignisten, Labadisten und Quietisten, by M. Ehre Gott Daniel Colberg, 2 vols. (Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1690, 1691).

^23:1 Op. supr. cit.; the most "advanced" writer on the subject being Tiedemann, to whose work we have already referred; but unfortunately we have not been able to procure a copy, and the British Museum is without it. Tiedemann thinks that none of the Trismegistic writings existed before the fourth century, while Fabricius himself, whose summary of prior opinion is overworked by Harles, assigns them to the time of Porphyry and Iamblichus, though Harles dates the earliest of them from the end of the first to the middle of the second century (p. 48, n.).

^23:2 It may be worth while here to record the opinion of Gibbon, who would ascribe a Christian origin to some of the Trismegistic writings, and impatiently dismisses the subject by classing Hermes with Orpheus and the Sibyls as a cloak for Christian forgery (vol. ii. p. 69, Bury's ed.).

^24:1 How the public is catered for may be seen from any popular "knowledge"-digest. The following will serve as a specimen, taken from the article "Hermes Trismegistus," in The American Encyclopaedia: a Popular Dictionary of General Knowledge, edited by Ripley and Dana (New York, 1874): "In the conflict between Neoplatonism and Christianity, the former sought to give a profounder and more spiritual meaning to the pagan philosophy, by combining the wisdom of the Egyptians and the Greeks, and representing it as a very ancient, divine revelation."

^24:2 Delivered before the University of Jena at Pentecost, 1827, by Lud. Frid. Otto Baumgarten-Crusius.

^24:3 Orelli (J. C.), Sanchoniathonis Fragmenta de Cosmogonia et Theologia Phoenicorum (Leipzig, 1826).

^25:1 Hilgers (B. J.), De Hermetis Trismegisti Poimandro Commentatio (Bonn, 1855), suggested by the appearance of Parthey's text in 1854.

^25:2 Mohler (J. A.), Patrologie, pp. 950-951--a brief note on Hermes. Ed. by F. X. Reithmayr (Regensberg, 1840).

^26:1 Op. cit., pp. 16-17.

^27:1 The whole of this article has been lifted, without acknowledgment, by M'Clintock and Strong in their Cyclopaedia of Biblical, Theological, and Ecclesiastical Literature (New York, 1872).

^28:1 Pierret, Melanges d'Archeologie egyptienne et assyrienne, i. (1873), p. 112; R. 1, n. 1.

^28:2 Op. sup. cit., 1866.

^29:1 The popular Christian solution, Menard should have said.

^32:1 Gesch. d. griech. Philos., III., ii., 225 ff. Zeller, while recognising the Gnostic nature of C. H. i. and C. H. xiii. (xiv.), treats the rest of our Corpus as an expression of declining Paganism. So also Erdmann (Hist. Philos., i. 113, 2, Tr.), who deals with our Corpus only, and assigns its sermons to different authors and times. He contends that C. H. xiii. (xiv.) shows a Neo-pythagorean tendency, a term far vaguer than Neo-platonic even.

^33:1 Hermes Trismegistos n. agyp., griech. u. oriental. Uberlieferungen (Leipzig, 1875).

^33:2 A laborious article replete with references, but dealing solely with the Hermes-saga and not with our writings.

^33:3 Aall (A.), Geschichte der Logosidee in der Philosophie (Leipzig, vol. i. 1896, vol. ii. 1899), ii. 78, n. 4.

^33:4 Cf. Reitzenstein, Zwei religionsgeschichtliche Fragen (Strassburg, 1901), p. 93, n. 3.

^34:1 Art. "Hermes and Hermes Trismegistus," by L. Schmitz, in Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology (London, 1870), a work which is now entirely out of date; Jowett's art., "Hermes Trismegistus," in the Encyclopaedia Britannica (9th ed., London, 1880), repeated in the recent reprint without alteration; and Mozley's art., "Hermes Trismegistus," in Smith and Wace's Dictionary of Christian Biography (London, 1882); to both of which articles, if not to the works themselves, the above remark also applies.

^34:2 The Theological and Philosophical Works of Hermes Trismegistus, Christian Neoplatonist.

^35:1 Op. cit., p. xii.

^35:2 In this repeating de Foix, who attempted the same task more than three hundred years before.

^36:1 "The Poemandres of Hermes Trismegistus," in The Journal of Theological Studies, vol. v. No. 19, April 1904 (London).

^37:1 Namely, that of the Good Shepherd.

^37:2 This is a reflection of Menard's sensible view.

^38:1 Ibid., p. 406.

^38:2 Ibid., p. 411.

^38:3 I have never come across this statement before, and so regret that G. has not given his authority. If such were the tradition, it would be exceedingly instructive. Salome, however, in the fragments of this Gospel preserved to us, says categorically that she has never "brought forth."

^39:1 It is not, even if the "opening chapters" be reduced to the Proem. Heracleon, one of the disciples of Valentinus, comments directly on this Proem, but from the point of view of a quite independent tradition.

^39:2 The first commentator of any kind of which we have any knowledge, rather.

^40:1 Ibid., p. 412.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 47]

III

THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 

THOTH (TEHUTI) 

THE present chapter will be devoted to a brief consideration of the nature, powers, and attributes of the divine personification Thoth (Tehuti), the Master of Wisdom and Truth, on the ground of pure Egyptian tradition. As I have unfortunately no sufficient knowledge of Egyptian, I am not in a position to control by the texts the information which will be set before the reader; it will, however, be derived from the works of specialists, and mainly from the most recent study on the subject, the two sumptuous volumes of Dr E. A. Wallis Budge, the keeper of the Egyptian and Assyrian antiquities in the British Museum. 

First of all, however, let us see what the German scholar Pietschmann has had to say on Thoth in his monograph specially devoted to Thrice-greatest Hermes according to Egyptian, Greek, and Oriental traditions. [*1] 

The first part of Pietschmann's treatise, in which he seems to be content, as far as his own taste and feeling are concerned, to trace the original of the grandiose concept of the Thrice-greatest to the naive conception of an "ibis-headed moon-god," is devoted to the consideration of what he calls the god Tex-Tehuti among 

[p. 48]

the Egyptians. Why Pietschmann should have chosen this double form of the name for his sub-title is not very clear. The variants appear to be Teh, Tehu, Tehut, and Tehuti--of which it would seem that the Greek form Thoth is an attempt to transliterate Tehut. There are, however, it may be remarked, no less than eighteen variants of the name found in Greek and Latin. I should thus myself be inclined to use the form Tehut if it were permissible; but of this I am not quite sure, as the weak-sounding though undoubtedly more common form Tehuti, is usually employed by scholars. As, however, Tehuti, to my ears at any rate, is not a very dignified sounding cognomen, I shall use the Greek form Thoth as being the more familiar to English readers. 

THOTH ACCORDING TO PIETSCHMANN 

Horapollo tells us that the ibis was the symbol of Thoth as the "master of the heart and reason in all men," [*1] though why this was so must remain hidden in the mystery of the "sacred animals," which has not yet to my knowledge been in any way explained. 

And as Thoth, the Logos, was in the hearts of all,  so was he the heart of the world whose life directed and permeated all things. [*2] 

Thus the temple, as the dwelling of the God, was regarded as a model of the world, and its building as a copy of the world-building. And just as Thoth had ordained measure, number, and order in the universe, so was he the master-architect of temple-building and of all the mystic monuments. Thus, as the ordering world-mind, a text addresses Thoth as follows: 

[p. 49]

"Thou art the great, the only God, the Soul of the Becoming." [*1] 

To aid him in the world Thoth has a spouse, or syzygy, Nehe-maut. She is, among the Gnostics, the Sophia-aspect of the Logos. She is presumably the Nature of our Trismegistic treatises. Together Thoth and Nehe-maut are the initiators of all order, rule, and law in the universe. 

Thus Thoth is especially the representative of the Spirit, the Inner Reason of all things; he is the Protector of all earthly laws, and every regulation of human society. [*2] Says a text: 

"His law is firmly established, like that of Thoth." [*3] 

As representative of the Reason immanent in the world, Thoth is the mediator through whom the world is brought into manifestation. He is the Tongue of Ra, the Herald of the Will of Ra, [*4] and the Lord of Sacred Speech. [*5] 

"What emanates from the opening of his mouth, that cometh to pass; he speaks, and it is his command; he is the Source of Speech, the Vehicle of Knowledge, the Revealer of the Hidden." [*6] 

[p. 50]

Thoth is thus the God of writing and all the arts and sciences. On a monument of Seti I. he is called "Scribe of the nine Gods." He writes "the truth of the nine Gods," and is called "Scribe of the King of Gods and men." 

Hence he is naturally inventor of the hieroglyphics, and patron and protector of all temple-archives and libraries, and of all scribes. At the entrance of one of the halls of the Memnonium at Thebes, the famous "Library of Osymandias," called "The great House of Life," we find Thoth as "Lord in the Hall of Books." [*1] 

In the Ebers papyrus we read: "His guide is Thoth, who bestows on him the gifts of his speech, who makes the books, and illumines those who are learned therein, and the physicians who follow him, that they may work cures." 

We shall see that one of the classes of priests was devoted to the healing of the body, just as another was devoted to the healing of the soul. 

These books are also called "The Great Gnoses of Thoth." [*2] Thoth was thus God of medicine, but not so much by drugs as by means of mesmeric methods and certain "magic formulae." Thus he is addressed as "Thoth, Lord of Heaven, who givest all life, all health." [*3] 

THE THREE GRADES OF THE EGYPTIAN MYSTERIES 

Moreover, Thoth was also Lord of Rebirth: [*4] "Thou hast given life in the Land of the Living; Thou hast 

[p. 51]

made them live in the Region of Flames; Thou hast given respect of thy counsels in the breasts and in the hearts of men--mortals, intelligences, creatures of light." 

The Land of the Living was the Invisible World, a glorious Land of Light and Life for the seers of ancient Egypt. Mortals, Intelligences, Creatures of Light, were, says Pietschmann, the "three grades of the Egyptian mysteries." [*1] These grades were, one may assume from our treatises: (1) Mortals--probationary pupils who were instructed in the doctrine, but who had not yet realised the inner vision; (2) Intelligences--those who had done so and had become "men," that is to say who had received the "Mind"; (3) Beings (or Sons) of Light--those who had become one with the Light, that is to say those who had reached the nirvanic consciousness. 

So much for what Pietschmann can be made to tell us of Thoth as Wisdom-God among the Egyptians. 

THOTH ACCORDING TO REITZENSTEIN 

To the information in Pietschmann may be added that which is given by Reitzenstein in the second of his two important studies, Zwei religionsgeschichtliche Fragen nach ungedruckten Texten der Strassburger Bibliothek (Strassburg, 1901). This second study deals with "Creation-myths and the Logos-doctrine," the special Creation-myths treated of being found in a hitherto unpublished Greek text, which hands on purely Egyptian ideas in Greek dress and with Greek god-names, and which is of great interest and importance for the general subject of which our present studies form part. 

[p. 52]

The writer of this cosmogonical fragment was a priest or prophet of Hermes, and Hermes plays the most important part in the creation-story. Reitzenstein then proceeds to show that in the oldest Egyptian cosmogony the cosmos is brought into being through the Divine Word, which Thoth, who seems to have originally been equated with the Sun-god, speaks forth. This gives him the opportunity of setting down the attributes ascribed to Thoth in Egypt in pre-Greek times. [*1] As, however, the same ground is covered more fully by Budge, we will now turn to his Gods of the Egyptians, or Studies in Egyptian Mythology (London, 1904), vol. i. pp. 400 ff., and lay under contribution the chapter entitled "Thoth (Tehuti) and Maat, and the other Goddesses who were associated with him," as the most recent work on the subject by a specialist in Egyptological studies, whose opinions, it is true, may doubtless on many points be called into question by other specialists, but whose data must be accepted by the layman as based on prolonged first-hand study of the original texts. In using the material supplied by Dr Budge, however, I shall venture on setting it forth as it appears to me--that is to say, with the ideas awakened in my own mind by the study of his facts. 

THOTH ACCORDING TO BUDGE 

In the Hymns to Ra in the Ritual or Book of the Dead, and in works of a similar nature, we find that Thoth and Maat stand one on either side of the Great God in his Boat, and that their existence was believed to be coeval with his own. Maat is thus seen to be the feminine counterpart, syzygy or shakti, of Thoth, and her name is associated with the idea of Truth and 

[p. 53]

[paragraph continues] Righteousness--that which is right, true, real, genuine, upright, righteous, just, steadfast, unalterable. 

HIS DEIFIC TITLES 

From the inscriptions of the later dynastic period, moreover, we learn that Thoth was called "Lord of Khemennu (Hermopolis), Self-created, to whom none hath given birth, God One." He is the great Measurer, the Logos, "He who reckons in Heaven, the Counter of the Stars, the Enumerator of the Earth and of what is therein, and the Measurer of the Earth." 

He is the "Heart of Ra which cometh forth in the form of the God Thoth." 

As Lord of Hermopolis, where was his chief shrine, and of his temples in other cities, he was called "Lord of Divine Words," "Lord of Maat," "Judge of the two Combatant Gods"--that is, of Horus and Set. Among other titles we find him called "Twice-great," and "Thrice-great." "From this last," says Budge, "were derived the epithets 'Trismegistus' and 'Termaximus' of the classical writers." We, however, doubt if this is so, and prefer the explanation of Griffith, as we shall see later on. 

In addition to these deific titles, which identify him with the Logos in the highest meaning of the term, he was also regarded as the Inventor and God of all arts and sciences; he was "Lord of Books," "Scribe of the Gods," and "Mighty in speech"--that is to say, "his words took effect," says Budge; his was the power of the "Spoken Word," the Word whose language is action and realisation. He was said to be the author of many of the so-called "funeral works" by means of which the "deceased" gained everlasting life. These books were, however, rather in their origin sermons of 

[p. 54]

initiation for living men, setting forth the "death unto sin and the new birth unto righteousness." Thus in the Book of the Dead he plays a part to which are assigned powers greater than those of Osiris or even of Ra himself. 

HIS SYMBOLS AND NAME 

He is usually depicted in human form with the head of an ibis, or sometimes as an ibis; but why he is so symbolised remains a mystery even unto this day. It is also of little purpose to set down the emblems he carries, or the various crowns he wears, without some notion of what these hidden symbols of a lost wisdom may purport. The meanings of these sacred signs were clear enough, we may believe, to those who were initiated into the "Language of the Word"; to them they revealed the mystery, while for the profane they veiled and still veil their true significance. 

Tehuti, the Egyptian name of Thoth, it has been suggested, is to be derived from tehu, the supposed oldest name of the ibis in Egypt; the termination ti thus signifying that he who was thus called possessed the powers and qualities of the ibis. 

But if this is the true derivation, seeing that Tehuti in his highest aspect is a synonym for the Logos of our system at the very least, I would suggest that we should rather exalt the "ibis" to the heavens than drag down the sublime concept of that Logos to considerations connected with a degenerate fowl of earth, and believe that the Egyptians chose it in wisdom rather than folly, as being some far-off reflection of a certain Great Bird of the Cosmic Depths, a member of that circle of Sacred Animals of which the now conventional Signs of the Zodiac are but faint sky-glyphs. 

But the derivation of the name Tehuti which seems 

[p. 55]

to have been favoured by the Egyptians themselves was from tekh, which usually means a "weight," but is also found as the name of Thoth himself. Now the determinative for the word tekh is the sign for the "heart"; moreover, Horapollo (i. 36) tells us that when the Egyptians wish to write "heart" they draw an ibis, adding, "for this bird was dedicated to Hermes (Thoth) as Lord of all Knowledge and Understanding." Is it possible, however, that in this Horapollo was either mistaken or has said less than he knew; and that the Egyptians once wrote simply "heart" for Thoth, who presided over the "weighing of the heart," but subsequently, in their love of mystery, and owing to the name-play, substituted the bird tekh or teknu, which we know closely resembled the ibis, for the more sacred symbol? 

The now commonest name for Thoth, however, is Egy. hab, Copt, hiboi, Gk. ibis; and it is the white ibis (Abu Hannes) which is the Ibis religiosa, so say Liddell and Scott. Another of the commonest symbolic forms of Thoth is the dog-headed ape. Thus among birds he is glyphed as the ibis, among animals as the cynocephalus. The main apparent reason for this, as we shall see later on, is because the ibis was regarded as the wisest of birds, and the ape of animals. [*1] 

In the Judgment Scene of the Book of the Dead the dog-headed ape (Aan) is seated on the top of the beam of the Balance in which the heart of the deceased is weighed; his duty apparently is to watch the pointer and tell his master Thoth when the beam is level. Brugsch has suggested that this ape is a form of Thoth 

[p. 56]

as God of "equilibrium," and that it elsewhere symbolises the equinoxes; but this does not explain the ape. Thoth is indeed, as we have seen, the Balancer--"Judge of the two Combatant Gods," [*1] Horus and Set; he it is who stands at the meeting of the Two Ways, at the junction of Order and Chaos; but this by no means explains the puzzling cynocephalus. It was in one sense presumably connected with a certain state of consciousness, a reflection of the true Mind, just as were the lion and the eagle (or hawk); it "mimicked" that Mind better than the rest of the "animals." 

Horapollo (i. 16), basing himself on some Hellenistic sources, tells us that the Egyptians symbolised the equinoxes by a sitting cynocephalus. One of the reasons which he gives for this is delightfully "Physiologic"; he tells us that at the equinoxes once every two hours, or twelve times a day, the cynocephalus micturates. [*2] From this as from so many of such tales we learn what the "sacred animal" did in heaven, rather than what the physical ape performed on earth. (Cf. R. 265, n. 3.) 

THE SHRINE OF THOTH 

"The principal seat of the Thoth-cult was Khemennu, or Hermopolis, a city famous in Egyptian mythology as the place containing the "high ground on which Ra rested when he rose for the first time." 

Dare I here speculate that in this we have the mountain of our "Secret Sermon on the Mountain," 

[p. 57]

and that it was in the Thoth mystery-tradition of Hermopolis that the candidates for initiation were taught to ascend the mountain of their own inner natures, on the top of which the Spiritual Sun would rise and rest upon their heads "for the first time," as Isis says in our "Virgin of the World" treatise? 

THOTH AND HIS COMPANY OF EIGHT 

At Khemennu [*1] Thoth was regarded as the head of a Company of Eight--four pairs of divinities or divine powers, each a syzygy of male and female powers, positive and negative, active and passive, the oldest example of the Gnostic Ogdoad. 

This was long ago the view of Brugsch, and it is now strongly supported by Budge, on the evidence of the texts, as against the opinion of Maspero, who would make the Hermopolitan a copy of the Heliopolitan Paut, or Company, which included Osiris and Isis. Budge, however, squarely declares that "the four pairs of gods of Hermopolis belong to a far older conception of the theogony than that of the company of gods of Heliopolis." 

If this judgment is well founded, we have here a most interesting parallel in the Osirian type of our Trismegistic literature, in which Osiris and Isis look to Hermes (Thoth) as their teacher, as being far older and wiser than themselves. 

The great struggle between Light and Darkness, of the God of Light and the God of Darkness, goes back to the earliest Egyptian tradition, and the fights of Ra and Apep, Heru-Behutet and Set, and Horus, son of Isis, and Set, are "in reality only different versions of one and the same story, though belonging 

[p. 58]

to different periods." The Horus and Set version is apparently the most recent. The names of the Light God and Dark God thus change, but what does not change is the name of the Arbiter, the Mediator, "whose duty it was to prevent either God from gaining a decisive victory, and from destroying one another." This Balancer was Thoth, who had to keep the opposites in equilibrium. 

THE HOUSE OF THE NET 

The name of the Temple of Thoth at Khemennu, or the City of Eight, was Het Abtit, or "House of the Net"--a very curious expression. From Ch. cliii. of the Ritual, however, we learn that there was a mysterious Net which, as Budge says, "was supposed to exist in the Under World and that the deceased regarded it with horror and detestation. Every part of it--its poles, and ropes, and weights, and small cords, and hooks--had names which he was obliged to learn if he wished to escape from it, and make use of it to catch food for himself, instead of being caught by 'those who laid snares.'" 

Interpreting this from the mystical standpoint of the doctrine of Rebirth, or the rising from the dead--that is to say, of the spiritual resurrection of those who had died to the darkness of their lower natures and had become alive to the light of the spiritual life, and this too while alive in the body and not after the death of this physical frame--I would venture to suggest that this Net was the symbol of a certain condition of the inner nature which shut in the man into the limitations of the conventional life of the world, and shut him off from the memory of his true self. The poles, ropes, weights, small cords, and hooks 

[p. 59]

were symbols of the anatomy and physiology, so to say, of the invisible "body" or "carapace" or "egg" or "envelope" of the soul. The normal man was emeshed in this engine of Fate; the man who received the Mind inverted this Net, so to speak, transmuted and transformed it, so that he could catch food for himself. "Come ye after me and I will make you fishers of men." The food with which the "Christ" nourishes his "body" is supplied by men. 

Thus in a prayer in this chapter of the Ritual we read: "Hail, thou 'God who lookest behind thee,' [*1] thou 'God who hast gained the mastery over thine heart,' [*2] I go a-fishing with the cordage [? net] of the 'Uniter of the earth,' and of him that maketh a way through the earth. [*3] Hail ye Fishers who have given birth to your own fathers, [*4] who lay snares with your nets, and who go round about in the chambers of the waters, take ye not me in the net wherewith ye ensnare the helpless fiends, and rope me not in with the rope wherewith ye roped in the abominable fiends of earth, which had a frame which reached unto heaven, and weighted parts that rested upon earth." [*5] 

[p. 60]

And in another chapter (cxxxiii.) the little man says to the Great Man within him: "Lift thyself up, O thou Ra, who dwellest in this divine shrine; draw thou unto thyself the winds, inhale the North wind, and swallow thou the beqesu of thy net on the day wherein thou breathest Maat." 

"On the day wherein thou breathest Maat" suggests the inbreathing or inspiration of Truth and Righteousness, the Holy Ghost, or Holy Breath or Life, the Spouse of the Ordering Mind or Logos. The winds are presumably the four great cosmic currents of the Divine Breath, the North wind being the "down-breath" of the Great Sphere. 

The term beqesu has not yet been deciphered (can it mean knots?); but the swallowing of the Net seems to suggest the transformation of it, inwardly digesting of it, in such a fashion that the lower is set free and becomes one with the higher. 

And that this idea of a net is very ancient, especially in its macrocosmic significance, is evidenced by the parallel of the Assyrian and Babylonian versions of the great fight between the Sun-god Marduk and the Chaotic Mother Tiamat and her titanic and daimonic powers of disordered motion and instability--both Egyptian and Babylonian traditions probably being derived from some primitive common source. 

"He (Marduk) set lightning in front of him, with burning fire he filled his body. He made a net to enclose the inward parts of Tiamat, the Four Winds he set so that nothing of her might escape; the South wind and the North wind, and the East wind and the West 

[p. 61]

wind, he brought near to the net which his father Anu had given him." [*1] 

Now in the Hymns of the popular Hermes-cult found in the Greek Magic Papyri, one of the most favourite forms of address to Hermes is "O thou of the four winds." Moreover, we may compare with the rope with which the Fishers "rope the abominable fiends of earth," the passage of Athenagoras to which we have already referred, and in which he tells us concerning the Mysteries that the mythos ran that Zeus, after dismembering his father, and taking the kingdom, pursued his mother Rhea who refused his nuptials. "But she having assumed a serpent form, he also assumed the same form, and having bound her with what is called the 'Noose of Hercules' (tui kaloymenui Erakleiutikui ammati), was joined with her. And the symbol of this transformation is the Rod of Hermes." 

Here again it is the symbolic Caduceus that represents the equilibrium between the opposed forces; it is the power of Thoth that binds and loosens; he holds the keys of heaven and hell, of life and death. It is further quite evident that Athenagoras is referring to a Hellenistic form of the Mysteries, in which the influence of Egypt is dominant. The "Noose of Hercules" is thus presumably the "Noose of Ptah." Now Ptah is the creator and generator, and his "Noose" or "Tie" is probably the Ankh-tie or symbol of life, the familiar crux ansata, of which the older form is a twisted rope, probably representing the binding together of male and female life in generation. Ptah is also the God of Fire, and we should not forget that it is Hephaistos in Greek myth who catches Aphrodite and Ares in a Net which he has cunningly contrived--at which the gods laughed in High Olympus. 

[p. 62]

In the list of titles of the numerous works belonging to the cycle of Orphic literature, one is called The Veil (Peplos) and another The Net (Diktyon). [*1] 

In the Panathenaea the famous Peplum, Veil, Web, or Robe of Athena, the Goddess of Wisdom, was borne aloft like the sail of a galley; but this was the symbol only of the Mysteries. Mystically it signified the Veil of the Universe, studded with stars, the many-coloured Veil of Nature, [*2] the famous Veil or Robe of Isis, that no "mortal" or "dead man" has raised, for that Veil was the spiritual nature of the man himself, and to raise it he had to transcend the limits of individuality, break the bonds of death, and so become consciously immortal. 

Eschenbach [*3] is thus quite correct when, in another of its aspects, he refers this Veil to the famous Net of Vulcan. Moreover Aristotle, quoting the Orphic writings, speaks of the "living creature born in the webs of the Net"; [*4] while Photius tells us that the book of Dionysius Aegeensis, entitled Netting, or Concerning Nets (Diktyaka), treated of the generation of mortals. [*5] And Plato himself likens the intertwining of the nerves, veins, and arteries to the "network of a basket" or a bird-cage. [*6] 

All of which, I think, shows that Thoth's Temple of the Net must have had some more profound significance in its name than that it was a building in which "the emblem of a net, or perhaps a net itself, was venerated," as Budge lamely surmises. 

[p. 63]

THOTH THE LOGOS 

But to resume. We have seen that Thoth was considered to be the "heart" and "tongue" of Ra the Supreme--that is, not only the reason and mental powers of the god Ra, and the means whereby they were translated into speech, but rather the Controller of the life and Instrument of the utterance of the Supreme Will; He was the Logos in the fullest sense of that mysterious name, the Creative Word. He it is who utters the "words" whereby the Will of the Supreme is carried into effect, and his utterance is that of Necessity and Law; his "words" are not the words of feeble human speech, but the compelling orders of the Creative Will. 

"He spoke the words which resulted in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and he taught Isis the words which enabled her to revivify the dead body of Osiris, in suchwise that Osiris could beget a child by her; and he gave her the formulae which brought back her son Horus to life after he had been stung to death by a scorpion." 

All of which, I believe, refers microcosmically to the mystery of the resurrection from the dead, by the power of the Logos. "Osiris" must die before he can be raised, and beget a son, who is himself, by immaculate conception within his own spiritual nature. "Horus" must be poisoned to death by the scorpion of "Typhon" before he can be raised by the baptism of the pure waters of Life. 

THE WORDS OF THOTH 

Thoth's "knowledge and powers of calculation measured out the heavens and planned the earth, and 

[p. 64]

everything which is in them; his will and power kept the forces in heaven and earth in equilibrium; it was his skill in celestial mathematics which made proper use of the laws (maat) upon which the foundation and maintenance of the universe rested; it was he who directed the motions of the heavenly bodies and their times and seasons; and without his words the gods, whose existence depended upon them, could not have kept their place among the followers of Ra"--but would presumably have disappeared into another universe. 

Thoth is the Judge of the dead, the Recorder and Balancer of all "words," the Recording Angel; for the testing of the soul in the Balance of the Hall of Osiris is called the "weighing of words" and not of "actions." But these "words" were not the words a man uttered, nor even the "reasons" he thought he had for his deeds, but the innermost intentions of his soul, the ways of the will of his being. 

This doctrine of "words" as expressions of will, however, had, in addition to its moral significance, a magical application. "The whole efficacy of prayer appears to have depended upon the manner and tone of voice in which the words were spoken." 

It was Thoth who taught these words-of-power and how to utter them; he was the Master of what the Hindus would call mantra-vidya, or the science of invocation or sacred chanting. These mantrah were held in ancient Egypt, as they were and are to-day in India, and elsewhere among knowers of such matters, of special efficacy in affecting the "bodies" and conditions of that fluid nature which exists midway between the comparative solidity of normal physical nature and the fixed nature of the mind. 

These "words" were connected with vital "breath" and the knowing use of it; that is to say, they were 

[p. 65]

only really efficacious when the spoken words of physical sound corresponded naturally in their vowels and consonants, or their fluid and fixed elements, with the permutations and combinations of the inner elements of Nature; they then and only then were maa or true or authentic or real--that is to say, they were "words-of -power" in that they compelled matter to shape itself according to true cosmic notions. 

Thus in a book called The Book of Breathings, it is said: "Thoth, the most mighty God, the Lord of Khemennu, cometh to thee, and he writeth for thee The Book of Breathings with his own fingers. [*1] Thus thy soul shall breathe for ever and ever, and thy form shall be endowed with life upon earth, and thou shalt be made a God, along with the souls of the Gods, and they shall be the heart of Ra [for thee], and thy members shall be the members of the Great God." 

THOTH AND THE OSIRIFIED 

In the Ritual we learn of the services which Thoth performs for "Osiris," that is for the Osirified, for he repeats them for every man who has been acquitted in the Judgment. Of three striking passages quoted by Budge, we will give the following as the most comprehensible, and therefore the seemingly most important for us. It is to be found in Ch. clxxxiii. and runs as follows, in the words placed in the mouth of the one who is being resurrected into an Osiris. 

"I have come unto thee, O son of Nut, Osiris, Prince of everlastingness; I am in the following of God Thoth, and I have rejoiced at everything which he hath done for thee. He hath brought unto thee sweet air for thy nose, and life and strength for thy beautiful face, and 

[p. 66]

the North wind which cometh forth from Tem for thy nostrils. . . . He hath made God Shu to shine upon thy body; he hath illumined thy path with rays of splendour; he hath destroyed for thee [all] the evil defects which belong to thy members by the magical power of the words of his utterance. He hath made the two Horus brethren to be at peace for thee; [*1] he hath destroyed the storm wind and the hurricane; he hath made the Two Combatants to be gracious unto thee, and the two lands [*2] to be at peace before thee; he hath put away the wrath which was in their hearts, and each hath become reconciled unto his brother." 

THOTH THE MEASURER 

Budge then proceeds to give the attributes of Thoth as connected with time-periods and the instruments of time, the sun and moon. As Aah-Tehuti, he is the Measurer and Regulator of times and seasons, and is clearly not the Moon-god simply--though Budge says that he clearly is--for Thoth as Aah is the "Great Lord, the Lord of Heaven, the King of the Gods"; he is the "Maker of Eternity and Creator of Everlastingness." He is, therefore, not only the Aeon, but its creator; and that is something vastly different from the Moon-god. 

THE TITLE "THRICE-GREATEST" 

On p. 401 our authority has already told us that one of the titles of Thoth is "Thrice-great," and that the Greeks derived the honorific title Trismegistus from this; but on p. 415 he adds: "The title given to him in some inscriptions, 'three times great, great' 

[p. 67]

[paragraph continues] [that is, greatest], from which the Greeks derived their appellation of the god o trismegistos, or 'ter maximus,' has not yet been satisfactorily explained, and at present the exact meaning which the Egyptians assigned to it is unknown." 

If this title is found in the texts, it will settle a point of long controversy, for it has been strenuously denied that it ever occurs in the hieroglyphics; unfortunately, however, Dr Budge gives us no references. To the above sentence our distinguished Egyptologist appends a note to the effect that a number of valuable facts on the subject have been collected by Pietschmann in the book we have already made known to our readers. We have, however, not been able to find any valuable facts in Pietschmann which are in any way an elucidation of the term Thrice-greatest; but to this point we will return in another chapter. 

THE SUPREMACY OF THOTH 

The peculiar supremacy ascribed to Thoth by the Egyptians, however, has been amply demonstrated, and, as the great authority to whom we are so deeply indebted, says in his concluding words: "It is quite clear that Thoth held in their minds a position which was quite different from that of any other god, and that the attributes which they ascribed to him were unlike the greater number of those of any member of their companies of gods. The character of Thoth is a lofty and a beautiful conception, and is, perhaps, the highest idea of deity ever fashioned in the Egyptian mind, which, as we have already seen, was somewhat prone to dwell on the material side of divine matters. Thoth, however, as the personification of the Mind of God, and as the all-pervading, and governing, and directing power 

[p. 68]

of heaven and earth, forms a feature of the Egyptian religion which is as sublime as the belief in the resurrection of the dead in a spiritual body, and as the doctrine of everlasting life." 

Thoth is then the Logos of God, who in his relation to mankind becomes the Supreme Master of Wisdom, [*1] the Mind of all masterhood. 

We will now turn to one whose views are considered heterodox by conservative and unimaginative critics, [*2] who confine themselves solely to externals, and to the lowest and most physical meanings of the hieroglyphics--to one who has, I believe, come nearer to the truth than any of his critics, and whose labours are most highly appreciated by all lovers of Egyptian mystic lore. 

THE VIEWS OF A SCHOLAR-MYSTIC 

The last work of W. Marsham Adams [*3] deserves the closest attention of every theosophical student. Not, however, that we think the author's views with regard to a number of points of detail, and especially with regard to the make-up of the Great Pyramid, are to be accepted in any but the most provisional manner, for as yet we in all probability do not know what the full contents of that pyramid are, only a portion of them being known to us according to some seers. The chief merit of the book before us is the intuitional grasp of 

[p. 69]

its author on the general nature of the mystery-cultus, as derived from the texts, and especially those of the Ritual or the so-called Book of the Dead, as Lepsius named it, setting a bad fashion which is not yet out of fashion. The Egyptian priests themselves, according to our author, called it The Book of the Master of the Secret House, the Secret House being, according to Adams, the Great Pyramid, otherwise called the "Light." 

THE SPIRITUAL NATURE OF THE INNER TRADITION OF EGYPTIAN WISDOM 

In his Preface the author gives us clearly to understand that he regards the Wisdom of Egypt as forming the main background of some of the principal teachings of Early Christianity; and that this view is strongly confirmed by a careful study of the Trismegistic literature and its sources, will be made apparent in the course of our own labours. But before we proceed to quote from the former Fellow of New College, Oxford, whose recent death is regretted by all lovers of Egypt's Wisdom, we must enter a protest. 

Mr Adams has severely handicapped his work; indeed, he has destroyed nine-tenths of its value for scholars, by neglecting to append the necessary references to the texts which he cites. Such an omission is suicidal, and, indeed, it would be impossible for us to quote Mr Adams were it not that our Trismegistic literature permits us--we might almost say compels us--to take his view of the spiritual nature of the inner tradition of Egyptian Wisdom. Not, however, by any means that our author has traversed the same ground; he has not even mentioned the name of the Thrice-greatest one, and seems to have been ignorant of our treatises. Mr Adams claims to have arrived at his 

[p. 70]

conclusions solely from the Egyptian texts themselves, and to have been confirmed in his ideas by personal inspection of the monuments. In fact, he considers it a waste of time to pay attention to anything written in Greek about Egyptian ideas, and speaks of "the distortion and misrepresentation wherein those ideas were involved, when filtered through the highly imaginative but singularly unobservant intellect of Greece." [*1] Thus we have a writer attacking the same problem from a totally different standpoint--for we ourselves regard the Greek tradition of the Egyptian Gnosis as a most valuable adjunct to our means of knowledge of the Mind of Egypt--and yet reaching very similar conclusions. 

THE HOLY LAND OF EGYPT AND ITS INITIATES 

The Holy Land of those who had gone out from the body, watered by the Celestial Nile, the River of Heaven, of which the earthly river was a symbol and parallel, was divided into three regions, or states: (1) Rusta, the Territory of Initiation; (2) Aahlu, the Territory of Illumination; and (3) Amenti, the Place of Union with the Unseen Father. [*2] 

"In the religion of Egypt, the deepest and most fascinating mystery of antiquity, the visible creation, was conceived as the counterpart of the unseen world. [*3] And the substance consisted not of a mere vague belief in the life beyond the grave, but in tracing out the Path whereby the Just, when the portal of the tomb is lifted up, [*4] passes through the successive stages of 

[p. 71]

[paragraph continues] Initiation, of Illumination, and of Perfection, necessary to fit him for an endless union with Light, the Great Creator." [*1] 

Thus we are told that at a certain point in Aahlu, the Territory of Illumination, the Osirified, the purified soul, has achieved the "Passage of the Sun"--that is to say, has passed beyond the mortal mind-plane; he opens the Gates of the Celestial Nile and receives the Atf-crown of Illumination, "fashioned after the form of the Zodiacal light, the glory of the supreme heaven." This is presumably the "crown of lives" referred to in our sermons, which he receives in the sphere called "Eight," and with which he goes to the Father. 

The Guide and Conductor through all these grades was Thoth the Eternal Wisdom; [*2] and we are told that: 

THOTH THE INITIATOR 

"Thoth the Divine Wisdom, clothes the spirit of the Justified [*3] a million times in a garment of true linen, [*4] of 

[p. 72]

that substance, that is to say, which by its purity and its brilliancy reminds us of the mantles, woven out of rays of light, wherewith the sun enwraps the earth afresh each day as she rotates before him; just as the soul of man is invested with new radiance each time that he turns to the presence of his Creator." Again, "in the harmonious proportion of the universe," the Egyptians saw "the Eternal Wisdom, Thoth, 'the Mind and Will of God.'" [*1] 

We have seen that Pietschmann considers the original of Thoth, the God of Wisdom, to be nothing more than the ibis-headed moon-god, thus intentionally deriving the origin of the Great Initiator from what he considers to be the crude beginnings of primitive ideas. But Thoth was the Great Reckoner, the Recorder of the Balance of Justice, the Teller of the Karmic Scales. Now the mortal time-recorder for the Egyptians was the moon, "for if we consider the motion of the moon relatively to the sun, we shall find that the time that it takes in covering a space equal to its own disc is just an hour. . . . Now, that measure of the 'Hour' was peculiarly sacred in Egypt; each of the twenty-four which elapse during a single rotation of the earth being consecrated to its own particular deity, twelve of light and twelve of darkness. 'Explain the God in the hour,' is the demand made of the adept in the Ritual when standing in the Hall of Truth. And that God in the hour, we learn, was Thoth, the 'Lord of the Moon and the Reckoner of the Universe.'" [*2] 

Again, with regard to the moon-phases, the first day of the lunar month was called "the conception of the moon," the second its "birth," and so on step by step till it was full. Now the time of all lower initiations was the full moon. Thus "in the lunar representations

[p. 73]

on the walls of the temple of Denderah we have fourteen steps leading up to the fifteenth or highest, whereon was enthroned Thoth, the Lord of the Moon." [*1] 

For some such reasons was Thoth called Lord of the Moon, not that the moon gave birth to the idea of Thoth. We must not seek for the origin of the Wisdom-tradition in its lower symbols. For in the inscription on the coffin of Ankhnes-Ra-Neferab--that is of her "whose life was the Sacred Heart of Ra"--we read: "Thy name is the Moon, the Heart of Silence, the Lord of the Unseen World" [*2]--of the space "as far as the moon," or the "sublunary region," as the old books say, the first after-death state, where souls are purified from earthly stains. 

SOME OF THE DOCTRINES OF INITIATION 

The end set before the neophyte was illumination, and the whole cult and discipline and doctrines insisted on this one way to Wisdom. The religion of Egypt was essentially the Religion of the Light. 

But "most characteristic of all was the omnipotent and all-dominating sense of the fatherhood of God, producing the familiar and in some respects even joyous aspect which the Egyptians imparted to the idea of death." And "to the sense which the priests at least possessed, both of the divine personality and of their own ultimate union with the personal deity [the Logos], far more probably than to any artificial pretension to a supposed exclusiveness, may be ascribed the mystery enshrouding their religion." [*3] 

And as Light was the Father of the Religion of Illumination, so was Life, his consort or syzygy, the Mother of the Religion of Joy. "Life was the centre, 

[p. 74]

the circumference, the totality of Good. Life was the sceptre in the hand of Amen; life was the richest 'gift of Osiris.' 'Be not ungrateful to thy Creator,' says the sage Ptah-Hotep, in what is perhaps the oldest document in existence, 'for he has given thee life.' 'I am the Fount of Light,' says the Creator in the Ritual. 'I pierce the Darkness. I make clear the Path for all; the Lord of Joy.'" [*1] Or again, as the postulant prays to the setting sun: "O height of Love, thou openest the double gate of the Horizon." [*2] 

Here we have the full doctrine of the Light and Life which is the keynote of our treatises. Again, the doctrine of the endless turning of the spheres, which "end where they begin," in the words of "The Shepherd," is shown in the great fourth year festival of Hep-Tep or "Completion-Beginning," when "the revolution and the rotation of our planet were simultaneously completed and begun afresh." [*3] 

THE TEMPLES OF INITIATION 

That the ancient temples of initiation in Egypt were models of the Sophia Above, or of the "Heavenly Jerusalem," to use a Jewish Gnostic term, or, in other words, of the Type of the world-building, we may well believe. Thus it is with interest that we read the remarks of Adams on the temple of Denderah (or Annu), rebuilt several times according to the ancient plans, and an important centre of the mystery-cultus. The temple was dedicated to Hat-Hor, whose ancient title was the Virgin-Mother. 

"In the centre of the temple is the Hall of the Altar, with entrances opening east and west; and beyond it lies the great hall of the temple entitled the Hall of 

[p. 75]

the Child in his Cradle, from whence access is obtained to the secret and sealed shrine entered once a year by the high priest, on the night of mid-summer." [*1] 

There were also various other halls and chambers each having a distinctive name, "bearing reference, for the most part, to the Mysteries of the light and of a divine Birth." We have such names as: Hall of the Golden Rays, Chamber of Gold, Chamber of Birth, Dwelling of the Golden One, Chamber of Flames. 

Now as the famous planisphere of Denderah--a wall-painting transferred bodily from the temple to Paris, early in the last century--"contains the northern and southern points, we are enabled to correlate the parts of that picture with the various parts of the temple, and thereby to discover a striking correspondence between the different parts of the inscription and the titles of the chambers and halls occupying relative positions." [*2] 

Thus we have in the planisphere corresponding to the halls and chambers such names as: Horus, the Entrance of the Golden Heavens, the Golden Heaven of Isis, Horizon of Light, Palace Chamber of Supreme Light, Heavenly Flame of Burning Gold. "And as the chief hall of the temple was the Hall of the Child in his Cradle, so the chief representation on the planisphere is the holy Mother with the divine Child in her arms." 

THE MYSTERY OF THE BIRTH OF HORUS. 

Now the great mystery of Egypt was the second birth, the "Birth of Horus." In "The Virgin of the World," a long fragment of the lost Trismegistic treatise, "The Sacred Book," preserved by Stobaeus, Isis says to Horus: I will not tell of this birth; I

[p. 76]

must not, mighty Horus, reveal the origin of thy race, lest men should in the future know the generation of the Gods. Of the nature of this rebirth we are familiar from our treatises. But in spite of such clear indications the mystery of the Golden Horus has not yet been revealed. 

In another passage from the same book Isis declares that the sovereignty or kingship of philosophy is in the hands of Harnebeschenis. This transliterated Egyptian name is given by Pietschmann [*1] as originally either Hor neb en xennu (Horus the Lord of Xennu), or as Hor nub en xennu (the Golden Horus of Xennu). His hieroglyph was the golden hawk, who flies nearest the sun, and gazes upon it with unwinking eyes, a fit symbol for the new-born, the "man" illuminate. 

Indeed, says Adams, "throughout the sacred writings of Egypt, there is no doctrine of which more frequent mention is made than that of a divine birth." [*2] 

In what circle of ideas to place the Birth of Horus the theosophical student may perhaps glean by reversing the stages given in the following interesting passage of our author: 

"In the Teaching of Egypt, around the radiant being, which in its regenerate life could assimilate itself to the glory of the Godhead, was formed the 'khaibit,' or luminous atmosphere, consisting of a series of ethereal envelopes, at once shading and diffusing its flaming lustre, as the earth's atmosphere shades and diffuses the solar rays. And at each successive transformation (Ritual, lxxvii-lxxxvii.) it descended nearer to the moral [? normal] conditions of humanity. From the form of the golden hawk, the semblance of the absolute divine substance of the one eternal self-existent being, it passes to the 'Lord of Time,' the image of the Creator, 

[p. 77]

since with the creation time began. Presently it assumes the form of a lily, the vignette in the Ritual representing the head of Osiris enshrined in that flower; the Godhead manifested in the flesh coming forth from immaculate purity. 'I am the pure lily,' we read, 'coming forth from the lily of light. I am the source of illumination and the channel of the breath of immortal beauty. I bring the messages; Horus accomplishes them.' Later the soul passes into the form of the uraeus, 'the soul of the earth.' . . . And finally it assumes the semblance of a crocodile; becoming subject, that is, to the passions of humanity. For the human passions, being part of the nature wherein man was originally created, are not intrinsically evil but only become evil when insubordinate to the soul." [*1] 

"THE BOOK OF THE MASTER" 

And not only was the Deity worshipped as the Source of Light and Life, but also as the Fount of Love. "I am the Fount of Joy," says the Creator in the Ritual, and when the Atf-crown of illumination is set upon the head of the triumphant candidate after accomplishing the "Passage of the Sun," as referred to above, the hymn proclaims that "north and south of that crown is Love." [*2] Into this Love the catechumen was initiated from the Secret Scroll, whose name is thus given in one of the copies: "This Book is the Greatest of Mysteries. Do not let the eye of anyone look upon it--that were an abomination. 'The Book of the Master of the Secret House' is its name." [*3] 

[p. 78]

The whole conception of the doctrine exposed in its chapters is instruction in Light and Life. 

But are we to suppose that the majority were really instructed in this wisdom?--for we find it customary to wrap up some chapters of this Secret Scroll with almost every mummy. By no means. It seems to me that there are at least three phases in the use of this scripture, and in the process of degeneration from knowledge to superstition which can be so clearly traced in the history of Egypt. First there was the real instruction, followed by initiation while living; secondly, there was the recitation of the instruction over the uninitiated dead to aid the soul of the departed in the middle passage; and thirdly, there was the burying a chapter or series of chapters of the Book of the Master as a talisman to protect the defunct, when in far later times the true meaning of the words written in the sacred characters had been lost, though they were still "superstitiously" regarded as magical "words of power." 

The recitation of some of the chapters over the dead body of the uninitiated, however, is not to be set down as a useless "superstition," but was a very efficacious form of "prayers for the dead." After a man's decease he was in conscious contact with the unseen world, even though he may have been sceptical of its existence, or at any rate unfit to be taught its real nature, prior to his decease. But after the soul was freed from the prison of the body, even the uninitiated was in a condition to be instructed on the nature of the path he then perforce must travel. But as he could not even then properly pronounce the "words" of the sacred tongue, the initiated priest recited or chanted the passages. 

[p. 79]

THE STEPS OF THE PATH 

"For the doctrine contained in those mystic writings was nothing else than an account of the Path pursued by the Just when, the bonds of the flesh being loosed, he passed through stage after stage of spiritual growth--the Entrance on Light, the Instruction in Wisdom, the Second Birth of the Soul, the Instruction in the Well of Life, the Ordeal of Fire, and the Justification in Judgment; until, illumined in the secret Truth and adorned with the jewels of Immortality, he became indissolubly united with Him whose name, says the Egyptian Ritual, is Light, Great Creator." [*1] 

It should, however, be remembered that this must not be taken in its absolute sense even for the initiate, much less for the uninitiated. For even in the mystic schools themselves, as we may see from our treatises, there were three modes in which knowledge could be communicated--"By simple instruction, by distant vision, or by personal participation." [*2] For indeed there were many phases of being, many steps of the great ladder, each in ever greater fullness embracing the stages mentioned, each a reflection or copy of a higher phase. 

Thus, for example, "the solemn address, described in the Sai-an-Sinsin, of the 'Gods in the House of Osiris,' followed by the response of the 'Gods in the House of Glory'--the joyous song of the holy departed who stand victorious before the judgment-seat, echoed triumphantly by the inner chorus of their beloved who have gone before them into the fullness of life" [*3]--must be taken as indicative of several stages. Such, for instance, as the normal union of the man's consciousness with that 

[p. 80]

of his higher ego, after exhausting his spiritual aspirations in the intermediate heaven-world--this is the joining the "those-that-are" of "The Shepherd" treatise, in other words, the harvest of those past lives of his that are worthy of immortality; or again the still higher union of the initiated with the "pure mind"; or again the still sublimer union of the Master with the nirvanic consciousness; and so on perchance to still greater Glories. 

Thus we are told that the new twice-born, on his initiation, "clothed in power and crowned with light, traverses the abodes or scenes of his former weakness, there to discern, by his own enlightened perception, how it is 'Osiris who satisfies the balance of Him who rules the heavens'; to exert in its supernal freedom his creative will, now the lord, not the slave of the senses; and to rejoice in the just suffering which wrought his Illumination and Mastery." [*1] 

But higher and still higher he has yet to soar beyond earth and planets and even beyond the sun, "across the awful chasms of the unfathomable depths to far-off Sothis, the Land of Eternal Dawn, to the Ante-chamber of the Infinite Morning." [*2] 

AN ILLUMINATIVE STUDY 

Many other passages of great beauty and deep interest could we quote from the pages of Marsham Adams' illuminative study, but enough has been said for our purpose. The Wisdom of Egypt was the main source of our treatises without a doubt. Even if only one-hundredth part of what our author writes were the truth, our case would be established; and if Egypt did not teach this Wisdom, then we must perforce bow 

[p. 81]

down before Mr Adams as the inventor of one of the most grandiose religions of the universe. But the student of inner nature knows that it is not an invention, and though, if he be a scholar at the same time, he cannot but regret that Mr Adams has omitted his references, he must leave the critics to one or other of the horns of the dilemma; they must either declare that our author has invented it all and pay homage to what in that case would be his sublime genius, or admit that the ancient texts themselves have inspired Mr Adams with these ideas. And if this be a foretaste of what Egypt has preserved for us, what may not the future reveal to continued study and sympathetic interpretation! 

Footnotes

^47:1 Hermes Trismegistos, nach agyptischen, griechischen und orientalischen Uberlieferungen (Leipzig, 1875).

^48:1 pases kardias kai logismou despotes, p. 40, ed. Leemans.

^48:2 Der Gott, "der in pantheistischer Anschauungsweise die ganze Welt belehrend durchdrang," writes Pietschmann, p. 14.

^49:1 Pleyte, Zeitschrift fur agyptische Sprache und Alterthumskunde, 1867, 10. The text is taken from a papyrus in the Leyden Museum.

^49:2 See Pietschmann, p. 15.

^49:3 From an ostrakon in the Louvre, De Horrack, Zeitschrift fur a S. u. A., 1868, 2. And again at Denderah, the King is said to "establish the laws like Thoth the twice-great one." See Dumichen, ibid., 1867, 74.

^49:4 Lepsius, Erster Gotterkreis, Taf. 1, 2. Text S. 181.

^49:5 Brugsch, Worterbuch, 803, and many other references.

^49:6 For a long list of references, see Pietschmann in loco. I have so far cited some of these references to show that the statements of Pietschmann are based upon very ample authority. In what follows, however, these references may be omitted as they are not owing to my own industry, and the scholar can obtain them from Pietschmann's book for himself.

^50:1 Op. cit., p. 16.

^50:2 Compare this title, die grossen Erkentnisse des Tehuti, with the Coptic Codex Brucianus--Voici le livre des gnoses de l'Invisible divin." Amelineau, Notice sur le Papyrus gnostique Bruce, p. 83 (Paris, 1891). See also Carl Schmidt, Gnostische Schriften in koptischer Sprache aus dem Codex Brucianus (Leipzig, 1892).

^50:3 Op. cit., p. 20.

^50:4 Herr der Metempsychose (Lord of Palingenesis), says Pietschmann, p. 23.

^51:1 Op. cit., p. 24 n.

^52:1 Op. cit., pp. 71 ff.

^55:1 And this is the case with the latter even to-day, where in the Sudan the natives "believe that its intelligence is of the highest order, and that its cunning is far superior to that of man." (Op. cit., i. 21.)

^56:1 This is one of the most interesting of his titles: "Judge of the Rehehui, the Pacifier of the Gods, who dwelleth in Unnu" (Hermopolis). (Op. cit., i. 405.)

^56:2 This must have been the mystery folk-tale circulated by the priests, for Marius Victorinus repeats it (Halm, Rhet. Lat. Min., p. 223), and it is preserved in the Physiologos (xlv. p. 275--Lauchert).

^57:1 Which means "City of the Eight [Gods]." (Op. cit., i. 113.)

^59:1 Perhaps suggesting two-faced or Janus-like--before and behind, without and within. With this, however, may be compared the symbolic headdress or mask worn by the virgin Kore (Proserpina) in the Eleusinian Mysteries; she had, Athenagoras (xx. 292) tells us, "two ordinary eyes, and two in her forehead, with her face at the back of her neck."

^59:2 Suggesting Thoth.

^59:3 Suggesting the power of him who can either wrap the Net round the man or open it in a new direction, so that the man can "pass right through his body," as Hermes says to Tat in one of our Sermons.

^59:4 Suggesting "Christs" who have given birth to their Father, the Mind, in their hearts.

^59:5 The fiends of a once mighty frame suggest beings of a daimonic nature. Perhaps there is a formal distinction intended by the epithet "helpless" and "abominable," corresponding with the rational and irrational aspects of the soul as set forth in our sermons.

^61:1 King (L. W.), Babylonian Religion, p. 71.

^62:1 See my Orpheus (London, 1896), pp. 39 and 44 ff.

^62:2 Cf. Philo, De Som., i. (v. 92--Pfeiff)--to pampoikilon yfasma toytoni ton kosmon.

^62:3 Eschenbach (A. C.), Epigenes de Poesi Orphica (Nurnberg, 1702), p. 51.

^62:4 De Gen. Anim., II. i. 613C.

^62:5 Bibl, clxxxv.

^62:6 Tim., 1079F.

^65:1 The symbol of his actualising power.

^66:1 Showing that Set is Horus in his form of darkness.

^66:2 Mystically, the upper and lower kingdoms in man.

^68:1 "Thoth the Wise" of the "Inscription of London"  section 4 (R. 64), to which we shall refer later on.

^68:2 See the reviews on the below-mentioned work in The Athenaeum of 31st December 1898, and The Academy of 31st December 1898 and 7th January 1899.

^68:3 The Book of the Master, or The Egyptian Doctrine of the Light born of the Virgin Mother (London, 1898)--a sequel to his study entitled The House of the Hidden Places, a Clue to the Creed of Early Egypt from Egyptian Sources (London, 1895).

^70:1 Op. cit., pref. v.

^70:2 Op. cit., 13. Compare with this the three grades of Initiation given by Pietschmann (p. 24 n.), as cited above, p. 51.

^70:3 The image-doctrine of our treatises.

^70:4 This is an error; true initiation consisted in the fact that cosmic consciousness was realised in the body, while a man still lived. This consciousness naturally included the after-death consciousness as part of its content.

^71:1 Op. cit., p. 24.

^71:2 Op. cit., pp. 14, 15.

^71:3 That is, he who has the "balanced" nature.

^71:4 In my Did Jesus Live 100 B.C.?--in treating of the Elxai tradition and the wild statements of the puzzled and puzzling Epiphanius, I asked: "May there not have been a mystery-teaching behind the beautiful historicised story of the sisters Mary and Martha, and of Lazarus, their brother, who was 'raised from the dead' after being 'three days' in the grave? Was not Lazarus raised as a 'mummy' swathed in grave-clothes?" In this connection it is interesting to find Tertullian (De Corona, viii.; Oehler, i. 436) referring to the "linen cloth" with which Jesus girt himself in John xiii. 4, 5, as the "proper garment of Osiris." The proper garment of Osiris at one stage consisted most probably of the symbolic linen wrappings of the "mummy."

^72:1 Op. cit., p. 23.

^72:2 Op. cit., p. 30.

^73:1 Op. cit., p. 194.

^73:2 Op. cit., p. 161.

^73:3 Op. cit., pp. 18, 20.

^74:1 Op. cit., p. 36.

^74:2 Op. cit., p. 153.

^74:3 Op. cit., p. 37.

^75:1 Op. cit., p. 71.

^75:2 Op. cit., p. 75.

^76:1 Op. cit., p. 44.

^76:2 Op. cit., p. 89.

^77:1 Op. cit., pp. 163, 164.

^77:2 Op. cit., p. 95.

^77:3 Op. cit., p. 96. The title seems to be found only in the latest recension of the twenty-sixth Saite dynasty--the time of our King Ammon--but certainly no better one can be suggested.

^79:1 Op. cit., pp. 103, 104.

^79:2 Op. cit., p. 148.

^79:3 Op. cit., p. 120.

^80:1 Op. cit., p. 185.

^80:2 Op. cit., p. 186.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 82]

IV 

THE POPULAR THEURGIC HERMES-CULT IN THE GREEK MAGIC PAPYRI 

THE "RELIGION OF HERMES" 

THAT at one period the "Religion of Hermes" was not only widely spread, but practically supreme, in popular Hellenistic circles, may be seen from a study of the texts of the numerous magic papyri which have been preserved, and made accessible to us by the industry of such immensely laborious scholars as Leemans, Dieterich, Wessely, and Kenyon. 

The Greek Hermes prayers, as with many others of a similar nature, are manifestly overworkings of more ancient types, and, as we might expect, are of a strongly syncretistic nature. In them we can distinguish in popular forms, based on the ancient traditions of Egyptian magic, most interesting shadows of the philosophic and theosophic ideas which our Trismegistic literature has set forth for us in the clear light of dignified simplicity. 

But just as we now know that the once so-called "Gnostic," Abraxas and Abraxoid amulets, gems, and rings pertained to the general popular magical religion and had nothing to do with the Gnosis proper, so we may be sure that the circles of high mysticism, who refused to offer to God even so pure a sacrifice as 

[p. 83]

the burnt offering of incense, and deemed naught worthy of Him, short of the "prayers and praises of the mind," had nothing directly to do with the popular Hermes prayers, least of all with the invocatory rites of popular theurgy, and phylactery or amulet consecration. 

Nevertheless, there is much of interest for us in these invocations, and much that can throw side-lights on the higher teaching and practice which transformed all external rites into the discipline of inner spiritual experience. 

The following prayers, which, as far as I know, have not been previously translated, are rendered from the most recently revised texts of Reitzenstein, who has omitted the magic names, and emended the previous editions. I cannot but think, however, that these texts might be submitted to a more searching analysis than has yet been accorded them. They seem to present somewhat similar phenomena to the recensions of the Book of the Dead; that is to say, fragments of material from the tradition of a greater past have been adapted and overworked for the needs of a lesser age. Indeed, the whole effort of the Trismegistic schools seems to have been to restore the memory of that greater past; it had been forgotten, and its dim record had become a superstition instead of a living faith, a degenerate magic instead of a potent theurgy. The theurgy of our prayers is that of dwarfs; the theurgy of the past was believed to have been that of giants. 

[p. 84]

I. AN INVOCATION TO HERMES AS THE GOOD MIND [*1]

[Revised text, R. 15-18; Leemans (C.), Papyri Graec. Mus. Ant. Pub. Lug. Bat. (Leyden, 1885), II. 141, 14 ff., and V. 27, 27 ff.; Dieterich (A.), Abraxas (Leipzig, 1891), 195, 4 ff.; and Jahrbucher f. class. Phil., Suppl. XVI. 808 ff. (Papyrus Mag. Mus. Lug. Bat.).] 

1. Come unto me, O thou of the four winds, [*2] almighty one, [*3] who breathest spirit into men to give them life; 

2. Whose name is hidden, and beyond the power of men to speak; [*4] no prophet [even] can pronounce it; yea, even daimons, when they hear thy name, are fearful! 

3. O thou, whose tireless eyes are sun and moon, [*5]--[eyes] that shine in the pupils [*6] of the eyes of men! 

4. O thou, who hast the heaven for head, aether for body, [and] earth for feet, and for the water round thee ocean's deep! [*7] Thou the Good Daimon art, who art the sire of all things good, and nurse of the whole world. [*8] 

5. Thy everlasting revelling-place [*9] is set above. 

6. Thine the good emanations [*10] of the stars,--those daimons, fortunes, and those fates by whom are given 

[p. 85]

wealth, good blend [of nature], [*1] and good children, good fortune, and good burial. For thou art lord of life,--

7. Thou who art king of heavens and earth and all that dwell in them; 

8. Whose Righteousness is never put away; whose Muses hymn thy glorious name; whom the eight Wardens guard,--thou the possessor of the Truth [*2] pure of all lie! 

9. Thy Name and Spirit rest upon the good. [*3] 

10. O mayst thou come into my mind and heart for all the length of my life's days, and bring unto accomplishment all things my soul desires! 

11. For thou art I, and I am thou. [*4] Whate'er I speak, may it for ever be; for that I have thy Name [*5] to guard me in my heart. [*6] 

[p. 86]

12. And every serpent [*1] roused shall have no power o'er me, nor shall I be opposed by any spirit, or daimonial power, or any plague, or any of the evils in the Unseen World; [*2] for that I have thy Name within my soul. 

13. Thee I invoke; come unto me, Good, altogether good, [come] to the good, [*3]--thou whom no magic can enchant, no magic can control, [*4] who givest me good health, security, [*5] good store, good fame, victory, [and] strength, and cheerful countenance! [*6] 

14. Cast down the eyes of all who are against me, and give me grace on all my deeds! [*7] 

II. AN INVOCATION TO LORD HERMES 

[Revised and restored text, stripped of later overworkings, R. 20, 21. Wessely (C.), Denkschriften der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften, "Neue griechische Zauberpapyri" (Vienna, 1893), vol. xlii. p. 55; Kenyon (F. G.), Greek Papyri in the British Museum (London, 1893), i. 116.] 

1. Come unto me, Lord Hermes, even as into women's wombs [come] babes! [*8] 

2. Come unto me, Lord Hermes, who dost collect the food of gods and men! [*9] 

3. Lord Hermes, come to me, and give me grace, 

[p. 87]

[and] food, [and] victory, [and] health and happiness, and cheerful countenance, [*1] beauty and powers in sight of all! 

4. I know thy Name that shineth forth in heaven; I know thy forms [*2] as well; I know thy tree; [*3] I know thy wood [*4] as well. 

5. I know thee, Hermes, who thou art, and whence thou art, and what thy city is. 

6. I know thy names in the Egyptian tongue, [*5] and thy true name as it is written on the holy tablet in the holy place at Hermes' city, where thou dost have thy birth. 

7. I know thee, Hermes, and thou [knowest] me; [and] I am thou, and thou art I. [*6] 

8. Come unto me; fulfil all that I crave; be favourable to me together with good fortune and the blessing of the Good. [*7] 

III. AN INVOCATION TO LORD HERMES 

[Revised and restored text, R. 21. It is worked in with the preceding, but is of later date.]

1. Come unto me, Lord Hermes, O thou of many names, who know'st the secrets hidden both beneath the poles [of heaven] and underneath the earth! 

[p. 88]

2. Come unto me, Lord Hermes, thou benefactor, who doest good to all the world! 

3. Give ear to me, [and] give me grace with all that are on earth; open for me the hands of all that give like thee; [*1] [and] make them give me what their hands contain! 

4. Even as Horus, [*2] if e'er he called on thee, O greatest of all gods, in every trial, in every space, 'gainst gods, and men, and daimones, and things that live in water and on earth,--had grace and riches with gods, and men, and every living thing beneath the earth;--so let me, too, who call on thee! So give me grace, form, beauty! 

6. Hear me, O Hermes, doer of good deeds, thou the inventor of [all] incantations, [*3] speak me good words! [*4] 

7. Hear me, O Hermes, for I have done all things [that I should do] for thy black dog-ape, [*5] lord of the nether ones! 

8. O, soften all [towards me], and give me might 

[p. 89]

[and] form, [*1] and let them give me gold, and silver [too], and food of every kind continually. 

9. Preserve me evermore for the eternity from spells, deceits, and witchery of every kind, from evil tongues, from every check and every enmity of gods and men! 

10. Give unto me grace, victory, success, and satisfaction! 

11. For thou art I, and I am thou; thy Name is mine, and mine is thine; for that I am thy likeness. [*2] 

12. Whatever shall befall me in this year, or month, or day, or hour,--it shall befall the Mighty God, whose symbol is upon the holy vessel's prow. [*3] 

[p. 90]

IV. AN INVOCATION TO THOTH AS LOGOS 

[Revised text, R. 22. Leemans, op. cit., II. 103, 7; Dieterich, op. cit., 189.] 

1. Thee I invoke alone, thou who alone in all the world imposest order upon gods and men, [*1] who dost transform thyself in holy forms, [*2] making to be from things that are not, and from the things that are making the not to be. 

2. O holy Thoth, [*3] the true sight of whose face none of the gods endures! 

3. Make me to be in every creature's name [*4]--wolf, dog, [or] lion, fire, tree, [or] vulture, [*5] wall, [*6] [or] water, [*7] or what thou will'st, for thou art able [so to do]. 

V. AN INVOCATION TO HERMES AS THE SPIRITUAL LIGHT

[Revised text R. 22, 23. Leemans, ibid., II. 87, 24; Dieterich, ibid., 176, 1.]

1. Thee I invoke who hast created all, who dost transcend the whole, the self-begotten God, who seest all and hearest all, but who art seen by none. 

2. For thou didst give the sun his glory and all might, the moon her increase and her decrease, and [unto both] their ordained course. Though thou didst not diminish aught the [powers of] darkness, the still 

[p. 91]

more ancient [than the sun and moon], thou mad'st them equal [with it]. [*1] 

3. For when thou didst shine forth, Cosmos came into being, and light appeared, and all things were dispensed through thee; wherefore they all are under thee. 

4. O thou, whose actual form none of the gods can see, who dost transform thyself into them all in visions [that men see], O thou Eternity of the eternity. [*2] 

5. Thee I invoke, O Lord, that thy true form may manifest to me, for that I am in servitude below thy world, [*3] slave to thy angel and unto thy fear. [*4] 

6. Through thee the pole and earth are fixed. 

7. Thee I invoke, O Lord, e'en as the gods whom thou hast made to shine, that they may have their power. 

The above prayers afford us some striking examples of the popular Hellenistic form of the Hermes religion, [*5] 

[p. 92]

in its theurgic phase. In it Hermes is regarded as the Mind [*1] or Logos. The Mind is invoked to enter the mind and heart (I. 10). [*2] With the shining out of the Mind, the Spiritual or Intelligible Light shines forth in the world and man (v. 3). The Mind is thus the guide of souls. [*3] He is also identified with the Good Daimon (of whom Chnuphis or Horus are variants), with the Great Ocean, the Heaven-Space or Celestial Nile, the Great Green, the Light, the Aeon. 

In connection with the above invocations Reitzenstein gives the text of a very interesting ritual of lower theurgy, or rite of the sacred flame, which he characterises by the term "mystery of lychnomancy or lamp-magic." This is the lower side of such high vision as is referred to in "The Shepherd of Men" treatise and in the rite described in the following passage of the Pistis Sophia, 272, 373: 

"Jesus said unto his disciples: Come unto me! And 

[p. 93]

they came unto him. He turned to the four quarters of the world, and spake the Great Name over their heads, and blessed them, and breathed on their eyes. 

"Jesus said unto them: Look, see what ye may see! 

"And lifting up their eyes they saw a great Light, exceeding vast, which no dweller on earth could describe. 

"He said to them again: Gaze into the Light, and see what ye may see! 

"They said: We see fire and water, and wine and blood." 

VI. THE MYSTIC RITE OF THE FLAME 

[Revised text, R. 25-27. Wessely, op. cit., "Griechische zauberpapyrus von Paris und London" (Vienna, 1888), 68, 930 ff.]

(a) Invocation to the Light [*1] 

1. I invoke thee, O God, the living one, [*2] who dost show forth thy splendour in the fire, thou unseen Father of the Light! [*3] Pour forth thy strength; awake thy daimon, and come down into this fire; inspire it with [thy] holy spirit; show me thy might, and let the house of the almighty God, which is within this light, be opened for me! Let there be light,--

[p. 94]

[thy] breadth-depth-length-height-ray; [*1] and let the Lord, the [God] within, shine forth! 

(b) A Stronger Form to be used if the Flame dies down

2. I adjure thee, O Light, holy ray, breadth-depth-length-height-ray, by the holy names which I have uttered, [*2] and am now about to speak . . . abide with me in this same hour, until I have besought thy God, and learnt about the things that I desire! 

(c) The Theagogy or Invocation of the God proper 

3. Thee I invoke, thou mightiest God and Master . . . thou who enlightenest all and pour'st thy rays by means of thine own power on all the world, O God of gods! 

4. O Word (Logos) that orderest night and day, who guid'st the ship, [*3] and hold'st the helm, thou dragon-slayer, [*4] Good Holy Daimon . . . ! 

5. To whom the East and West give praise as thou dost rise and set, thou who art blest by all the gods, angels, and daimones! 

6. Come, show thyself to me, O God of gods . . . ! 

7. Enter, make manifest thyself to me, O Lord; for I invoke as the three apes invoke thee--who symbol-wise name forth thy holy Name. 

[p. 95]

8. In thy ape-form [*1] enter, appear to me, O Lord; for I name forth thy mightiest names! 

9. O thou who hast thy throne about the height of cosmos, [*2] and judgest all, encircled with the sphere of Surety and Truth! [*3] 

10. Enter, appear to me, O Lord, for that I was before the fire and snow, and shall be after [them]; 

11. I am the one who has been born from heaven. [*4] 

12. Enter, appear to me, O Lord of mighty names, whom all have in their hearts, [*5] who dost burst open rocks, [*6] and mak'st the names of gods to move! 

13. Enter, appear to me, O Lord, who hast thy power and strength in tire, who hast thy throne within the seven poles. [*7] 

[p. 96]

14. And on thy head a golden crown, and in thy hand a staff . . . [*1] by which thou sendest forth the gods! 

15. Enter, O Lord, and give me answer with thy holy voice, that I may clearly hear and truthfully about this thing! 

(d) A Stronger Form of Adjuration if (c) fails 

16. He doth enjoin thee, He the great living God, who is for the eternities of the eternities, the shaker and the thunderer, who doth create each soul and every birth. Enter, appear to me, O Lord, joyous, benignant, gentle, glorious, free from all wrath; for I adjure thee by the Lord [of all]! 

(e) The Greeting when the Presence of the God is manifested 

17. Hail Lord, O God of gods, thou benefactor . . . ! Hail to thy glories [*2] ever more, O Lord! 

(f) The Farewell to the God 

18. I give thee thanks, O Lord. Depart, O Lord, to thine own heavens, thine own realms, and thine own 

[p. 97]

course, preserving me in health, free from all harm, free from all fear of any ka, [*1] free from all stripes, and all dismay, hearkening to me for all the days of [all] my life! 

(g) The Farewell to the Flame 

19. Depart, O holy ray; depart, O fair and holy light of highest God! 

In connection with the above, we may also take the following ritual-prayer used in the consecration of an amulet ring. 

VII. A PRAYER OF CONSECRATION

[Revised text, R. 28, 29. Wessely, ibid., 84, 1598 ff.]

1. Thee I invoke, O greatest God, Lord everlasting, thou world-ruler, above the world, beneath the world, mighty sea-ruler; 

2. Who shinest forth at dawn, out from the East rising for all the world, and setting in the West! 

3. Come unto me, thou who dost rise from the four winds, joyous Good Daimon, for whom the heaven is thy revelling-place! [*2] 

4. I call upon thy holy, mighty, hidden names which thou dost joy to hear. 

5. When thou dost shine the earth doth sprout afresh, the trees bear fruit when thou dost laugh, the animals bring forth when thou dost turn to them. 

6. Give glory, honour, grace, fortune and power . . . ! 

7. Thee I invoke, the great in heaven . . . , O dazzling Sun, who shed'st thy beams on all the world! 

8. Thou art the mighty serpent, the chief of all the 

[p. 98]

gods, [*1] O thou who dost possess Egypt's beginning, [*2] and the end of all the world! 

9. Thou art the [God] who saileth o'er the ocean; thou art the [God] who doth come into sight each day. 

10. O thou who art above the world, and art beneath the world, O mighty ruler of the sea, give ear unto my voice this day, this night, these holy hours [of thine], and through this amulet let that be done for which I consecrate it! 

Footnotes

^84:1 I have supplied the titles.

^84:2 Perhaps originally spirits or breaths.

^84:3 pantokratur, used of Hermes, Anth. P., append., 282.

^84:4 Compare Lactantius, i. 6 (Frag. II.); and especially iv. 7 (Frag. VI.).

^84:5 The "eyes and light of Horus," according to Plutarch, De Is. et Os., lii.; mystically, the higher and lower "ego" and much else.

^84:6 en tais korais--compare the dissertation on the meaning of the title of our treatise generally translated "Virgin (kore) of the World," in the commentary thereto.

^84:7 Sc. the Ocean of Space, the "Great Green" of the Ritual.

^84:8 That is, father-mother of the universe.

^84:9 kumaste'rion--that is, heaven. See VII. 3 below.

^84:10 aporroiai--or personified influences. See Plutarch, De Is. et Os., xxxviii., liii., lviii.; and especially Pistis Sophia, where it occurs over and over again. Compare also K. K., 1; Stob., p. 405, 17 (W.).

^85:1 eykerasia--referring apparently to the composition of "body" and "soul."

^85:2 That is, the Pleroma or Aeon (see VI. 9 below). Reitzenstein (p. 18) says rightly, as we have seen, that Egyptologists have long recognised that the God here identified with Agathodaimon was originally the Hermes or Thoth of Hermopolis Magna, Lord of the Eight Wardens (the Ogdoad), symbolised by apes, hymned by the Muses (? the Nine or Ennead), and spouse of Isis-Righteousness (cf. Plut., De Is. et Os., iii.).

^85:3 See 13 below.

^85:4 Compare the extra-canonical logos: "I stood on a lofty mountain and saw a gigantic man, and another, a dwarf; and I heard as it were a voice of thunder, and drew nigh for to hear; and He spake unto me and said: I am thou, and thou art I; and wheresoever thou mayest be I am there. In all am I scattered [that is, the Logos as seed or "members"], and whencesoever thou wiliest, thou gatherest Me; and gathering Me, thou gatherest Thyself." (From the Gospel of Eve, quoted by Epiphanius, Haeres., xxvi. 3.) Cf. II. 7.

^85:5 In the Egyptian sense--that is, thy true "person" or "presence." See R. 17, n. 6, for many references to this fundamental concept of Egyptian religion.

^85:6 fylakte'rion--lit., as a phylactery or amulet. See R. 18, n. 8, for Egyptian origin of Jewish phylacteries.

^86:1 drax--here the symbol of any hostile elemental force. Compare K. K.,--Stob., 402, 22 (W.).

^86:2 kath' Aidoy.

^86:3 See 9 above.

^86:4 abaskantos, abaskantos.

^86:5 suterian, or salvation.

^86:6 See II. 2 below.

^86:7 Compare with this prayer for the descent of the Mind into the heart, the ascent of the man into the Mind of C. H., xiii. (xiii.) 3.

^86:8 This is an echo of spiritual rebirth or regeneration.

^86:9 In its highest sense the heavenly food, or wisdom, the "supersubstantial bread," or "bread of life."

^87:1 epafrodisian prosw'poy. See I. 13 above.

^87:2 The symbols of which are: the ibis in the east, ape in the west, the serpent in the north, the wolf (or jackal) in the south. So says the overworking of the text; but perhaps wolf should rather be dog.

^87:3 The terebinth, or turpentine palm. Compare this with the story of Terebinthus, from whose four Books Manes is said, in the Acta Archelai, to have derived his system.

^87:4 The ebony; perhaps symbolic of the "dark" wisdom, the initiation "in the black" of the K. K. Fragments.

^87:5 ta barbarika onomata--lit., barbarous, that is, non-Greek.

^87:6 Cf. I. 11.

^87:7 Lit., with Agathodaimon; compare sun theui--"with God's blessing."

^88:1 syndukontun--a apax legomenon--dw'ku (didumi) may be compared with ste'ku (istemi). The image may be taken from the well-known symbolical representation of the sun sending forth rays, each furnished with a hand for giving and blessing, especially in the frescoes of the Atem-cult period. Cf. K. K., 11 and 31.

^88:2 In the mystery-myth.

^88:3 Orig., medicines or philtres.

^88:4 eydialektos genou--a unique and inelegant expression in Greek, and of uncertain translation into English.

^88:5 This appears here to refer to Anubis, the "dog" of Hades, or the "death-genius," the attendant on Thoth. "Black" is lit. "Ethiopian." But compare in Pistis Sophia, 367, "Aethiopic Ariouth," a ruler among the infernal daimonials, who is "entirely black." The Ethiopians were famous for their sorcery and black magic. They were the traditional opponents of the "white magicians" of Egypt. Compare "Hor, son of the Negress" in the "Second Story of Khamuas," in Griffith's (F. Ll.) Stories of the High Priests of Memphis (Oxford, 1900), pp. 51 ff.

^89:1 This is not necessarily a prayer for physical form and the rest, but a prayer that the subtle ka of the man, the plastic soul-substance, may take a form of power and beauty, in the unseen world.

^89:2 eidulon, or image or double. The theurgist is endeavouring to identify his ka with that of the god. It was with his ka also, presumably, that the consecrated statue of the god was "animated." Compare the exposition of this theory as given in P. S. A., and the "image" or "likeness of God" in Lactantius, ii. 10. According to the Egyptians, man possessed: (1) a physical body (khat); (2) a soul (ba); (3) a heart (ab); (4) a double (ka); (5) an intelligence (khu); (6) a power (sekhem); (7) a shadow (khaibit) (8) a spiritual body (sah [sic]); (9) a name (ren). See Budge, Gods of the Egyptians, ii. 299, 300. These are, of course, not arranged in any natural order or in a scientific distribution. The precise meaning of most of these terms is not known. Budge (op. cit., i. 163, 164), however, writes: "Related intimately to the body, but with undefined functions, as far as we can discover, was the sekhem, a word which has been translated 'power,' and 'form,' and even 'vital force'; finally the glorified body, to which had been united the soul, and spirit and power, and name of the deceased, had its abode in heaven. This new body of the deceased in heaven was called sahu."

^89:3 Thoth and Maat are represented as sitting on either side of Ra in his boat.

^90:1 That is, Hermes as the cosmic Logos.

^90:2 Thoth changes his form in every heaven-space or sphere. Compare C. H., i. 13; and also the same idea in the descent of the Christos in a number of Gnostic systems, where the Saviour and King conceals himself in the forms of his servants in every phase of his descent. Cf. also C. H., xi. (xii.) 16.

^90:3 thauth.

^90:4 That is, essence, or may be type.

^90:5 Presumably a symbol for air.

^90:6 Presumably a symbol for earth.

^90:7 Compare C. H., xi. (xii.) 20; and P. S. A., vi.

^91:1 With the Egyptians, Darkness was the mystery of all mysteries. As Damascius (On First Principles) says: "Of the first principle the Egyptians said nothing; but characterised it as a darkness beyond all intellectual conception, a thrice unknown Darkness" (skotos agnuston tris touto epifemizontes). See my Orpheus (London, 1896), p. 93, and for "Night," pp. 154 and 170 ff. Perhaps this may again give some clue to the initiation "in the black" of the K. K. excerpt. The "dark wisdom" was the hidden of the hidden.

^91:2 aiun aiunos. In another hymn, Hermes, as Logos, is called "Cosmos of cosmos" (R. 23, n. 1)--that is, the spiritual world or order.

^91:3 That is the spiritual cosmos, or cosmos of Mind.

^91:4 Compare Isaiah xlv. 7: "I form the light and create darkness: I make peace and create evil: I the Lord do all these things." Cf. C. H., i. 23, "the avenging daimon"; and ibid., 15, "Within the Harmony he hath become a slave."

^91:5 Called in the Trismegistic literature the "Religion of the Mind" (Mentis religio). See P. S. A., xxv.

^92:1 Compare the cosmogony in Dieterich, Abraxas, 17, 43: "Through the Bitterness of God, there appeared Mind . . . that restrains the heart, and was called Hermes." With this peculiar phrase "Bitterness of God" compare the "Bitter Chaos" of the hymn at the end of the J. source of the Naassene Document in "The Myth of Man" chapter; also the "Bitter Water" or Chaos of the Sethian System (Hipp., Philos., v. 19); so also Julian, in Oration V., who writes: "The oracles of the gods declare that through purification not only our soul but also our bodies are judged worthy of being greatly helped and preserved, for it is said in them that 'the mortal vesture of bitter matter is preserved.'" Is it thus possible that the "Bitterness" of Jacob Bohme may be a reminiscence of the ancient Gnosis?

^92:2 For pure Egyptian parallels see R. 24, n. 1.

^92:3 See the theogony in Dieterich, op. cit., 18, 75: "And the soul came into being. And God said: 'Thou shalt move all things . . . Hermes guiding thee.'" Compare C. H., x. (xi.) 21: "But on the pious soul the Mind doth mount, and guide it to the Gnosis' light;" also xii. (xiii.) 12, ix. (x.) 10, iv. (v.) 11, vii. (viii.) 2.

^93:1 These rubrics I have added, following the example of Reitzenstein, but not his wording.

^93:2 Compare the expression "Jesus the living [one]" found frequently in the Introduction to the "First Book of Ieou" (Carl Schmidt, Gnostische Schriften in koptischer Sprache aus dem Codex Brucianus (Leipzig, 1892), 142-145--reprinted with his recent translation of the Pistis Sophia in Band I. of his Koptisch gnostische Schriften (Leipzig, 1905); and also the Preface to the newest found logoi: "These are the . . . words which Jesus, the living [one], spake" (Grenfell and Hunt, New Sayings of Jesus, London, 1904).

^93:3 Compare in the same writings the oft-repeated "Father of all fatherhood, Boundless Light."

^94:1 See Dieterich, Jahrb. f. Phil., Suppl., xvi. 802, 171, and 706. Compare also Ephes. iii. 18, and the Valentinian interpretation of the terms in this text as given by Hippolytus, Philos., vi. 34 (Dunker and Schneidewin, p. 248); also the interpretation of the Light Hymn in Pistis Sophia, 146, where the "height" is identified with the "home" of the Light.

^94:2 The magic names of power are omitted, as in the other prayers.

^94:3 Horus is often represented as pilot of the sun-ship in its voyage across the ocean of space, the "Great Green."

^94:4 The dragon here undoubtedly meaning darkness. Cf. C. H., i. 4.

^95:1 us kynokefalos. Can it be possible that behind this strange symbolism there may once have been some such idea as this--that as the ape is to man, so was this great elemental to the God?

^95:2 Lit., art seated on the head of cosmos.

^95:3 That is the Eternity or Aeon, called elsewhere the Pleroma or "fullness of grace," and identified with Agathodaimon (see prayer, R. 30). See also Wessely, op. cit., 185 (R. 362); and compare John i. 14, "full of grace and truth"; and 16, "Of his fullness have we received, and grace for grace."

^95:4 The regenerate, or spirit-born--that is of "virgin-birth" or the "birth of Horus." But compare the declaration of the soul on its entrance into the unseen world after death, as given on an inscription found in the tomb of an Orphic or Pythagorean initiate, at Petilia, in what was once Magna Graecia: "Of Earth and starry Heaven child am I; my race is of the Heavens!" (See Inscr. Gr. Siciliae et Italiae, 638; and my "Notes on the Eleusinian Mysteries," Theosophical Review, xxii. 317.)

^95:5 These are the logoi hidden in the hearts of all.

^95:6 This may be merely a figurative expression in praise of the might that can not only dissolve the most stable things on earth, but also set in motion the centre of stability of spiritual essences; or it may refer to the idea of the "God born from the rock," which is most familiar to us from the Mithriac mystery-tradition, where the rock is said to symbolise in physics the "firmament," which was thought of as solid or rigid by the ancients.

^95:7 That is, the seven cosmic spheres.

^96:1 memnoinen--an untranslatable reading. Is it Egyptian?--or is it intended for memnoneian? If the latter, it would presumably be connected with the Egyptian myth and cult of Memnon (see Roscher's Lexikon, coll. 2661 ff.). The Memnon cult was somehow connected with Hermes, for in the ruins of the temple were still (at the beginning of the third century) to be seen "statues of Hermes," according to Philostratus (Vit. Apoll., vi. 4), who also (Imag., i. 7) tells us that the Memnon statue was as a lyre which was struck by the rod (pleiktron), that is the ray (e aktis), of the sun. If so, "the rod [of power], by which thou sendest forth the gods," that is thy rays, each god being a ray of the spiritual sun, might have the epithet Memnonian applied to it. But in our present lack of information, this interpretation seems very strained.

^96:2 doxai--here meaning powers.

^97:1 aneiduloplekton.

^97:2 kumaste'rion. Cf. I. 5 above.

^98:1 The serpent was a symbol of the Logos, and this is the idea underlying the so-called Ophite systems of the Gnosis.

^98:2 This refers to the first nome of Upper Egypt, whose metropolis, Elephantine, was once the chief seat of the popular Agathodaimon cult (R. 29, n. 4). The "world" was thus the Egyptian civilised world, beyond which was the darkness of Ethiopia.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 99]

V

THE MAIN SOURCE OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE ACCORDING TO MANETHO, HIGH PRIEST OF EGYPT 

HERMES AT THE BEGINNING OF THE HELLENISTIC PERIOD 

THE more intimate contact of Greek thought and philosophy with Egyptian lore and mystic tradition began immediately with the brilliant era of the Lagides, who gradually made Alexandria the intellectual and religious, philosophic and scientific, centre of the Hellenistic world. 

Thoth-Hermes, as we have seen, had been for the Egyptians from the earliest times the teacher of all ancient and hidden wisdom; he was par excellence the writer of all sacred scripture and the scribe of the gods. We should then naturally expect that his dominating influence would play a leading part in the new development; and this, indeed, is amply demonstrated by the evidence of the religious art of the time, which presents us with specimens of statues of the Greek type of Hermes, bearing at the same time either the feather of truth (the special symbol of Maat) on the head, or the papyrus-roll in the hand [*1]--both symbols of Thoth in his dual character as revealer and scribe. 

[p. 100]

Of the complex nature of the mystic and apocalyptic literature that thus came into existence we have very distinct testimony. [*1] In keeping with its Egyptian prototype it was all cast in a theological and theosophical mould, whether it treated of physics, or medicine, or astrology. Thus we learn that Pamphilus, the grammarian, [*2] was intimately acquainted with a Greek-Egyptian literature dealing with "sacred plants" and their virtues as determined by the influences of the thirty-six Decans; this lore, he tells us, was derived from the "Books ascribed to the Egyptian Hermes." [*3] 

PETOSIRIS AND NECHEPSO 

Of still greater interest are the Greek fragments of Petosiris and Nechepso which have come down to us. [*4] These Greek fragments are to be dated at least before the end of the second century B.C., [*5] and afford us striking parallels with our extant Trismegistic literature. 

In them we find the Prophet Petosiris represented as the teacher and counsellor of King Nechepso, as Asclepius of Ammon in one type of our literature; while it is Hermes who reveals the secret wisdom to two younger gods, Asclepius and Anubis, as in our sermons he does to Asclepius and Tat. 

As to Petosiris himself, Suidas (s.v.) tells us that he was an Egyptian philosopher who wrote on comparative 

[p. 101]

[paragraph continues] Greek and Egyptian theology, making selections from the "Holy Books," and treating of astrology and the Egyptian Mysteries. Moreover, Proclus [*1] tells us that Petosiris had an intimate knowledge of every order of the Gods and Angels, and refers to a hieratic formula of theurgic invocation to the greatest of the goddesses (Necessity), for inducing the vision of this Power, and the ritual of the manner of addressing her when she appeared, as handed on by the same Petosiris. 

The mystical nature of this literature is still more clearly shown in what Vettius Valens [*2] tells us of Nechepso, who surpassed the Ammon of our literature and attained to direct knowledge of the Inner Way. 

Vettius, in the first half of the first century A.D., laments that he did not live in those days of initiate kings and rulers and sages who occupied themselves with the Sacred Science, when the clear Aether spake face to face with them without disguise, or holding back aught, in answer to their deep scrutiny of holy things. In those days so great was their love of the holy mysteries, so high their virtue, that they left the earth below them, and in their deathless souls became "heaven-walkers" [*3] and knowers of things divine. 

Vettius then quotes from a Greek apocalyptic treatise of Nechepso, where the King tells us that he had remained in contemplation all night gazing into the aether; and so in ecstasy he had left his body, [*4] and had then heard a heavenly Voice [*5] addressing him. This Voice was not merely a sound, but appeared as a 

[p. 102]

substantial presence, who guided Nechepso on his way through the heaven-space. 

It is, moreover, exceedingly probable that the magnificent spectacle of the star-spheres [*1] to which Vettius refers, speaking of it as "the most transcendent and most blessed vision (theuria) of all," was taken directly from the same source. 

With this we may compare the wish of Trismegistus that Tat might get him the wings of the soul and enjoy that fair sight, [*2] and the seeing of it by Hermes himself through the Mind. [*3] 

All of which proves the existence of books in Greek in middle Ptolemaic times treating in the same manner of identical subjects with those contained in our Trismegistic literature. 

MANETHO THE BELOVED OF THOTH 

When, then, the sovereignty of Egypt passed into the hands of the Diadochi of Alexander, and the Ptolemies made Alexandria the centre of learning in the Greek world, by the foundation of the ever-famous Museum and Library and Schools in their capital, there arose an extraordinary enthusiasm for translating, paraphrasing, and summarising into Greek of the old scriptures and records of the nations. The most famous name of such translators and compilers and comparative theologians is that of Manetho, [*4] who introduced the 

[p. 103]

treasures of Egyptian mysticism, theology, mythology, history, and chronology to the Grecian world. Moreover, seeing that the veracity and reliability of Manetho as a historian is with every day more and more accepted as we become better acquainted with the monuments, he seems to have done his work loyally enough. 

Manetho was contemporary with the first two Ptolemies; that is to say, he lived in the last years of the fourth and the first half of the third century B.C. He was a priest of Heliopolis (On), [*1] and was thoroughly trained in all Greek culture [*2] as well as being most learned in the ancient Wisdom of Egypt. [*3] Manetho not only wrote on historical subjects, but also on the mystic philosophy and religion of his country, and it is from his books in all probability that Plutarch and others drew their information on things Egyptian. Manetho derived his information from the hieroglyphic inscriptions in the temples [*4] and from the rest of the priestly records; but unfortunately his books are almost entirely lost, and we only possess fragments quoted by later writers. 

THE LETTER OF MANETHO TO PTOLEMY PHILADELPHUS

One of these quotations is of great importance for our present enquiry. It is preserved by Georgius 

[p. 104]

[paragraph continues] Syncellus, [*1] and is stated to be taken from a work of Manetho called Sothis [*2] a work that has otherwise entirely disappeared. The passage with the introductory sentence of the monk Syncellus runs as follows: 

"It is proposed then to make a few extracts concerning the Egyptian dynasties from the Books of Manetho. [This Manetho,] being high priest of the Heathen temples in Egypt, based his replies [to King Ptolemy] on the monuments [*3] which lay in the Seriadic country. [These monuments,] he tells us, were engraved in the sacred language and in the characters of the sacred writing by Thoth, the first Hermes; after the flood they were translated from the sacred language into the then common tongue, [*4] but [still written] in hieroglyphic characters, and stored away in books by the Good Daimon's son and the second Hermes, father of Tat--in the inner chambers of the temples of Egypt. 

'"In the Book of Sothis Manetho addresses King Philadelphus, the second Ptolemy, personally, writing as follows word for word: 

"'The Letter of Manetho, the Sebennyte, to Ptolemy Philadelphus. 

"'To the great King Ptolemy Philadelphus, the venerable: I, Manetho, high priest and scribe of the holy fanes in Egypt, citizen of Heliopolis but by birth a Sebennyte, [*5] to my master Ptolemy send greeting. 

[p. 105]

"'We [*1] must make calculations concerning all the points which you may wish us to examine into, to answer your questions [*2] concerning what will happen to the world. According to your commands, the sacred books, written by our forefather Thrice-greatest Hermes, which I study, shall be shown to you. My lord and king, farewell.'" 

THE IMPORTANCE OF MANETHO'S STATEMENT IN HIS "SOTHIS" 

Here we have a verbal quotation from a document purporting to be written prior to 250 B.C. It is evidently one of a number of letters exchanged between Manetho and Ptolemy II. Ptolemy has heard of the past according to the records of Egypt; can the priests tell him anything of the future? They can, replies Manetho; but it will be necessary to make a number of calculations. Ptolemy has also expressed a strong desire to see the documents from which Manetho derived his information, and the high priest promises to let him see them. 

These books are ascribed to Hermes, the Thrice-greatest, and this is the first time that the title is used in extant Greek literature. This Hermes was the second, the father of Tat, we are told elsewhere by Manetho, and son of the Good Spirit (Agathodaimon), who was the first Hermes. Here we have the precise grading of the degrees in our treatises: (i.) The Shepherd of Men, or The Mind; (ii.) Thrice-greatest; (iii.) Tat. This refers to the ever-present distinction of pupil and master, and the Master of masters. 

[p. 106]

If, however, we seek for historical allusions, we may perhaps be permitted to conclude that the first Hermes, that is to say the first priesthood among the Egyptians, used a sacred language, or in other words a language which in the time of the second Hermes, or second priesthood, was no longer spoken. It was presumably archaic Egyptian. The two successions of priests and prophets were separated by a "flood." This "flood" was presumably connected with, if not the origin of, the flood of which Solon heard from the priest of Sais, which happened some nine thousand years before his time, and of which we have considerable information given us in the Timaeus and Critias of Plato. [*1] The Good Angel is the same as the Mind, as we learn from the Trismegistic literature, and was regarded as the father of Hermes Trismegistus. This seems to be a figurative way of saying that the archaic civilisation of Egypt before the flood, which presumably swept over the country when the Atlantic Island went down, was regarded as one of great excellence. It was the time of the Gods or Divine Kings or Demi-Gods, whose wisdom was handed on in mystic tradition, or revived into some semblance of its former greatness, by the lesser descendants of that race who returned from exile, or reincarnated on earth, to take charge of the new populations who had gradually returned to the lower Nile plains after the flood had subsided. 

Thus we have three epochs of tradition of the Egyptian mystery-cultus: (i.) The first Thoth or Agathodaimon, the original tradition preserved in the sacred language and character in the stone monuments of the 

[p. 107]

[paragraph continues] Seriadic land, presumably the Egypt prior to the Atlantic flood; (ii.) the second Thoth, the Thrice-greatest, the mystery-school after the period of the great inundation, whose records and doctrines were preserved not only in inscriptions but also in MSS., still written in the sacred character, but in the Egyptian tongue as it was spoken after the people reoccupied the country; and (iii.) Tat, the priesthood of Manetho's day, and presumably of some centuries prior to his time, who spoke a yet later form of Egyptian, and from whose demotic translations further translations or paraphrases were made in Greek. 

IS "SOTHIS" A FORGERY? 

This natural line of descent of the fundamental doctrines in the tradition of the Trismegistic literature, however, is scouted by encyclopaedism, which would have our sermons to be Neoplatonic forgeries, though on what slender grounds it bases its view we have already seen. It will now be interesting to see how the testimony of Manetho is disposed of. Our encyclopaedias tell us that the book Sothis is obviously a late forgery; parrot-like they repeat this statement; but nowhere in them do we find a single word of proof brought forward. Let us then see whether any scholars have dealt with the problem outside of encyclopaedism. Very little work has been done on the subject. The fullest summary of the position is given by C. Muller. [*1] Muller bases his assertion on Bockh, [*2] and Bockh on Letronne. [*3] 

[p. 108]

The arguments are as follows: (i.) That the term "venerable" (sebastos) is not used prior to the time of the Roman emperors; (ii.) that Egypt knows no flood; (iii.) that the ancient mythology of Egypt knows no first and second Hermes; (iv.) that Egypt has no Seriadic land; (v.) that the term "Trismegistus" is of late use. 

THE ARGUMENTS OF ENCYCLOPAeDISM REFUTED

Let us take these arguments in order and examine them, bearing in mind, however, that the whole question has been prejudiced from the start, and that encyclopaedism, in order to maintain its hypothesis of the spuriousness of our Trismegistic writings, is bound to argue the spuriousness of Manetho's Sothis. The categorical statements of Manetho are exceedingly distressing to the former hypothesis; in fact, they give it the lie direct. As to the arguments, then: 

(i.) The term sebastos is in later times equated with "Augustus," the honorific title of the Roman emperors. Therefore, it is argued, it could not have been used prior to their times. But why not? The king to an Egyptian was divine--every inscription proves it--and the term "venerable" was in early times always applied to the Gods. Why not then apply it to the "Great King"? Indeed, what could be more natural than to do so? 

(ii.) We have already shown that, according to Plato, Egypt knew most accurately of a Flood; Plato further tells us that Solon got his information from the priests of Sais, who told him that all the records were preserved in the temple of Neith. 

It is not here the place to discuss the Atlanticum of Plato and the long history of opinion connected with 

[p. 109]

it, for that would require a volume in itself. I have, however, acquainted myself with all the arguments for and against the authenticity of at least the germ of this tradition, and with the problems of comparative mythology and folklore involved in it, and also with the recent literature of the subject which seeks to corroborate the main conceptions of Plato by the researches of seership. All this, taken in conjunction with the general subject of the "myths" of Plato, and the latest views on this subject, has convinced me that the greatest of Greek philosophers did not jest when, his dialectic having gone as far as it could, he sought refuge in the mystery-traditions for corroboration of those intuitions which his unaided intellect could not demonstrate. 

It can of course be argued that every reference to a flood in Egyptian Hellenistic literature is but a repetition of what the incredulous must regard as Plato's brilliant romance; but in this connection, as in many others, it is equally arguable that all such references--Plato's included--are derivable from one and the same source--namely, Egypt herself. 

And, indeed, on 9th November 1904, at a meeting of the Society of Biblical Archaeology, a paper by Professor Naville was read by Mr F. Legge on "A Mention of a Flood in the Book of the Dead." The flood in question is that described in the Leyden version as Ch. clxxv. [*1] 

(iii.) Cicero (106-44 B.C.) speaks of five Mercurii, the last two of whom were Egyptian. [*2] One was the "son of Father Nile," whose name the Egyptians considered it impiety to pronounce--and for whom, presumably, they substituted the term Agathodaimon; and the 

[p. 110]

second was the later Thoyth, the-founder of Hermopolis. [*1] Cicero could hardly have invented this; it must have been a commonplace of his day, most probably derived in the first instance from the writings of Manetho, from which generally the Greeks, and those imbued with Greek culture, derived all their information about Egypt. 

And, indeed, Reitzenstein (p. 139), though he refers the information given by Syncellus to a Pseudo-Manetho (without a word of explanation, however), admits that the genealogy of Hermes there given is in its main features old. [*2] 

THE SERIADIC LAND

(iv.) The statement that Egypt knew no Seriadic land or country seems to be a confident assertion, but the following considerations may perhaps throw a different light on the matter. 

In the astronomical science of the Egyptians the most conspicuous solar system near our own, represented in the heavens by the brilliant Sirius, was of supreme interest. Cycles of immense importance were determined by it, and it entered into the highest mysticism of Egyptian initiation. Sirius was, as it were, the guardian star of Egypt. Now ancient Egypt was a sacred land, laid out in its nomes or provinces according to the heavens, having centres in its body corresponding to the centres or ganglia of the heavens. As the Hindus had a Heavenly Ganges (Akasha-Ganga) and an earthly Ganges, so had the heavens a Celestial 

[p. 111]

[paragraph continues] Nile, and Egypt a physical Nile, the life-giver of the land. The yearly inundation, which meant and means everything for ancient and modern Khem, was observed with great minuteness, and recorded with immense pains, the basis of its cycle being the Sothiac or Siriadic; Sirius (Seirios) being called in Greek transliteration Sothis and Seth (Eg. Sept). What more natural name, then, to give to the country than the Seriadic Land? 

The Nile records in ancient times were self-registered by pyramids, obelisks, and temples, and in later times nearly all monuments were built according to the type of the masonic instruments of the Egyptian astrogeological science. This science has been studied in our own times by an Egyptian, and the results of his researches have been printed "for private circulation," and a copy of them is to be found in the British Museum. In his Preface the author writes as follows: [*1] 

"The astrogeological science gave birth to a monumental system, by means of which the fruits of the accumulated observations and experience of the human race have been preserved, outliving writings, inscriptions, traditions, and nationalities. The principal monuments had imparted to them the essential property of being autochronous landmarks of a geochronological nature. Many of them recorded, hydromathematically, the knowledge in astronomy, in geography, and in the dimension and figure of the earth obtained in their respective epochs. They were Siriadic monuments, because their magistral lines were projected to the scale 

[p. 112]

of the revolutions of the cycles of the star Surios (sic) in terms of the standard astrogeological cubit." 

Doubtless our author flogs his theory too severely, as all such writers do; but nilometry and the rest was certainly one of the most important branches of the priestly science. 

THE STELAe OF HERMES 

But before we deal with the last objection urged against the authenticity of Manetho's Sothis, we will add a few words more concerning these Seriadic monuments known in antiquity as the Stelae of Hermes or of Seth, and erroneously spoken of in Latin and English as the "Columns" or "Pillars" of Hermes. 

The general reader may perhaps be puzzled at the variety of spelling of the name of the star, but he should recollect that the difficulties of transliteration from one language to another are always great, and especially so when the two languages belong to different families. Thus we find the variants of Tehuti, the Egyptian name of Hermes, transliterated in no less than nineteen various forms in Greek and two in Latin--such as Thoyth, Thath, Tat, etc. [*1] Similarly we find the name of the famous Indian lawgiver transliterated into English as Manu, Menu, Menoo, etc. 

With regard to these "Mercurii Columnae," it was the common tradition, as we have already pointed out, that Pythagoras, Plato, and others got their wisdom from these columns, that is to say, monuments. [*2] The 

[p. 113]

historian Ammianus Marcellinus, [*1] the friend of the Emperor Julian, has preserved for us a peculiarity of the construction of some of these pyramids or temples which is of interest. The passage to which we refer runs as follows: 

"There are certain underground galleries and passages full of windings, which, it is said, the adepts in the ancient rites (knowing that the flood was coming, and fearing that the memory of the sacred ceremonies would be obliterated) constructed in various places, distributed in the interior [of the buildings], which were mined out with great labour. And levelling the walls, [*2] they engraved on them numerous kinds of birds and animals, and countless varieties [of creatures] of another world, which they called hieroglyphic characters." [*3] 

We are thus told of another peculiarity of some of the Seriadic monuments, and of the "Books preserved from the Flood" of which there were so many traditions. These are the records to which Sanchuniathon and Manetho make reference. 

THE SONS OF SETH-HERMES 

The Egyptian account is straightforward enough; but when Josephus, following the traditional practice of his race in exploiting the myths of more ancient nations for the purpose of building up Jewish history--for the 

[p. 114]

[paragraph continues] Mosaic Books supply innumerable examples of the working-up of elements which the Jews found in the records of older nations--runs away with the idea that Seth (the Egyptian Sirius) was the Biblical patriarch Seth, the Jewish "antiquarian" enters on a path of romance and not of history. 'Tis thus he uses the Egyptian Seriadic tradition for his own purposes: 

"All of these [the Sons of Seth] being of good disposition, dwelt happily together in the same country free from quarrels, without any misfortune happening to the end of their lives. The [great] subject of their studies was that wisdom which deals with the heavenly bodies and their orderly arrangement. In order that their discoveries should not be lost to mankind and perish before they became known (for Adam had foretold that there would be an alternate disappearance of all things [*1] by the force of fire and owing to the strength and mass of water)--they made two monuments, [*2] one of brick and the other of stone, and on each of them engraved their discoveries. In order that if it should happen that the brick one should be done away with by the heavy downpour, [*3] the stone one might survive and let men know what was inscribed upon it, at the same time informing them that a brick one had also been made by them. And it remains even to the present day in the Siriad land." [*4] 

This passage is of great interest not only as affording a very good example of the method of inventing Jewish "antiquities," but also as permitting us to recover the outlines of the original Egyptian account which Josephus purloined and adapted. The Sons of Seth were the initiates of the archaic priesthood of the First Hermes. 

[p. 115]

[paragraph continues] Adam has been substituted for the First Man, in the sense of our "Shepherd" tradition; and the two kinds of monuments (which Josephus seems to regard as two single structures and not as relating to two classes of buildings) may refer to the brick structures and temples of that age, and to specially constructed and more lasting monuments of stone--perhaps rock-cut temples, or the most ancient pyramids. I have also asked myself the question as to whether there may not be some clue concealed in this "brick monument" reference to the puzzling statement in the Babylonian Talmud [*1] that Jesus set up a "brick-bat" and worshipped it. Jesus is said in the Talmud Jeschu Stories to have "learned magic in Egypt," and the magical wisdom of ancient Egypt is here said to have been recorded on monuments of brick. [*2] 

Reitzenstein (p. 183), after pointing to the similarity of tradition as to the Seriadic Land contained in Josephus, and in what he characterises as Pseudo-Manetho, [*3] adds the interesting information that the Seriadic Land is borne witness to by an inscription as being the home and native land of Isis; indeed, the Goddess herself is given the name of Neilotis or Seirias; she is the fertile earth and is Egypt. [*4] 

To continue, then, with the consideration of the arguments urged against the authenticity of Manetho's Sothis. With regard to objection (iv.), we have given very good reasons for concluding that so far from Egypt "knowing no Seriadic land," Egypt was the Seriadic Land par excellence, and the Books of Hermes 

[p. 116]

were the direct descendants of the archaic stone monuments of that land. And further, we have shown that our Trismegistic writings are a step or two further down in the same line of descent. The whole hangs together logically and naturally. 

We have thus removed four of the five props which support the hypothesis of forgery with regard to the Sothis document. Let us now see whether the remaining prop will bear the weight of the structure. 

THE EPITHET "THRICE-GREATEST" 

(v.) We are told that the term "Trismegistus" is of late use. This assertion is based entirely on the hypothesis that all our extant Trismegistic writings are Neoplatonic forgeries of the third or at best the second century, before which time the name Thrice-greatest was never heard of. The term Trismegistus must go as far back as the earliest of these writings, at any rate, and where we must place that we shall see at the end of our investigations. 

That the peculiar designation Trismegistus was known in the first century even among the Romans, however, is evident from the famous Latin epigrammatist Martial (v. 24), who in singing the praise of one Hermes, a famous gladiator, brings his paean to a climax with the line: 

Hermes omnia solus et ter unus. [*1]

A verse which an anonymous translator in 1695 freely renders as: 

Hermes engrosses all men's gifts in one, 
And Trismegistus' name deserves alone.

Such a popular reference shows that the name Trismegistus was a household word, and argues for 

[p. 117]

many years of use before the days of Martial (A.D. 43-104?). But have we no other evidence? 

In the trilingual inscription (hieroglyphic, demotic, and Greek) on the famous Rosetta Stone, which sings the praises of Ptolemy Epiphanes (210-181 B.C.), Hermes is called the "Great-and-Great." [*1] Letronne renders this deux fois grand; [*2] and in his notes [*3] says that the term "Trismegistus" was not known at this date, thus contemptuously waving aside Manetho's Sothis. Had it been known, he says, it would undoubtedly have been used instead of the feebler expression "great-and-great." [*4] But why undoubtedly? Let us enquire a little further into the matter. The Egyptian reduplicated form of this attribute of Hermes, aa aa, the "great-great," is frequently elsewhere found with a prefixed sign which may be transliterated ur. [*5] So that if the more simple form is translated by "great, great," the intensive form would naturally be rendered "great, great, great," or "three times great." But we have to deal with the form "thrice-greatest," a superlative intensive. We have many examples of adjectives intensified with the particle tris in Greek, [*6] 

[p. 118]

but no early instances of their superlatives; therefore, what? Apparently that the term "Trismegistus" is a late invention. 

But may we not legitimately suppose, in the absence of further information, that when the Egyptian had intensified his reduplicated form he had come to an end of his resources--it was the highest term of greatness that he could get out of his language? Not so when he used Greek. He could go a step further in the more plastic Hellenic tongue. Why, then, did he not use "thrice-greatest" instead of "great-and-great" on the Rosetta Stone? 

Because he was translating aa aa and not its intensified form. But why did he not use the intensified form in the demotic inscription? Well, "whys" are endless; but may we not suppose that, as Ptolemy was being praised for his justice, which he is said to have exercised "as Hermes the great-and-great," the reduplicated form was sufficient for this attribute of the idealised priesthood, while the still more honorific title was reserved for Hermes as the personified Wisdom? Or, again, may it not have been politic to refrain from adjectives which would have dimmed the greatness of Ptolemy? 

THE CLUE OF GRIFFITHS 

So I wrote in November 1899, when the major part of this chapter was first published in The Theosophical Review. Shortly afterwards, however, I came across an entirely new clue. In his Stories of the High Priests of Memphis: the Sethon of Herodotus and the Demotic Tales of Khamuas (Oxford, 1900), F. Ll. Griffiths presents us with the translation of an exceedingly interesting demotic text, found on the verso of two Greek 

[p. 119]

documents, the contents of which prove them to be official land-registers of the seventh year of Claudius (A.D. 46-47). There is also "strong evidence for attributing the demotic text to some time within thirty years from that date" (p. 41). So much for the copy of the original; but what of its contents? As they belong to the most important cycle of folk-tates of Egypt, it is to be assumed that their form and substance is old. 

In this papyrus we are told that on an occasion of great need when the Pharaoh of Egypt was being overcome at a distance by the sorceries of the Ethiopian enchanters, he was saved, and the magic of the Black Ones sent back upon them, by a certain Hor, son of Pa-neshe, most learned in the Books. Before his great trial of strength with the Ethiopian spells, we read of this Hor that: 

"He entered the temple of Khmun; he made his offerings and his libations before Thoth, the Eight-times-great, the Lord of Khmun, the Great God" (p. 58). 

To this Griffiths appends the following note: 

"'Thoth, eight times great'; the remains of the signs indicate this reading. The title, which here appears for the first time in Egyptian literature, is the equivalent of trismegistos [thrice-greatest], a late epithet first used about the date of this MS. [*1] o is megas [great], which we may represent algebraically by a; o o (2a), a common title of Thoth in late hieroglyphic, is megas kai megas [great and great] on the Rosetta Stone, but probably represents megistos [greatest], and 8o is therefore trismegistos [thrice-greatest], i.e. (2a)^3. The famous epithet of Hermes which has puzzled commentators thus displays its mathematical formation. 6o = 3(2a) would not fill the 

[p. 120]

lacuna on the papyrus, nor would it give the obviously intended reference to the name of Thoth's city, 'the Eighth,' and the mythological interpretation of that name." 

The mythological interpretation of that name, namely Khmun (Khemen-nw), which Budge transliterates Khemennu, Griffiths says is "the eighth city," i.e. "the eighth in Upper Egypt going up the river." [*1]

We are loth to deprive any one of a so fair adaptation to environment in the evolution of purely physical interpretation; but we are afraid that our readers will have already learned for themselves that Khemennu was the City of the Eight, the City of the Ogdoad, and will expect some less mundane explanation of the name; not that we altogether object to Khemennu being the "Eighth City up the River," if that river is interpreted as the Celestial Nile on which the soul of the initiated sailed in the solar boat. 

Reitzenstein then is wrong in supposing (p. 117, n. 6) that Griffiths connects the honorific title Trismegistus with the eight cynocephali who form the paut of Thoth; but we may do so. 

The nature of this symbolic Ogdoad is most clearly seen in the inscription of Der-el-Bahari, of the time of the Twenty-second Dynasty which Maspero has lately published. [*2] 

In it the Osirified says to the Supreme: 

"I am One who becomes Two; I am Two who becomes Four; I am Four who becomes Eight; I am the One after that." 

So also in the first Hermes Prayer, quoted in a preceding chapter, addressed to Hermes as Agathodaimon,

[p. 121]

[paragraph continues] Thoth is he "whom the Eight Wardens guard." 

These Eight, we may perhaps be permitted to speculate, were generated Two from One, aa aa, Greatest; Four from Two, Twice-greatest; Eight from Four, Thrice-greatest. 

Such a combination would specially commend itself to men trained in Pythagorean mathematical symbols, as were doubtless many who took part in compiling the Egyptian Hellenistic theosophical literature. 

I, therefore, conclude that the honorific title Thrice-greatest can very well go back to early Ptolemaic times; and therefore, as far as I can see, the authenticity of Manetho's Sothis stands unimpugned as far as any arguments so far brought against it are concerned. I therefore regard the quotation of Syncellus as a most valuable piece of information in tracing the genesis of the Trismegistic literature. Whether or not any of our extant sermons can be placed among these earlier forms of this literature will be discussed later on. 

THE EARLIEST TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 

That, however, literature of a similar nature existed in early and middle Ptolemaic times we have already seen from the material adduced at the beginning of this chapter; we may therefore fitly conclude it by pointing out that in later Ptolemaic times, and down to the first century A.D., we find in the same literature specimens of cosmogenesis closely resembling the main elements of the world-formation given in our "Shepherd" treatise. 

An excellent example is that of the fragmentary cosmogonical poem, the text of which Reitzenstein has printed in his Zwei religionsgesch. Fragen, to which we 

[p. 122]

have already referred. This poem Reitzenstein (p. 92) dates as belonging to the first century B.C., though it may probably be earlier; it declares itself to be of the Hermes tradition, both in its statement about itself and also in the fact that it is Hermes, the Beloved Son of Zeus, who is the Logos-Creator of the cosmos, and also the progenitor or "father" of the prophet-poet who writes the vision. 

PHILO BYBLIUS 

But not only did the tradition of Egyptian Hermes dominate the Greek forms of cosmogony which emanated from Alexandria and spread through the Hellenic world, but it also imposed itself upon the forms of cosmogony and the history-writing of other nations; the most striking example of this is to be found in the Phoenician Histories of Philo Byblius, who lived in the second half of the first century A.D. 

The fragments of this work are of great interest to our present enquiry, as they tend to show that both Egypt and Phoenicia, the two most sacred nations, derived their cosmogonical knowledge and mystery-traditions from the same source; that source being traced to the most archaic Books of Thoth. 

This is all, no doubt, an overwriting of Phoenician records in the light of Egyptian tradition; Philo, however, would have us regard his work as a Greek translation or paraphrase of a compilation made by an ancient and learned Phoenician priest, Sanchuniathon, based immediately upon archaic Phoenician records by one who was also learned in the oral tradition of his own mysteries. 

The initial question as to whether Philo had a genuine Phoenician document before him or not, need 

[p. 123]

not occupy us here, save in the most superficial fashion, as we are at present interested in the Egyptian elements of his account solely, and not in disentangling the native Phoenician substratum. 

It must, however, in fairness be said that though the Byblian prefaces his account with an introduction and intersperses it with occasional remarks, all this is transparently his own, and is clearly distinguishable from what have every appearance of being translated passages.

ARE HIS "PHOeNICIAN HISTORIES" A FORGERY?

The general theory, however, since the time of Orelli [*1] has been that Philo forged the whole of this cosmogony and history. On the contrary, it was made considerable use of by Porphyry in his criticism of Christianity, and Eusebius [*2] quotes the passages used by Porphyry. [*3] The whole work of Philo, moreover, is claimed to be recovered by Wagenfeld, who has elaborately defended its genuineness. [*4] There indeed seems no reason to 

[p. 124]

accept the forgery-hypothesis, which apparently rests on an even flimsier basis than the forgery-theory of the Trismegistic writings. The work, on the contrary, considered as a specimen of Phoenician story strongly influenced by Egyptian tradition, is a most interesting document for understanding the ancient Semitic mystery-tradition as distinguished from Jewish adaptations of general Semitic legend--in other words, the distinction of Semitismus and Israelitismus. Porphyry was not only a Semite himself but also a good critic, and not likely to base his arguments on a forgery; nor would Philo have ventured to put forward a forgery when there were thousands of learned and fanatical Jews who would have been only too glad to expose it. 

Philo tells us that the Phoenician public traditions being chaotic, "Sanchuniathon, a man of great learning and a busy searcher [after knowledge], who especially desired to know the first principles from which all things are derived, most carefully examined the Books of Taaut, for he knew that Taaut was the first of all under the sun who discovered the use of letters and the writing of records. So he started from him, making him as it were his foundation--from him the Logos whom the Egyptians called Thouth, the Alexandrians Thoth, [*1] but whom the Greeks have turned into Hermes." [*2] 

SANCHUNIATHON AND THE BOOKS OF HERMES 

This evidently means that the source of Sanchuniathon's information as to the mystic beginning of things was derived from the Books of Thoth, and 

[p. 125]

that this was so may be seen from the following passage: 

"He supposes the beginning of all things to consist of a Dark Mist of a spiritual nature, or as it were a Breath of dark mist, and of a turbid Chaos black as Erebus; [*1] that these were boundless, and for many an age [*2] remained without a bound. 'But when,' he [*3] says, 'the Spirit fell in love with his own principles, [*4] and they were interblended, that interweaving was called Love; [*5] and this Love was the origin of the creation of all things. But [Chaos] did not know its own creation. [*6] From its embrace with Spirit Mot was born. [*7] From her [Mot, the Great Mother] it was that every seed of the creation came, the birth of all the cosmic bodies. 

"'[First of all] there were [Great] Lives [*8] devoid of sensation, and out of these came subsequently [Great] 

[p. 126]

[paragraph continues] Lives possessed of intelligence. [*1] The latter were called Zophasemin (that is to say, "Overseers of the Heavens"). The latter were fashioned in the form of eggs, and shone forth as Mot, the Sun and Moon, the Stars and the great Planetary Spheres. 

"'Now as the [original] nebula began to lighten, through its heat mists and clouds of sea and earth [*2] were produced, and gigantic downpours and torrents of the waters in the firmaments. Even after they were separated, [*3] they were still carried from their proper places by the heat of the sun, and all the [watery and earthy elements] met together again in the nebula one with the other, and dashed together, amid thunder and lightning; and over the crash of the thunderings the [Great] Rational Lives before-mentioned watched, [*4] while on the land and sea male and female cowered at their echo and were dismayed.' 

"After this our author proceeds to say: 'These things we found written in the Cosmogony of Taaut, and in his commentaries, based on his researches and the evidences which his intelligence saw and discovered, and so enlightened us.'" [*5] 

There are many other points of interest in Philo's translation, but we need not elaborate them here. One point, however, must not be omitted, because of its importance with regard to the Hermes-Aesculapius tradition, an important factor in the Trismegistic writings. 

[p. 127]

"And Cronus [Ammon] going to the land of the South gave the whole of Egypt to the God Taaut to be his kingdom. All these things were first recorded by the Seven Sons of Sydyk, the Cabiri, and their eighth brother, Asclepius, as it was commanded them by the God Taaut." [*1] 

Aesculapius is here at once identified with the cult of the "Great Gods" (kbr, KBR, Kabirim), who were, according to the old Semitic tradition, the Sons of King Sydyk (? Melchizedec). The whole subject of the very ancient mysteries of these Great Gods is one of immense interest, but we must not be tempted to follow this alluring bye-path. [*2] Enough has been said to show that both Sanchuniathon and the writer of "The Shepherd" drew their accounts of cosmogony from the same sources, namely, the "Books of Thoth," or, in other words, the Egyptian mystery-tradition. 

Footnotes

^99:1 R. 3, nn. 1, 2.

^100:1 See R. 3-7, to whom I am indebted for the indications.

^100:2 Of the school of Aristarchus (fl. 280-264). The great Lexicon of Pamphilus is supposed by some to have been the basis of that of Hesychius.

^100:3 Apud, Galen, peri aplun farm., vi. Prooem. (tom. ix. p. 798 K).

^100:4 See Riess, Philologus Supplem., Fragg. 27-29.

^100:5 See Kroll, "Aus der Geschichte der Astrologie," Neue Jahrbb. f. Phil. u. Pad., vii. 559 ff.

^101:1 Kroll, ii. 344; Riess, Frag. 33.

^101:2 Riess, Frag. 1.

^101:3 oyranobatein.

^101:4 So R. (5) completes a lacuna.

^101:5 boe'--presumably a parallel with the Bath-kol of Talmudic Rabbinism.

^102:1 The same rapturous vision of the soul after death is translated by Seneca (Cons. ad Marciam, 18, 2) from Poseidonius (135-(?)51 B.C.), who also clearly derived it from the same Egyptian Hellenistic literature.

^102:2 C. H., v. (vi.) 5.

^102:3 C. H., xi. (xii.) 6, 7; also Stob., Ecl., i. 49 (386, 3, W.).

^102:4 There are some dozen variants in the spelling and accenting of this name in Greek transliteration; in Egyptian we are told it means "Beloved of Thoth" (Mai en Thoth).

^103:1 Plutarch, De Is. et Osir., ix. and xxviii.

^103:2 Josephus, C. Apion., i. 14.

^103:3 Aelian, De Animalium Natura, x. 16.

^103:4 Budge, op. sup. cit., i. 332, says: "A tradition says Solon, Thales, and Plato all visited the great college at Heliopolis, and that the last-named actually studied there, and that Manetho the priest of Sebennytus, who wrote a history of Egypt in Greek for Ptolemy II., collected his materials in the library of the priesthood of Ra."

^104:1 Chron., xl. See Cory (I. P.), Ancient Fragments, pp. 173, 174--mispaged as 169 (2nd ed.; London, 1832); and Mitller, Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum, pp. 511 ff. (Paris, 1848).

^104:2 biblos Sw'theos.

^104:3 stelun, generally translated "columns"; but the term is quite a general one and denotes any monument bearing an inscription.

^104:4 Syncellus has "into the Greek tongue," an evident slip, as many have already pointed out.

^104:5 Sebennytus was the chief city of the Sebennyte province, situated about the centre of the Delta. Heliopolis or On, the City of the Sun, was situated some thirty miles north of Memphis.

^105:1 Presumably Manetho and his fellow priests.

^105:2 Lit., "for you questioning."

^106:1 See my article on "The Sibyl and her Oracles," in The Theosophical Review, vol. xxii. pp. 399 S. See also the passage preserved from the Ethiopian History of Marcellua by Proclus in his commentary on the Timaeus of Plato; Cory, Ancient Fragments, p. 233.

^107:1 Frag. Hist. Graec., ut sup. cit., p. 512.

^107:2 A. Bockh, Manetho und die Hundsternperiode: em Beitrag zur Geschichte der Pharaonen, pp. 14-17 (Berlin, 1845).

^107:3 M. Letronne, Recueil des Inscriptions grecques et latines de l'Egypte, tom, i., pp. 206, 280 ff. (Paris, 1842).

^109:1 See The Athenaeum, 12th November 1904.

^109:2 De Nat. Deorum, iii. 22.

^110:1 Ursin, De Zoroastre, etc., p. 73.

^110:2 For a permutation of the elements in this genealogy, in the interests of Heliopolis, see Varro, De Genie Pop. Rom., as quoted by Augustine in De Civ. Dei, xviii. 3 and 8.

^111:1 Hekekyan Bey, C. E., A Treatise on the Chronology of Siriadic Monuments, demonstrating that the Egyptian Dynasties of Manetho are Records of Astrogeological Nile Observations which have been continued to the Present Time--Preface, p. v. (London, 1863). The book deserves careful study, and cannot be hastily set aside with the impatience of prejudice.

^112:1 See Pietschmann, op. cit., pp. 31, 32; also Spiegelberg, Recueil des Travaux relatifs a la Philologie et a l'Archeologie egyptiennes et assyriennes, xxiii. 199. R. 117, n. 1.

^112:2 See the last chapter of the book from which the following passage is quoted. See also Iamblichus, De Mysteriis, cap. ii., who in a very clear statement of the sources of his information, and the method of treating the numerous points raised by Porphyry, says: "And if thou proposest any philosophical problem, we will resolve it for thee according to the ancient monuments of Hermes, on the thorough study of which Plato, and prior to him Pythagoras, founded their philosophy."

^113:1 Who flourished in the early second half of the fourth century A.D.

^113:2 The passages and chambers being hewn out of the solid rock.

^113:3 Ammiani Marcellini Rerum Gestarum Libri qui supersunt, xxii. xv. 30; ed. V. Gardthausen (Leipzig, 1874), p. 301.

^114:1 tun olun.

^114:2 ste'las.

^114:3 epombrias, a downpour or flood of rain.

^114:4 Josephus, Antt., I. ii.; Cory's An. Fragg., pp. 171, 172.

^115:1 Sanhedrin, 107 B; Sota, 47 A.

^115:2 See my Did Jesus Live 100 B.C.?--pp. 137 ff. and 147 ff.

^115:3 A similarity already pointed out by Plew, Jahrb. f. Phil. (1868), p. 839.

^115:4 Drexler in Roscher's Lex. d. Myth., ii. 388, 408, 445.

^116:1 Pietschmann misquotes this line, giving "ter maximus" for "ter unus" (op. cit., p. 36).

^117:1 kathaper Ermeis o megas kai megas, line 19; the reading is perfectly clear, and I cannot understand the remark of Chambers (op. cit., Pref. vii.) that Hermes is called "megas, megas, megas" on the Rosetta Stone.

^117:2 "Inscription grecque de Rosette," p. 3, appended to Muller, Frag. Hist. Graec. (Paris, 1841).

^117:3 Ibid., p. 20.

^117:4 Recueil des Inscriptions grecques et latines de l'Egypte, i. 283 (Paris, 1842).

^117:5 See Pietschmann, op. sup. cit., p. 35.

^117:6 In Greek not only is the term trismakar (thrice-blessed) applied to Hermes in the inscriptions of Pselcis (see Letronne's Recueil, i. 206 n.), but also in a Magical Prayer (Wessely, 1893--p. 38, 11. 550 ff.; Kenyon, p. 102) he is addressed as trismegas, or "thrice-great" simply.

^119:1 Griffiths here refers to Pietschmann as his authority for this statement.

^120:1 Cf. Proc. Soc. Bib. Arch. (1899), p. 279.

^120:2 Recueil des Travaux relat. a la Phil, et a l'Archeol. egypt. et assyr., xxiii. 196. Cf. R. 54.

^123:1 J. C. Orelli, Sanchoniathonis Berytii quae feruntur Fragmenta (Leipzig, 1826).

^123:2 Praeparatio Evangelica, I. vi., vii.

^123:3 These are collected by Cory in his Ancient Fragments, pp. 3 ff. (London, 1832); and they may also be found in C. Muller, Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum, "Philo Byblius," iii. pp. 560 ff. (Paris, 1848).

^123:4 F. Wagenfeld, Sanchuniathon's Urgeschichte der Phonizier in einem Auszuge aus der wieder aufgefundenen Handschrift von Philo' s vollstandiger Ubersetzung (Hanover, 1836). In the following year Wagenfeld published the Greek text with a Latin translation under the title Sanchoniathonis Historiarum Phoeniciae Libri IX. (Bremse, 1837). For the further consideration of the reliability of Sanchuniathon, see Count (Wolf Wilhelm) Baudissin's Studien zur semitischen Religionsgeschichte, Heft ii., "Uber den religionsgeschichtlichen Werth der phonicischen Geschichte Sanchuniathon's" (Leipzig, 1876).

^124:1 Perhaps attempts at transliterating the dialectic variants of Upper and Lower Egypt of the name Tehuti.

^124:2 Wagenfeld's text, Prooem., p. 2; Euseb., Praep. Ev., I. ix. 29.

^125:1 This is the beginning of the out-breathing of the universe or of any system; it is the Great Breath or Spirit moving on the Waters of Chaos, the primal nebula. Erebus was fabled to be a region of nether darkness separating Earth and Hades (not Hell). It was the Dark Side of Heaven.

^125:2 Lit., aeon.

^125:3 That is, Sanchuniathon; so that we may take this passage as a direct quotation, or rather translation.

^125:4 Or sources; that is, the primal states of Matter or Chaos.

^125:5 Pothos, pothos; yearning, longing--love for all that lives and breathes. This union was symbolised not only among the Phoenicians but also among most of the other nations by an egg, round which a serpent twines. When the egg and serpent are represented apart they stand for "Chaos" and "Ether," matter and spirit; but when united they represent the hermaphrodite or male-female first principle of the universe, spirit-matter, called in Greek translation Pothos or Eros.

^125:6 Cf. "The Darkness comprehended it not" of the Proem to the Fourth Gospel.

^125:7 Here Philo, the translator, volunteers the information that some call this prime plasm of Chaos, "Slime," others explain it as "Fermentation," in a watery sort of medium.

^125:8 The primal elements and their subdivisions.

^126:1 The same distinction is made in the cosmogonic account in "The Shepherd," but with more detail.

^126:2 Presumably still mingled together, as in the account in "The Shepherd."

^126:3 That is to say, after the land and water were separated.

^126:4 egregoresen. The same expression is used in the Greek translation of The Book of Enoch, in speaking of the Watchers (Egregores).

^126:5 Op. cit., i. ii., pp. 8 ff.

^127:1 Op. cit., viii. p. 26.

^127:2 The best source of information is the art. "Megaloi Theoi," in Reseller's Ausfuhrliches Lexikon der griechischen u. romischen Mythologie, II. ii. (Leipzig, 1894-97).

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 128]

VI

AN EGYPTIAN PROTOTYPE OF THE MAIN FEATURES OF THE POeMANDRES' COSMOGONY 

THE HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE "POeMANDRES" 

ONE has only to read through the remains of the Trismegistic literature preserved to us to assure himself that the whole of it looked back to the Poemandres instruction as the most primitive form of the tradition in the language of Greece. The extant form of our "Poemandres" sermon is clearly not the most primitive form; but whatever that form was, it must have contained the cosmological part. 

Now, if we regard this cosmogenesis as a purely literary compilation, the task of the higher criticism will be to try to sift out the various elements in it, and if possible to trace them to their sources. 

But before making any attempt of this nature, it will be as well to consider the nature of the literary art of our document. It purports itself to be an apocalypse, or rather the record of an apocalyptic vision, and not a purely literary compilation from already existing literary sources. It declares itself to be the work of a seer and prophet and not of a scribe or commentator; it claims to be an inspired document, a scripture, and not the work of a schoolman. 

Of this class of writing we have very many examples in other scriptures, and it will be as well to consider 

[p. 129]

briefly the nature of such documents. In the original form of apocalypses we do not as a rule find that prior formal literary material is used--that is to say, we do not find that previously existing written sources are incorporated; what we do find is that in almost every case the seer uses the forms and terms of previously existing ideas to express what he sees. These forms and terms are found in already existing written and oral traditions, and the prophetical writer is compelled to use the thought-language of his own mind and of that of his age to express himself. This, however, does not negate the possibility of his having seen a true vision, of his having been inspired. 

It is evident that whoever wrote the "Poemandres" must have been saturated with the religious, mystical, philosophic, and scientific thought of his age, clothed in the forms of the thought-language of his day; and it is also clear that whatever "newness" there may have been in him, was owing to the nature of the "touch" of inspiration he had received. This striking of a new keynote, as it were, in his inner nature, enabled him to regroup and reconstruct the previous ideas he had imbibed from his studies. 

A PROTOTYPE OF ITS COSMOGENESIS 

Now as far as our cosmogenesis is concerned, it has not yet been found possible to trace the exact verbal forms of its elements to any precise literary sources, but it has been found possible to point to written sources which contain similar ideas; and not only so, but with regard to the main features of it, a distinct prototype has been found in Egypt itself. This discovery is due to Reitzenstein (pp. 59 ff.),and the prototype is to be found in an Egyptian inscription in the British 

[p. 130]

[paragraph continues] Museum, which was first read correctly and interpreted by Dr J. H. Breasted. [*1] Before using it, however, Reitzenstein got his colleague Professor Spiegelberg to go through it; and again when Maspero, in reviewing [*2] Breasted's work, had further confirmed the view of it which Reitzenstein had in his mind, Spiegelberg again revised certain points in the translation owing to Maspero's suggestions. 

The inscription itself is dated about the eighth century B.C., but it states that it is the reproduction of a then old written text from the temple of Ptah at Memphis. 

The chief content has to do with the Osiris-myth, but into this is inserted the distinctive Ptah-doctrine. Ptah is supposed by some to have originally been simply the god of handicraft, seeing that he is equated by the Greek interpreters of god-names with Hephaistos. He was, however, rather the Demiurgus, for in very early times he is found in the closest connection with the Gods of Heaven and Gods of Light, and is conceived as the Dispenser of all life. 

In our text Ptah is brought into the closest relations with the Supreme Deity (Atum). This "God the Father" emanates from himself eight deities (the Ogdoad). Each one of these is Ptah with a distinctive epithet. To the fourth [*3] of them, "Ptah the Great," a theological system is attached, which, though not entirely ignoring the former presentation, is but loosely interwoven with it. 

Before, however, Reitzenstein proceeds to deal with this, he gives Professor Spiegelberg's translation of a 

[p. 131]

[paragraph continues] Prayer to Ptah, of the time of Ramses III. (c. 1233 B.C.), from the Papyrus Harris (I. 44, 3 ff.), in order to make clearer the circle of ideas into which we shall be introduced. This Prayer is as follows: 

A PRAISE-GIVING TO PTAH 

"Hail to thee! Thou art great, thou art old, Tatenen, [*1] Father of the gods, 
God ancient from the beginning; 
Who fashioned men, 
Who made the gods, 
Who began with the creation as the first creator, 
Who created for all who came after him, 
Who made the heaven; as his heart [*2] he created it; 
Who hanged it up, 
As God Shu raised himself; [*3] 
Who founded the earth of thy own power, 
Who circled in the primal water of the Great Green, [*4] 
Who created the invisible world, which brings the dead bodies to rest; 

[p. 132]

Who let Ra come to make them glad, 
As Prince of Eternity, 
Lord of Eternity, 
Lord of Life; 
Who fills the lungs with air, 
Who gives breath to every nostril, 
Who vivifies all beings with his gifts. 
Length of life, fortune, and fate are subject unto him 
They live by that which goeth forth out of his mouth. [*1] 
Who made contentment for all the gods, 
In his form of ancient primal water; [*2] 
Lord of Eternity, to whom Eternity is subject, 
Breath of Life for all beings."

There are other hymns of an exactly similar nature in which other gods are praised, especially Thoth and Horus. And now to turn to our inscription, and to that part of the text assigned to the fourth of the Forms of Manifestation, or Aspects or Persons, of Ptah. 

PTAH-THOTH THE WISE ONE 

l. 52. Ptah the Great is the heart and tongue of the god-circle. [*3] 

 section 1, l. 53. (Two gods) [*4] are they, the one as heart, the other as tongue, emanations of Atum. Exceeding great is Ptah; if he . . . then are their ka's in this heart and tongue [of his]. 

l. 54. When Horus arose in him (Atum) as Ptah, and when Thoth arose in him as Ptah, the power of heart 

[p. 133]

and tongue came into being through him. (It is Atum) who brings forth his being out of every body and out of every mouth of all the gods. All men, all quadrupeds, all creeping things live through his thinking and uttering whatsoever he will. 

 section 2, l. 55. His god-circle is before him; he is teeth [and] lips, vessels [and] hands. Atum (is in his) god-circle; Atum is in his vessels, in his hands; the god-circle is also teeth and lips in that mouth which hath uttered the name of everything, and out of which Shu and Tefnut have proceeded. [*1] 

l. 56. Then the god-circle organised the seeing of the eye, the hearing of the ear, the smelling of the nose, wherewith they made the desire of the heart to arise. And this [heart] it is which accomplishes every desire, but it is the tongue which repeats [*2] what the heart desires. 

 section 3. He (Ptah) gives existence [*3] unto all gods, to Atum and his god-circle, for every god-word [*4] comes into existence through the desire of the heart and the command of the tongue. 

l. 57. He makes the ka . . . ; he makes all nourishment and all offerings [*5] with this word; he makes what 

[p. 134]

is loved and what is hated. He gives life to the pious, death to the impious. He makes every fabric, and every fabrication. 

l. 58. The doing of the arms, the going of the feet, the movement of all limbs, is accomplished by the utterance of the word, because of the desire of the heart, [the word] which comes from the tongue and effects the whole of all things. So arises the teaching: Atum has made the gods to become Ptah Tatenen [*1] so soon as the gods come into existence. All things proceed from him: sacrifice and food as well as oblation and all fair things. 

 section 4, l. 59. He is Thoth the Wise, whose power is greater than that of the other gods. He (Thoth) at-oned himself with Ptah, after he had brought forth all things and all god-words; [*2] after that he had fashioned the gods, had made the cities, settled the nomes, established the gods in their shrines, 

l. 60. When he had ordained their sacrifices, founded their shrines, and had made statues of [? for] their bodies for their contentment. 

 section 5. If the gods enter into their body, so is he (Ptah) in every wood, in every jewel, in every metal. [*3] All things thrive after him if they [the gods] are there. To him all gods and their ka's make oblation, uniting and binding themselves together [for him who is] Lord of the Two Lands. [*4] 

[p. 135]

With these words the special theological system attached to the fourth person of Ptah is concluded, and the text returns to the Osiris-myth. 

EGYPTIAN SYNCRETISM 1000 B.C. 

From this most interesting inscription copied from an ancient written document, we learn in the first place that in Egypt already, a good thousand years before the date of our "Poemandres," we have what the critical mind would call a distinct specimen of syncretism; namely, an attempt to combine three God-myths, or traditions, into a single system. These, if we persist in taking a purely traditional view, are: (i.) The Hermopolitan myth of Thoth as the Logos-Demiurge, who also in it frequently appears as an aspect of the Supreme; (ii.) The doctrine of the Ptah-priests of Memphis, according to which Ptah as the Primal Deity creates himself and all gods and men, and fashions the world; and (iii.) The Heliopolitan theology, in which Atum as the first of an ennead of gods unites his eight fellow-gods in himself and is the Primal God and Primal Basis of all things. 

In all this the scribe or prophet has employed very early conceptions: on the one hand, that the plurality of gods are but "members" of a One and Only God; and on the other, that a sharply-defined and in some respect special God is similar to another more-general God in some particular attribute of his. Thus Atum is really the Primal God; but the God-circle, his "Body" (or Pleroma), consists of Eight different Forms of Ptah. Atum has emanated them; he is therefore "he who himself creates himself"; but equally so has Ptah created Atum and himself. The most important Member of this universal Ptah-Being or Cosmic God is Ptah the Great, 

[p. 136]

who is Heart and Tongue--the former as Horus, the latter as Thoth. Thoth proceeds into manifestation as Tongue or Word to accomplish the cosmic purpose; but the Word is only the thought which has proceeded, or in a certain fashion emanated, out of the Person. Thoth and Horus are inseparably united with Ptah. 

Reitzenstein thinks that the occasion for introducing the whole of this system into an exposition which otherwise deals with the Osiris-myth, was afforded by the parts played by Horus and Thoth in that myth. But it is evidently in itself a special system in which Thoth was the One God, the Word by whom all things were made. 

All of this must be quite manifest to any careful reader, and therefore there is no reason for its further elaboration. But though we have recovered one specimen of this kind of syncretism only, it is not to be supposed that it was unusual; indeed, it was a necessity in Egypt, where, beyond all other lands, the idea of a number of divinities united in one, each showing forth in separation some attribute dominantly, but in union possessing simultaneously the attributes of all the others, was the only key possible to a state of affairs where a plurality of gods existed side by side with the doctrines of the One and the All. 

THE DOCTRINE OF "POeMANDRES" COMPARED WITH THAT OF ITS PROTOTYPE 

Nevertheless, our inscription is not only of general use, but of special use for an elucidation of the main elements in the "Poemandres" cosmogony. Any attempt to translate the ideas of the Atum-Ptah-Thoth combination into Greek could have resulted in no other nomenclature than theos (God)--demioyrgos or demioyrgos nous (Demiurge or Demiurgic Mind)--nous

[p. 137]

and logos (Mind and Word), as is the case in our treatise. 

This argument is all the stronger if we reflect that if Thoth, after the ordering of the cosmos, at-oned himself again with Ptah, then he must have completed this ordering which was emanated from Ptah. It is thus that the writer has brought to clear expression the conception that the Word is the Proceeding Thought of Ptah, and that both are inseparably united with one another. 

So, too, we find in the "Poemandres" that the Logos, after the completion of the cosmic ordering, returns to the Demiurgic Mind and is at-oned with him. 

This similarity of fundamental conception cannot be due to chance, and we must therefore conclude that a doctrine essentially corresponding with the theology of our inscription is the main source of the "Poemandres" cosmogony. This fairly establishes the main content of our cosmogony on an Egyptian ground. 

If to this we add the general Egyptian belief that a man's soul, after being "purified" in the after-death state, goes back to God, to live for the eternity as a god with the gods, [*1] then we have established the chief part of the "Poemandres" treatise as the Hellenised doctrine of the Egyptian priests--the mystery-tradition. 

With all of this agrees the thought that the God as Mind dwells in the pious, as we learn from the Hermes Prayers. So also it is Ptah in our inscription who gives life to the pious and death to the impious. In very early accounts we find Ptah, the Mind, is the 

[p. 138]

imparter of the gnosis for the gods--that is, as a Greek would say, he was the inventor of philosophy, as indeed Diogenes Laertius tells us (Prooem. 1): "The Egyptians declare that Hephaistos was the source of philosophy, the presidents of which are priests and prophets." Ptah, the Mind, reveals himself to his own and gives them good counsel; "Ptah hath spoken to thee," Suidas tells us (s.v.), was a Greek-Egyptian saying, which is best elucidated by the Stele of Intef, which tells us that the people say of the heart of Intef: "It is an oracle of the god which is in every body." [*1] 

All of this and much more of a like nature make it indubitably clear that the fundamental conceptions of the "Poemandres" are Egyptian, and that the theory of Neoplatonic forgery must be for ever abandoned; so that even the dreams of Deveria are nearer the truth than the confident assertions of many a great name in scholarship. 

THE MAN-DOCTRINE 

But what, says Reitzenstein (p. 69), is not Egyptian, is the doctrine of the Man, the Heavenly Man, the Son of God, who descends and becomes a slave of the Fate-Sphere; the Man who, though originally endowed with all power, descends into weakness and bondage, and has to win his own freedom and regain his original state. 

This doctrine seems to have been in its origin part and parcel of the Chaldaean mystery-tradition; but it was widely spread in Hellenistic circles, and had analogies in all the great mystery-traditions, as we shall now proceed to see, and chiefly by the analysis of what has hitherto been regarded as one of the most chaotic and puzzling documents of Gnosticism. 

Footnotes

^130:1 Zeitschr. f. ag. Sprache (1901), pp. 39 ff.

^130:2 "Sur la Tout-puissance de la Parole," Recueil des Travaux rel. a la Phil. . . . egypt., xxiv. 168 ff.

^130:3 The God of Fire and Mind.

^131:1 An epithet of Ptah. But compare the Hymn to Ra given by Budge (op. cit., i. 339): "Praise to thee O Ra, exalted Sekhem, Ta-thenen, Begetter of his Gods." Sekhem is vital "power"; Tathenen is, therefore, presumably Creative Life, or the Demiurgic or Creative Power. On page 230 Budge tells us that Tathenen is elsewhere symbolised as a fire-spitting serpent armed with a knife.

^131:2 The Heaven is the Great Heart of the Great Cosmos; in man the little cosmos, the heart, was the seat of the true understanding and will.

^131:3 Shu generally represents the dry air between the earth and sky. Cf. the Hymn to Amen-Ra: "Thou art the One God, who did'st form thyself into two gods; thou art the creator of the egg, and thou did'st produce thy Twin-gods" (Budge, op. cit., ii. 89). Shu's twin or syzygy is Tefnut, who in terrene physics represents the moist air; but Shu is elsewhere equated with the Light.

^131:4 The Ocean of Heaven.

^132:1 The life or breath of the Creator.

^132:2 Sc. the water of the Great Green.

^132:3 Paut, sphere, or group, or company, or hierarchy, or pleroma,--here an Ogdoad.

^132:4 Namely, Thoth and Horus.

^133:1 That is, the heart (Horus) rules action by fingers (and toes), by means of the ducts or vessels (arteries, veins, and nerves) leading to them, and all that these mean on the hidden side of things; while the tongue in the mouth (Thoth), by means of teeth and lips, is the organ of speech, or intelligent or meaning utterance.

^133:2 This appears to be a mistranslation; it seems by what follows to mean "commands" or "gives expression to."

^133:3 Not being; that is, brings them into manifestation. He is the Demiurge.

^133:4 R. glosses this as hieroglyph; but it should perhaps mean "word of the language of the gods"--the language shown by action in the world.

^133:5 That is to say, apparently, the fruit of actions on which gods and men feed. Cf. Hermes-Prayer, II. 2, where Hermes is said to "collect the nourishment of gods and men."

^134:1 That is, as we have seen above, Ptah as the Demiurgic Power.

^134:2 Hieroglyphics; showing that the oldest hieroglyphics were symbols of the words of action--that is to say, modes of expression of being in action.

^134:3 Lit., copper.

^134:4 That is, the worlds of gods, or immortals, and of men, or mortals. But Reitzenstein says: "Thus the God of Memphis [i.e. Ptah] is the divinity or 'the God' of all Egypt"--meaning thereby the physical upper and lower lands; but I prefer a wider sense.

^137:1 This does not mean, I hold, that there was no "reincarnation," that is, that the "being" of the man did not emanate other "souls," but that the "soul" of a particular life did not return--that all of it deserving of immortality became a god with the gods, or "those-that-are," and do not only ex-ist.

^138:1 Cf. Breasted, Zeit. f. ag. Spr. (1901), p. 47.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 139]

VII

THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 

THE GNOSTIC TRADITION 

"BUT All-Father Mind, being Life and Light, did bring forth Man (Anthrupon) co-equal to Himself." [*1] 

So runs the opening paragraph of what we may call the soteriological part of the "Poemandres" treatise of our Trismegistic literature. This Man or Anthropos is the Spiritual Prototype of humanity and of every individual man, and is a technical term found in a number of the early Christianised Gnostic systems. 

For instance, in a system some outlines of which are preserved in the polemical Refutation of Irenaeus, [*2] and which the Bishop of Lyons seems to associate with an Ophite tradition, while Theodoret [*3] ascribes it to the Sethians, we are told that in the Unutterable Depth were two Great Lights,--the First Man, or Father, and His Son, the Second Man; and also the Holy Spirit, the First Woman, or Mother of all living. 

In this tradition, moreover, the Son of the Mother--the chief Formative Power of the seven Demiurgic Potencies of the sensible cosmos--is called Ialdabaoth (? the Child of the Egg), who boasts himself to be 

[p. 140]

supreme. But his mother, Wisdom, reproves his pride, saying unto him: "Lie not, Ialdabaoth, for above thee is the Father of All, First Man, and Man Son of Man." [*1] 

THE "PHILOSOPHUMENA" OF HIPPOLYTUS 

But the main source of our information on this Anthropos tradition, in its Christianised Gnostic form, is to be found in Hippolytus' Philosophumena; or, Refutation of all Heresies. 

In 1842, Minoides Mynas, a learned Greek, sent on a literary mission by the French Government, discovered in one of the monasteries on Mount Athos the only MS. (generally ascribed to the fourteenth century) which we possess of this extremely valuable work. It was originally in ten books, but, unfortunately, the first three and the beginning of the fourth are missing from our MS. The first book, however, was already known, though previously erroneously ascribed to Origen, and was accordingly prefixed to the text of the editio princeps of our work by Emmanuel Miller (Oxford, 1851). 

The missing Books II. and III. dealt respectively with the doctrines and mysteries of the Egyptians and with those of the Chaldaeans. Hippolytus (Prooem.) boasts that he has divulged all their mysteries, as well as the secrets of those Christian mystics whom he stigmatises as heretics, and to whom he devotes Books V.-IX. 

It is a curious fact that it is precisely those Books wherein this divulging of the Mysteries was attempted, which should be missing; not only have they disappeared, but in the Epitome at the beginning of Book X. the summary of their contents is also omitted. This seems almost to point to a deliberate removal of just 

[p. 141]

that information which would be of priceless value to us to-day, not only for the general history of the evolution of religious ideas, but also for filling in an important part of the background of the environment of infant Christianity. 

Why, then, were these books cut out? Were the subsequent Christian Orthodox deterred by religious scruples, or were they afraid to circulate this information? Hippolytus himself seems to have had no such hesitation; he is ever delightedly boasting that he is giving away to the multitude the most sacred secrets of others; it seems to have been his special metier to cry aloud on the house-tops what had been whispered in their secret chambers. It was for him a delicious triumph over "error" to boast, "I have your secret documents, and I am going to publish them!" 

Why, then, should those who came after him hesitate? Surely they were like-minded with Hippolytus, and would have been as delighted as himself in humbling the pride of the hated Mystery-institutions in the dust? Can it possibly be that they saw far more clearly than he did that quite other deductions might be drawn from his "startling revelations"? 

THE NAASSENES 

That far other deductions could be drawn from the Mystery-rites and Mystery-myths was at anyrate the view of a tradition of early Jewish and Christian mystics whom Hippolytus calls Naassenes. The claim of these Gnostics was practically that Christianity, or rather the Good News of the Christ, was precisely the consummation of the inner doctrine of the Mystery-institutions of all the nations; the end of them all was the revelation of the Mystery of Man. 

[p. 142]

It is further to be noticed that these Naassenes, "who call themselves Gnostics" (v. 2), are the very first school of Christian "heresy" with which Hippolytus deals; he puts them in the forefront of his Refutation, as being, presumably, in his opinion, the oldest, or, at anyrate, as representing the most ancient form of Christian "heresy." 

Although the name Naassene (Naassenoi) is derived from the Hebrew Nahash (Serpent), Hippolytus does not call them Ophites; indeed, he reserves the latter name to a body to which he also gives (viii. 20) the name Cainites and Nochaitae (Noxaitai)--? Nachaitae, again, from Nachash [*1]--and considers them of not sufficient importance for further mention. 

These Naassenes possessed many secret books or apocrypha--that is, books kept back from general circulation--and also regarded as authoritative the following scriptures: The Gospel of Perfection, The Gospel of Eve, The Questions of Mary, [*2] Concerning the Offspring of Mary, The Gospel of Philip, The Gospel according to Thomas, and The Gospel according to the Egyptians. All of which points somewhat to an Alexandrian or Egyptian circle. 

ANALYSIS OF HIPPOLYTUS' ACCOUNT OF THE NAASSENE DOCUMENT 

One of their secret MSS. had fallen into the hands of Hippolytus. It is in the Bishop of Portus' quotations 

[p. 143]

from this document that Reitzenstein (pp. 81 ff.) seeks to discover what he calls the "Hellenistic Myth of the God Anthropos." His theory is that, by eliminating the Christian citations and thoughts of the Naassene writer, we are face to face with a purely Heathen document. 

The reproduction of their views, as given by Hippolytus, [*1] falls according to Reitzenstein into three divisions. 

(i.) The first begins with the explanation of the name "Naassene" (S. 131, 1; C. 139, 1 [*2]), and, after giving a few brief headings, ends (S. 134, 8; C. 141, 2) with the statement that the writer of the MS. said they had their tradition from James, the Brother of the Lord, who had delivered it to Mariamne. 

(iii.) The third begins (S. 170, 64; C. 178, 1) with another explanation of the name. In both of these parts are found remains of hymns from some liturgical collection. 

(ii.) Between i. and ii. lies a longer exposition in which Hippolytus tries to show that the Naassene doctrines are taken from the Mysteries, culminating in the assertion that the Naassenes, as a matter of fact, were nothing else than sectaries of the Mysteries of the Mother of the Gods, in proof of which he quotes at length from a secret document of their school. 

Our interest in these quotations, however, is very different from that of Hippolytus, for, as Reitzenstein has now shown, it is manifest on inspection that the Christian quotations and thoughts in this document 

[p. 144]

violently disrupt its underlying continuity, and that they are for the most part easily removable without damage to the sense. 

With regard to the Old Testament quotations it is not always so easy to disentangle them from the Hellenistic source, much less from the New Testament quotations; the phenomena, however, presented by them are of such a nature that, in my opinion, there is ample evidence before us that there was a Jewish working-over of the matter before it came into the hands of the Christian overwriter. Reitzenstein, however, does not venture so far. 

Even, then, if we were content with Reitzenstein's analysis only, it is quite clear that the quotations from the Old Testament formed no part of the original; and that we have, therefore, before us what was once a purely Heathen text, with Gnostic Christian scholia, or rather overworked by a Christian Gnostic. The original Pagan text had, accordingly, been cut up by the Naassene overwriter before ever it came into the hands of Hippolytus. 

Now, as the Christianised text must have been for some time in private circulation before it reached the library of the Bishop of Portus [*1]--even if we make no allowance for a Jewish Hellenistic stratum of overwriting, still seeing that Hippolytus' own view was that, in the Naassene MS., he had before him a basic document of those whom he regarded as the earliest Christian "heretics"--it is quite evident that if we were to place the date of the original Hellenistic source in the first century, we should not be doing violence even to the ecclesiastical traditional absurdity that Gnosticism first sullied the orthodox purity of the Church only 

[p. 145]

in the reign of Trajan (96-117 A.D.). But we will return to the question of date later on. 

As the whole matter is not only one of considerable interest for the student of our treatises, but also of the greatest importance for the student of the history of Gnosticism, I shall give a translation of Hippolytus' introductory and concluding sections, as well as of the intermediate section which specially concerns us, so that the reader may have a view of the whole medley as it comes to us from the hands of the heresy-hunting bishop. 

I shall, moreover, proceed a stage further in the analysis of the material of Hippolytus than Reitzenstein has done, and hope, when the evidence has been laid before the reader, to win his assent to what appears to me to be the natural sifting out of the various elements, with resultant phenomena which are of the greatest importance for the history of Gnosticism, and, therefore, of the evolution of Christian dogmatics, and which lead to conclusions that are far too serious to be treated in the short space of a single chapter of our present essay.

In the following analysis H. stands for Hippolytus; C. for the Christian Gnostic final overwriter, the "Naassene" whose MS. lay before H.; J. for the Naassene Jewish mystic who preceded C. and overworked the original; S. for the original Heathen Hellenistic Source. 

As H. and C. are of secondary importance for our immediate enquiry, though of themselves of the greatest value and interest, I shall print them in smaller type. J. I shall print in the same type as S., as nearer in contact with S. than C., and as being sometimes more difficult to detach from S. than from C. 

The reader, to have the text of Hippolytus before him, must neglect all the critical indications and read straight on. 

[p. 146]

With these brief preliminary indications we will, then, present the reader with a translation of the first section, or introductory part, [*1] of Hippolytus' exposure or exposition of the Naassene doctrines, begging him to remember throughout that it is a portrait painted by the hand of one of their bitterest foes. 

HIPPOLYTUS' INTRODUCTION 

H. The priests and chiefs of [this] doctrine [*2] were first of all those who were called Naasseni--so named in Hebrew, [in which] "serpent" is called naas. [*3] But subsequently they called themselves Gnostics, pretending that they alone knew the Depths. 

From these many separated themselves and [so] turned the school, which was originally a single one, into numerous sects, setting forth the same ideas in various doctrinal forms, as our argument will show as it advances. 

These [Naassenes] honour as the Logos (Reason) of all universals [*4] Man, and Son of Man. This Man is male-female, and is called by them Adamas. [*5] And they have many intricate [*6] hymns in his honour. These hymns--to dispose of them briefly--run somewhat as follows: 

J. '"From Thee' [is] Father, and 'Through Thee' [*7] Mother--the two Immortal Names, [*8] Parents of Aeons, O Thou who hast the Heaven for Thy City, O Man of Mighty Names." [*9] 

[p. 147]

H. And they divide him into three, like Geryones; [*1] for, they say, he has a mental, psychic, and choic [aspect]; [*2] and they think that the Gnosis of [*3] this [Man] is the beginning of the possibility of knowing God, saying: 

J. The beginning of Perfection [is] the Gnosis of Man, but the Gnosis of God is perfected Perfection. [*4] 

H. All these, he says [*5]--mental, psychic, and earthy--descended together into one man--Jesus, born of Mary. 

And these three Men, he says, spake each from their own special essences to their own special folk. 

For of the universal principles there are three kinds [or races]--the angelic, psychic, and earthy; and three churches--angelic, psychic, and earthy named the Elect, Called, and Bound. 

These are the chief heads from a very large number of doctrines, [*6] which, he says, James, the Brother of the Lord, handed on to Mariamne. [*7] 

[p. 148]

But in order that we may put an end to the lying accounts of these impious [heretics] concerning Mariamne, and James, and the Saviour Himself, [*1] let us come to the Initiations from which they get this myth--if you like [to call it so]--to the non-Grecian and Grecian [Initiations]; and let us see how, by combining together the secret Mysteries of all the Gentiles which must not be spoken of, and by telling lies about the Christ, they take in those who do not know that these things are the Orgies of the Gentiles. 

Now, since the foundation of their system is Man Adamas, and they say it has been written of him, "Who shall declare his generation?" [*2]--learn how they have taken the undiscoverable and contradictory generation of Man and plastered it on the Christ.

THE MATERIAL FOR THE RECOVERY OF THE ORIGINAL HELLENISTIC DOCUMENT 

(1) S. "Earth (say the Greeks [*3]) first brought forth Man--bearing a fair gift, desiring to be mother not of plants without feeling, nor of brutes without reason, but of a tamed God-loving life. 

"Difficult is it (H. he says [*4]) to discover whether it was among the Boeotians that Alalkomeneus rose from the Kephisian Lake as first of men; or whether

[p. 149]

it was the Idaean Kuretes, race divine, or the Phrygian Korybantes, whom Helios saw first sprouting forth tree-like; or whether Arkadia brought forth Pelasgos [first], older than the Moon; or Eleusis Diaulos, dweller in Raria; or Lemnos Kabeiros, fair child of ineffable orgies; [*1] or whether Pallene Phlegraean Alkyoneus, eldest of Giants. 

"The Libyans say that Garamas, [*2] rising from parched plains, first picked sweet date of Zeus; while Neilos, making fat the mud of Egypt to this day (H. he says), breeds living things, and renders from damp heat things clothed in flesh." [*3] 

The Assyrians say it was with them Oannes, the Fish-eater; while the Chaldaeans [say that it was] Adam. 

(2) J. And this Adam they [the Chaldaeans] say was the man that Earth produced--a body only, and that he lay breathless, motionless, immovable, like a statue, being an image of that Man Above--

[p. 150]

H. --of whom they sing, and brought into existence by the many Powers, [*1] concerning which there is much detailed teaching. 

J. In order, then, that the Great Man from Above--

C. From whom, as is said, every fatherhood has its name on earth or in the heavens. [*2]

J. --might be completely brought low, there was given unto him [*3] Soul also, in order that through the Soul the enclosed plasm of the Great, Most-fair, and Perfect Man might suffer and be chastened. 

H. For thus they call Him. They seek to discover then further what is the Soul, and whence, and of what nature, that by entering into man and moving him, it should enslave and chasten the plasm of the Perfect Man; but they seek this also not from the Scriptures, but from the Mysteries. 

(3) S. And they [*4] say that Soul is very difficult to discover, and hard to understand; for it never remains of the same appearance, or form, or in the same state, so that one can describe it by a general type, [*5] or comprehend it by an essential quality. 

H. These variegated metamorphoses they [*6] have laid down in the Gospel, superscribed "According to the Egyptians." [*7] 

S. They are accordingly in doubt--

H. --like all the rest of the Gentiles--

J. --whether it [sc. the Soul] is from the Pre-existing [One], or from the Self-begotten, or from the Streaming Chaos. [*8] 

[p. 151]

H. And first of all, in considering the triple division of Man, they fly for help to the Initiations of the Assyrians; for the Assyrians were the first to consider the Soul triple and [yet] one. 

(4) S. Now every nature (H. he says) yearns after Soul--one in one way and another in another. 

For Soul is cause of all in Genesis. All things that are sustained and grow (H. he says) need Soul. Indeed, no sustenance (H. he says) or growth is possible without the presence of Soul. 

Nay, even stones (H. he says) are ensouled; [*1] for they have the power of increase [or growth]; and growth could not take place without sustenance; for it is by addition that things which increase grow; and addition is the sustenance of that which is sustained. [*2] 

(5) Now the Assyrians call this [Mystery] Adonis (or Endymion). And whenever it is called Adonis (H. he says), it is Aphrodite who is in love with and desires Soul so-called. 

H. And Aphrodite is Genesis according to them. [*3]

But when Persephone (that is, Kore) is in love with Adonis, Soul becomes subject to Death, separated from Aphrodite (that is, from Genesis). 

But if Selene is impassioned of Endymion, and is in 

[p. 152]

love with [formal] beauty, [*1] it is the Nature of the higher [spaces [*2]] (H. he says) which desires Soul. 

(6 [*3]) But if (H. he says) the Mother of the Gods emasculate Attis--she, too, regarding him as the object of her love--it is the Blessed Nature Above of the supercosmic and aeonian [spaces] which calls back the masculine power of Soul to herself. [*4] 

H. For Man, he says, is male-female. According, then, to this theory of theirs, the intercourse between man and woman is exhibited as most mischievous, and is forbidden according to their teaching. 

J. For Attis (H. he says) is emasculated--that is, [Soul is separated] from the earthy parts of the creation [tending] downwards, and ascends in quest of the Aeonian Essence Above--

[p. 153]

C. --where (H. he says) is "neither male nor female," [*1] but a new creature, a new man, who is male-female. 

H. What they call "Above" I will explain when I come to the proper place. And they say that this theory is supported not simply by [the myth] of Rhea, but also, to put it briefly, by universal creation. 

Nay, they make out that this is [even] what was said by the Word (Logos): [*2]

C. "For the invisible [*3] things of Him [God]--namely, His Eternal [*4] Power and Godhead--are clearly seen from the creation of the world, being understood by His things that are made; so that they [men] are without excuse. Because that, though knowing God, they glorified Him not as God, nor did they give [Him] thanks, but their non-understanding heart was made foolish. [*5]

[p. 154]

"Professing themselves to be wise, they convicted themselves of folly, and changed the Glory of the Incorruptible God into the likeness of an image of corruptible man, and of birds, and of four-footed beasts, and creeping things. [*1] . . . [*2] 

"Wherefore also God gave them up to passions of dishonour; for both their females did change their natural use to that which is against nature--

H. And what the natural use is, according to them, we will say later on.

C. --"and likewise also their males, leaving the natural use of the female, burned in their lust for one another, males with males working unseemliness [*3]--

H. And "unseemliness," according to them, is the First and Blessed Formless Essence, the Cause of all forms for things enformed. [*4]

C. --"and receiving in themselves the recompense of their Error which was meet." 

H. For in these words which Paul spake is contained, they say, the whole of their hidden and ineffable Mystery of the Blessed Bliss. 

For what is promised by the [rite of the] bath [*5] is nothing else, according to them, than the introduction into Unfading Bliss of him who, according to them, is washed with Living Water, and anointed with the Chrism that no tongue can declare. [*6] 

[p. 155]

(7) And they say that not only the Mysteries of the Assyrians and Phrygians substantiate this teaching (logos) concerning the Blessed Nature, which is at once hidden and manifest [but also those of the Egyptians [*1]]. 

C. [*2] [The Nature] which (H. he says) is the Kingdom of the Heavens sought for within man--

H. --concerning which [Nature] they hand on a distinct tradition in the Gospel entitled According to Thomas, saying as follows: 

C. "He who seeketh shall find me in children from the age of seven years [*3]; for in them at the fourteenth year [*4] [lit. aeon] I hidden am made manifest."

H. But this is not Christ's Saying but that of Hippocrates: 

"A boy of seven years [is] half a father." [*5] 

Hence as they place the Original Nature of the universals in the Original Seed, having learned the Hippocratian dictum that a child of seven is half a father, they say at fourteen years, according to Thomas, it is manifested. This [*6] is their ineffable and mysterious Logos. [*7] 

(8 [*8]) S. (H.--At anyrate they say that) the Egyptians--who are the most ancient of men after the Phrygians, who at the same time were confessedly the first to communicate to mankind the Mystery-rites and Orgies of all the Gods, and to declare their Forms and Energies--have the mysteries of Isis, holy, venerable, and not to be disclosed to the uninitiated. 

[p. 156]

H. And these are nothing else than the robbing of the member of Osiris, and its being sought for by the seven-robed and black-mantled [*1] [Goddess]. 

And (they [the Egyptians] say) Osiris is Water. [*2] And Seven-robed Nature--

H. --having round her, nay, robing herself in seven aetheric vestures--for thus they [*3] allegorically designate the planet-stars, calling [their spheres] aetheric vestures--

S. --being metamorphosed, as ever-changing Genesis, by the Ineffable and Uncopiable and Incomprehensible and Formless, is shown forth as creation. 

J. And this is what (H. he says) is said in the Scripture: 

"Seven times the Just shall fall and rise again." [*4] 

For these "fallings" (H. he says) are the changes of the stars, [*5] set in motion by the Mover of all things. 

(9) S. Accordingly they [*6] declare concerning the Essence of the Seed which is the cause of all things in 

[p. 157]

[paragraph continues] Genesis, that it is none of these things, but that it begets and makes all generated things, saying:

"I become what I will, and am what I am." [*1]

Therefore (H. he says) That which moves all is unmoved; for It remains what It is, making all things, and becomes no one of the things produced.

(H. He says that) This is the Only Good--

C. And concerning this was spoken what was said by the Saviour: 

"Why callest thou me Good? One is Good [*2]--my Father in the Heavens, who maketh His sun to rise on righteous and unrighteous, and sendeth rain on saints and sinners." [*3]

H. And who are the saints on whom He sendeth rain and the sinners on whom He also sendeth rain--this also he tells subsequently with the rest. 

S. --and (H. that) This is the Great, Hidden, and Unknown Mystery of the Egyptians, Hidden and [yet] Revealed. 

For there is no temple (H. he says) before the

[p. 158]

 entrance of which the Hidden [Mystery] does not stand naked, pointing from below above, and crowned with all its fruits of generation. 

 (10) And (H. they say) it stands so symbolised not only in the most sacred temples before the statues, but also set up for general knowledge--

C. --as it were "a light not under the bushel, but" set "on the candlestick" [*1]--a preaching "heralded forth on the house-tops." [*2]

S. --on all the roads and in all the streets, and alongside the very houses as a boundary and limit of the dwelling; (H. that) This is the God spoken of by all, for they call Him Bringer-of-good, not knowing what they say. 

H. And this mystery [-symbol] the Greeks got from the Egyptians, and have it [even] to this day.

At anyrate, he says, we see the "Hermes" [*3] honoured by them in this form. 

(11) S. And the Cyllenians, treating [this symbol] with special honour, [regard it as the] Logos. [*4] 

For (H. he says) Hermes is [the] Logos, who, as being the Interpreter and Fabricator of all things that have been and are and shall be, was honoured by them under the symbolism of this figure, namely an ithyphallus. 

And that he (H. that is Hermes, so symbolised) is

[p. 159]

[paragraph continues] Conductor and Reconductor of souls, [*1] and Cause of souls, has not escaped the notice of the poets (H. of the Gentiles), when saying: 

"But Cyllenian Hermes summoned forth the souls 
Of men mindful" [*2]--

--not the "suitors" of Penelope (H. he says), hapless wights! but of those who are roused from sleep, and have their memory restored to them--

"From what honour and [how great] degree of blessedness." [*3]

J. That is, from the Blessed Man Above--

H. --or Original Man, or Adamas, as they [*4] think--

J. --they [*5] have been thus brought down into the plasm of clay, in order that they may be enslaved to the Demiurge of this creation, Esaldaios [*6]--

H. --a fiery God, fourth in number, for thus they call the Demiurge and Father of this special cosmos. [*7] 

[p. 160]

(13) S. "And he [*1] holds a rod in his hands, 
Beautiful, golden; and with it he spell-binds the eyes of men, 
Whomsoever he would, and wakes them again too from sleep." [*2]

This (H. he says) is He who alone hath the power of life and death. [*3] 

J. Concerning Him it is written: "Thou shalt shepherd them with a rod of iron." [*4] 

But the poet (H. he says), wishing to embellish the incomprehensibility of the Blessed Nature of the Logos, bestowed upon Him a golden instead of an iron rod. 

S. "He spell-binds the eyes" of the dead (H. he says), and "wakes them again too from sleep"--those who are waked from sleep and become "mindful." [*5] 

C. Concerning them the Scripture saith: "Awake thou that sleepest, and rise, and Christ will give thee light." [*6] 

This is the Christ, the Son of Man (H. he says), expressed in all who are born from the Logos, whom no expression can express.

S. This (H. he says) is the Great Ineffable Mystery of the Eleusinia: "Hye Kye." [*7] 

[p. 161]

J. And that (H. he says) all things have been put under Him, this too has been said: "Into all the earth hath gone forth their sound." [*1] 

(14) S. And "Hermes leads them, moving his rod, and they follow, squeaking" [*2]--the souls in a cluster, as the poet hath shown in the following image: 

"But as when bats into some awesome cave's recess 
Fly squeaking--should one from out the cluster fall 
Down from the rock, they cling to one another." [*3] 

J. The "rock" (H. he says) means Adamas. This (H. he says) is the "corner-stone"--

C. --"that hath become the head of the corner." [*4] For in the

[p. 162]

[paragraph continues] "Head" is the expressive Brain [*1] of the Essence, from which [Brain] "every fatherhood" [*2] has its expression--

J. --which "I insert in the foundation of Zion." [*3]

[By this] (H. he says) he [*4] means, allegorically, the plasm of man. For the Adamas who is "inserted" is [the inner man, and the "foundations of Zion" are [*5]] the "teeth"--the "fence of the teeth," as Homer says--the Wall and Palisade [*6] in which is the inner man, fallen into it from the Primal Man, the Adamas Above--[the Stone] "cut without hands" [*7] cutting it, and brought down into the plasm of forgetfulness, the earthy, clayey [plasm].

(15) S. And (H. he says that) they followed Him squeaking [*8]--the souls, the Logos. 

"Thus they went squeaking together; and he led them on, 
Hermes, the guileless, down the dark ways." [*9] 

That is, (H. he says) [He led them] into the eternal lands free from all guile. For where (H. he says) went they? 

(16) "They passed by the streams of Ocean, and by the White Rock, 
By the Gates of the Sun, and the People of Dreams." [*10]

For He (H. he says) is Ocean--"birth-causing of

[p. 163]

gods and birth-causing of men" [*1]--flowing and ebbing for ever, now up and now down. 

J. When Ocean flows down (H. he says), it is the birth-causing of men; and when [it flows] up, towards the Wall and Palisade, and the "White Rock," it is the birth-causing of gods. 

This (H. he says) is what is written: 

"'I have said ye are Gods and all Sons of the Highest' [*2]--if ye hasten to flee from Egypt and get you beyond the Red Sea into the Desert"; that is, from the intercourse below to the Jerusalem Above, who is the Mother of the Living. [*3] "But if ye turn back again into Egypt"--that is, to the intercourse below--"'ye shall die like men.'" [*4] 

For (H. he says) all the generation below is subject to death, but the [birth] begotten above is superior to death. 

C. For from water alone--that is, spirit--is begotten the spiritual [man], not the fleshly; the lower [man] is fleshly. That is (H. he says) what is written: "That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit." [*5] 

H. This is their [*6] spiritual birth. 

J. This (H. he says) is the Great Jordan, which, flowing downwards and preventing the sons of Israel

[p. 164]

from going forth out of Egypt, or from the intercourse below--

H. --for Egypt is the body, according to them--

J. --was turned back by Jesus [*1] and made to flow upwards. 

H. Following after these and such like [follies], these most wonderful "Gnostics," discoverers of a new grammatical art, imagine that their prophet Homer showed forth these things arcanely; and, introducing those who are not initiated into the Sacred Scriptures into such notions, they make a mock of them. 

And they say that he who says that all things are from One, is in error, [but] he who says they are from Three is right, and will furnish proof of the first principles [of things]. [*2] 

J. For one (H. he says) is the Blessed Nature of the Blessed Man Above, Adamas; and one is the [Nature] Below, which is subject to Death; and one is the Race without a king [*3] which is born Above--where (H. he says) is Mariam the sought-for, and Jothor the great sage, and Sepphora the seeing, and Moses whose begetting is not in Egypt--for sons were born to him in Madiam. [*4] 

S. And this (H. he says) also did not escape the notice of the poets:

[p. 165]

"All things were threefold divided, and each received his share of honour." [*1] 

C. For the Greatnesses (H. he says) needs must be spoken, but so spoken by all everywhere, "that hearing they may not hear, and seeing they may not see." [*2] 

J. For unless (H. he says) the Greatnesses [*3] were spoken, the cosmos would not be able to hold together. These are the Three More-than-mighty Words (Logoi): Kaulakau, Saulasau, Zeesar;--Kaulakau, the [Logos] Above, Adamas; Saulasau, the [Logos] Below; Zeesar, the Jordan flowing upwards. [*4] 

(17 [*5]) S. He (H. he says) is the male-female Man 

[p. 166]

in all, whom the ignorant call three-bodied Geryones--Earth-flow-er, as though flowing from the earth; [*1] while the Greek [theologi] generally call Him the "Heavenly Horn of Men," [*2] because He has mixed and mingled [*3] all things with all. 

C. For "all things (H. he says) were made through Him, and without Him no one thing was made that was made. In Him is Life." [*4] 

This (H. he says) is "Life," the ineffable Race of perfect men, which was unknown to former generations. 

And the "nothing" [*5] which hath been made "without Him," is the special cosmos; [*6] for the latter hath been made without Him by the third and fourth [? Ruler]. [*7] 

[p. 167]

J. This [*1] (H. he says) is the drinking-vessel--the Cup in which "the King drinketh and divineth." [*2]

This (H. he says) was found hidden in the "fair seed" of Benjamin. 

(18) S. The Greeks also speak of it (H. he says) with inspired tongue, as follows: 

"Bring water, bring [me] wine, boy! 
Give me to drink, and sink me in slumber! [*3] 
My Cup tells me of what race I must be born, 
[Speaking with silence unspeaking]." [*4] 

C. This (H. he says) would be sufficient alone if men would understand--the Cup of Anacreon speaking forth speechlessly the Ineffable Mystery. 

J. For (H. he says) Anacreon's Cup is speechless--in as much as it tells him (says Anacreon) with speechless sound of what Race he must be born--

C. --that is, spiritual, not carnal--

J. --if he hear the Hidden Mystery in Silence. 

C. And this is the Water at those Fair Nuptials which Jesus turned and made Wine.

"This (H. he says) is the great and true beginning of the signs which Jesus wrought in Cana of Galilee, and made manifest His Kingship [or Kingdom] of the Heavens." [*5] 

This (H. he says) is the Kingship [or Kingdom] of the Heavens within us, [*6] stored up as a Treasure, [*7] as "Leaven hid in three measures of Flour." [*8] 

[p. 168]

(19 [*1]) S. This is (H. he says) the Great Ineffable Mystery of the Samothracians,--

C. --which it is lawful for the perfect alone to know--[that is] (H. he says) for us. 

J. For the Samothracians, in the Mysteries which are solemnised among them, explicitly hand on the tradition that this Adam is the Man Original. 

S. Moreover, [*2] in the initiation temple of the Samothracians stand two statues of naked men, with both hands raised to heaven and ithyphallic, like the statue of Hermes in Cyllene. [*3] 

J. The statues aforesaid are images of the Man Original. [*4] 

C. And [also] of the regenerated [*5] spiritual [man], in all things of like substance with that Man. 

This (H. he says) is what was spoken by the Saviour: 

"If ye do not drink My Blood and eat My Flesh, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of the Heavens. [*6]

"But even if ye drink (H. he says) the Cup which I drink, [*7] where I go, there ye cannot come." [*8]

[p. 169]

For He knew (H. he says) of which nature each of His disciples is, and that it needs must be that each of them should go to his own nature. 

For from the twelve tribes (H. he says) He chose twelve disciples, and through them He spake to every tribe. [*1] 

On this account (H. he says) all have not heard the preachings of the twelve disciples; and even if they hear, they cannot receive them. For the [preachings] which are not according to their nature are contrary to it. 

(20) S. This [Man] (H. he says) the Thracians who dwell round Haimos call Korybas, [*2] and the Phrygians in like manner with the Thracians; for taking the source of His descent from the Head Above [*3]--

J. --and from the expressive Brain [*4]--

S. --and passing through all the sources of all things beneath--how and in what manner He descends we do not understand.

J. This is (H. he says) what was spoken: 

"His Voice we heard, but His Form we have not seen." [*5] 

For (H. he says) the Voice of Him, when He hath been delegated and expressed, is heard, but the Form that descended from Above, from the Inexpressible [Man]--what it is, no one knows. It is in the earthy plasm, but no one has knowledge of it. 

This [Man] (H. he says) is He who "inhabiteth the

[p. 170]

[paragraph continues] Flood," [*1] according to the Psalter, who cries and calls from "many waters." [*2] 

The "many waters" (H. he says) are the manifold genesis of men subject to death, from which He shouts and calls to the Inexpressible Man, saying: 

"Save my [? Thy] alone-begotten from the lions." [*3] 

To this [Man] (H. he says) it hath been spoken: 

"Thou art my Son, O Israel, [*4] fear not; should'st thou pass through rivers, they shall not engulph thee; should'st thou pass through fire, it shall not consume thee." [*5] 

By "rivers" (H. he says) he [*6] means the Moist Essence of Genesis, and by "fire" the impulse and desire towards Genesis. 

And: "Thou art mine; fear not." [*7] 

And again he [*8] says: 

"If a mother forget her children so as not to take pity on them or give them suck, [then] I too will forget you" [*9]--saith Adamas (H. he says) to his own men. 

"Nay, even if a woman shall forget them, I will not forget you. Upon my hands have I graven you." [*10] 

And concerning His Ascent--

C. --that is, his regeneration in order that he may be born spiritual, not fleshly.

J. --the Scripture saith (H. he says): 

"Lift up the gates, ye who are rulers of you, and be

[p. 171]

ye lift up ye everlasting gates, and the King of Glory shall come in." [*1] 

This is a wonder of wonders. 

"For who (H. he says) is this King of Glory? [*2] A worm [*3] and no man, the scorn of men, and the contempt of the people. [*4] He is the King of Glory, the Mighty in War." [*5] 

By "War" he [*6] means the "[war] in the body," for the plasm is compounded of warring elements, as it is written (H. he says): 

"Remember the war that is [warred] in the body." [*7] 

This (H. he says) is the Entrance, and this is the Gate, which Jacob saw, when he journeyed into Mesopotamia. [*8] 

C. Which is the passing from childhood to puberty and manhood; that is, it was made known to him who journeyed into Mesopotamia. 

J. And Meso-potamia (H. he says) is the Stream of Great Ocean flowing from the middle of the Perfect Man.

And he [*9] marvelled at the Heavenly Gate, saying: 

"How terrible [is] this place! This is naught else than the House of God; yea, this [is] the Gate of Heaven." [*10] 

C. On this account (H. he says) Jesus saith: 

"I am the True Door." [*11] 

J. And he [*12] who says these things is (H. he says)

[p. 172]

the [one] from the Inexpressible Man, expressed from Above--

C. --as the perfect man. The not-perfect man, therefore, cannot be saved unless he be regenerated passing through this Gate. 

(21) S. This same [Man] (H. he says) the Phrygians call also Papa; [*1] for He calmed [*2] all things which, prior to His own manifestation, were in disorderly and inharmonious movement. 

For the name Papa (H. he says) is [the] Sound-of-all-things-together in Heaven, and on Earth, and beneath the Earth, saying: "Calm, calm" [*3] the discord of the cosmos. 

C. And: Make "peace for them that are far"--that is, the material and earthy--"and peace for them that are near" [*4]--that is, the spiritual and knowing and perfect men. 

(22) S. The Phrygians call Him also Dead--when buried in the body as though in a tomb or sepulchre. 

C. This (H. he says) is what is said: 

"Ye are whited sepulchres, filled (H. he says) within with bones of the dead, [*5] for Man, the Living [One] [*6] is not in you." 

And again He says: 

"The dead shall leap forth from their graves" [*7]--

--that is, from their earthy bodies, regenerated spiritual, not fleshly. 

This (H. he says) is the Resurrection which takes place

[p. 173]

through the Gate of the Heavens, through which all those who do not pass (H. he says) remain Dead. 

S. The same Phrygians again call this very same [Man], after the transformation, God [or a God]. [*1] 

C. For he becomes (H. he says) God when, rising from the Dead, through such a Gate, he shall pass into Heaven. 

This is the Gate (H. he says) which Paul, the Apostle, knew, setting it ajar in a mystery, and saying that he was caught up by an angel and came to the second, nay the third heaven, into Paradise itself, and saw what he saw, and heard ineffable words, which it is not lawful for man to utter. [*2]

These (H. he says) are the Mysteries, ineffable [yet] spoken of by all,--

"--which [also we speak, yet] not in words taught of human wisdom, but in [words] taught of Spirit, comparing things spiritual with spiritual things. But the psychic man receiveth not the things of God's Spirit, for they are foolishness unto him." [*3] 

And these (H. he says) are the Ineffable Mysteries of the Spirit which we alone know. 

Concerning these (H. he says) the Saviour said: 

"No one is able to come to Me, unless my Heavenly Father draw him." [*4]

For it is exceedingly difficult (H. he says) to receive and accept this Great Ineffable Mystery. 

And again (H. he says) the Saviour said: 

"Not every one that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord! shall enter into the Kingdom of the Heavens, but he who doeth the Will of My Father who is in the Heavens" [*5]--

--which [Will] they must do, and not hear only, to enter into the Kingdom of the Heavens. 

[p. 174]

And again He said (H. he says): 

"The tax-gatherers and harlots go before you into the Kingdom of the Heavens." [*1] 

For by "tax-gatherers" (telunai) are meant (H. he says) those who receive the consummations [*2] (tele) of the universal [principles]; and we (H. he says) are the "tax-gatherers" [*3] [upon whom the consummations of the aeons have come" [*4]]. 

For the "consummations" (H. he says) are the Seeds disseminated into the cosmos from the Inexpressible [Man], by means of which the whole cosmos is consummated; for by means of these also it began to be. 

And this (H. he says) is what is said: 

"The Sower went forth to sow. And some [Seeds] fell by the way-side, and were trodden under foot; and others on stony places, and they sprang up (H. he says), but because they had no depth, they withered and died. 

"Others (H. he says) fell on the fair and good ground, and brought forth fruit--one a hundred, another sixty, and another thirty. 

"He who hath (H. he says) ears to hear, let him hear!" [*5] 

That is (H. he says), no one has been a hearer of these Mysteries, save only the gnostic, perfect [man].

This (H. he says) is the "fair and good ground" of which Moses saith: 

"I will bring you into a fair and good land, into a land flowing with milk and honey." [*6] 

This (H. he says) is the "honey and milk" by tasting which the perfect [men] become free from all rule, [*7] and share in the Fullness. 

This (H. he says) is the Fullness whereby all things that are generated both are and are full-filled from the Ingenerable [Man]. 

[p. 175]

(23) S. This same [Man] is called by the Phrygians Unfruitful.

C. For He is unfruitful as long as He is fleshly and works the work of the flesh. 

This (H. he says) is what is said: 

"Every tree that beareth not good fruit, is cut down and cast into the fire." [*1] 

For these "fruits" (H. he says) are the logic, [*2] living men only who pass through the third Gate. [*3] 

J. At anyrate they [*4] say:

"If ye have eaten dead things and made living ones, what will ye make if ye eat living things?" [*5]

And by "living things" they mean logoi and minds and men--the "pearls" of that Inexpressible [Man] cast into the plasm below. [*6] 

C. This is what He saith (H. he says): 

"Cast not the holy thing to the dogs nor the pearls to the swine." [*7]

H. For they say that the work of swine is the intercourse of man with woman. 

(24 [*8]) S. This same [Man] (H. he says) the Phrygians also call Ai-polos; [*9] not because (H. he says) He feeds

[p. 176]

 she-goats and he-goats, as the (C.--psychics [*1]) interpret the name, but because (H. he says) He is Aei-polos--that is, "Always-turning" (Aei-polon), [*2] revolving and driving round the whole cosmos in [its] revolution; for polein is to "turn" and change things. 

  Hence (H. he says) all call the two centres [*3] of heaven poles. And the poet also  (H. he says) when he says: "Hither there comes and there goes (poleitai) Old Man of the Sea, whose words are e'er true--Egypt's undying Proteus." [*4] 

[p. 177]

[By poleitai] he does not mean "he is put on sale," [*1] but "he turns about" [or comes and goes] there,--as though it were, [he spins] and goes round. 

And the cities in which we live, in that we turn about and circulate in them, are called poleis. 

Thus (H. he says) the Phrygians call Aipolos this [Man] who turns all things at all times all ways, and changes them into things kin. 

(25) The Phrygians, moreover (H. he says), call Him Fruitful. 

J. For (H. he says): 

"Many more are the children of the desolate [woman] than of her who hath her husband." [*2] 

C. That is, the regenerated, deathless, and ever-continuing [children] are many, although few are they [thus] generated; but the fleshly (H. he says) all perish, though many are they [thus] generated. 

[p. 178]

C. For this cause (H. he says): 

"Rachel bewailed her children, and would not (H. he says) be comforted weeping over them; for she knew (H. he says) that they are not." [*1] 

J. And Jeremiah also laments the Jerusalem Below--not the city in Phoenicia, [*2] but the generation below--which is subject to destruction. 

C. For Jeremiah also (H. he says) knew the perfect man, regenerated from water and spirit, not fleshly. 

J. At anyrate the same Jeremiah said: 

"He is man, and who shall know him?" [*3] 

C. Thus (H. he says) the knowledge of the perfect man is deep and hard to comprehend. 

J. For "The beginning of Perfection (H. he says) is Gnosis of man, but Gnosis of God is perfect Perfection." [*4] 

(26) S. And the Phrygians (H. he says) call Him also "Plucked Green Wheat-ear"; and after the Phrygians the Athenians [so designate Him], when, in the secret rites at Eleusis, they show those who receive in silence the final initiation there into the Great--

C. --and marvellous and most perfect--

S. --Epoptic Mystery, a plucked wheat-ear. [*5] 

[p. 179]

And this Wheat-ear is also with the Athenians the Light-giver [*1]--

C. --perfect [and] mighty--

J. --from the Inexpressible--

S. --as the hierophant himself--not emasculated like the "Attis," [*2] but made eunuch with hemlock juice--

C. --and divorced from all fleshly generation--

S. --in the night, at Eleusis, solemnising the Great Ineffable Mysteries, when the bright light streams forth, [*3] shouts and cries aloud, saying: 

[p. 180]

"[Our] Lady hath brought forth a Holy Son: Brimo [hath given birth] to Brimos"--

--that is, the Strong to the Strong. 

(27) J. And "[Our] Lady" (H. he says) is the Genesis--

C. --the Spiritual, Heavenly [Genesis]--

J. --Above. And the Strong is he who is thus generated. 

For it is the Mystery called "Eleusis" and "Anaktoreion";--"Eleusis," because we--

C. --the spiritual--

J. --come [*2] from Above, streaming down from Adamas, for eleus-esthai (H. he says) is "to come"; and "Anaktoreion" [from anag-esthai, "leading back," that is [*3]] from "returning" [*4] Above. [*5] 

This [Return] (H. he says) is that of which those who are initiated into the great Mysteries of the Eleusinia speak. 

(28) S. And the law is that after they have been initiated into the Little Mysteries, they should be further initiated into the Great. 

"For greater deaths do greater lots obtain." [*6] 

The Little (H. he says) are the Mysteries of

[p. 181]

[paragraph continues] Persephone Below; concerning which Mysteries and the way leading there and--

C. --being broad and wide,--

--taking [men] to Persephone, the poet also speaks: 

"Beneath this there is another path death-cold, 
Hollow and clayey. But this [*1] is best to lead 
To grove delightsome of far-honoured Aphrodite." [*2] 

These [*3] are (H. he says) the Little Mysteries--

C. --those of the fleshly generation--

S. --and after men have been initiated into them, they should cease for a little, and become initiated in the Great--

C. --heavenly [Mysteries]. 

S. For they to whom the "deaths" in them [*4] are appointed, "receive greater lots." 

J. For this [Mystery] (H. he says) is the Gate of Heaven, and this is the House of God, where the Good God dwells alone; into which [House] (H. he says) no impure [man] shall come--

C. --no psychic, no fleshly [man]--

J. --but it is kept under watch for the spiritual alone; where when they come, they must cast away their garments, and all become bridegrooms, obtaining their true manhood [*5] through the Virginal Spirit. 

[p. 182]

For this (H. he says) is the Virgin big with child, conceiving and bearing a Son [*1]--

C. --not psychic, not fleshly, but a blessed Aeon of Aeons. [*2]

Concerning these [Mysteries] (H. he says) the Saviour hath explicitly said that: 

"Narrow and strait is the Way that leadeth to Life, and few are they who enter it; but broad and wide [is] the Way that leadeth to Destruction, and many are they who journey thereby." [*3] 

S. [*4] Moreover, also, the Phrygians say that the Father of wholes [*5] is Amygdalos [*6]--

J. --no [ordinary] tree [*7] (H. he says); but that He is that Amygdalos the Pre-existing, who having in Himself the Perfect Fruit, as it were, throbbing [*8] and moving in [His] Depth, He tore asunder [*9] His Womb, and gave birth to His own Son [*10]--

[p. 183]

C. --the Invisible, Unnameable, and Ineffable [One] of whom we tell. [*1] 

S. For "amyxai" [*2] is, as it were, "to break" and "cut open"; just as (H. he says) in the case of inflamed bodies and those which have some internal tumour, when physicians lance them, they speak of "amychas." [*3]

Thus (H. he says) the Phrygians call him Amygdalos.

C. From whom proceeded and was born the Invisible--

"Through whom all things were made, and without whom nothing was made." [*4] 

(30) S. The Phrygians also say that that which is generated from Him is Syriktes. [*5] 

J. For that which is generated is Spirit in harmony. [*6] 

C. For "God (H. he says) is Spirit." [*7]

Wherefore He says: 

"Neither in this mountain do the true worshippers worship, nor in Jerusalem, but in Spirit." [*8] 

[p. 184]

For the worship of the perfect [men] (H. he says) is spiritual, not fleshly. 

J. And "Spirit" (H. he says) is there where both Father and Son are named, generated there from Him [*1] and the Father. 

S. He [*2] (H. he says) is the Many-named, Myriad-eyed, Incomprehensible, whom every nature desires, some one way, some another. 

J. This (H. he says) is the Word [*3] of God, which is:

"The Word of Announcement of the Great Power. Wherefore It shall be sealed, and hidden, and concealed, stored in the Habitation, where the Root of the Universals has its foundation--

"Of Aeons, Powers, Intelligences, Gods, Angels, Spirits Delegate, Existing Non-existences, Generated Ingenerables, Comprehensible Incomprehensibles,--Years, Months, Days, Hours,--of [the] Boundless Point, from which the most minute begins to increase by parts. [*4] 

"For (H. he says) the Point which is nothing and is composed of nothing, though partless, will become by

[p. 185]

means of its own Thought a Greatness [*1] beyond our own comprehension." 

C. This [Point] (H. he says) is the Kingdom of the Heavens, the "grain of mustard seed," [*2] the partless point, the first existing for the body; which no one (H. he says) knows save the spiritual [men] alone. 

J. This (H. he says) is what is said: 

"They are neither words nor languages whereby their [*3] sounds are heard." [*4] 

H. These things, [then,] which are said and done by all men, they thus interpret off-hand to their peculiar theory (noun), pretending that they are all done with a spiritual meaning. 

For which cause also they [*5] say that the performers in thetheatres--they, too, neither say nor do anything without Design. [*6] 

S. For example (H. he says), when the peopleassemble in the theatres, and a man comes on the stage,clad in a robe different from all others, with lute [*7] inhand on which he plays, and thus chants the GreatMysteries, not knowing what he says: [*8] 

"Whether blest Child of Kronos, 
or of Zeus, or of Great Rhea,--
Hail, Attis, thou mournful song [*9] of Rhea!

[p. 186]

Assyrians call thee thrice-longed-for Adonis; 
all Egypt [calls thee] Osiris; 
the Wisdom of Hellas [names thee] Men's Heavenly Horn; 
the Samothracians [call thee] august Adama; 
the Haemonians, Korybas; 
the Phrygians [name thee] Papa sometimes, 
at times again Dead, or God, [*1] or Unfruitful, 
or Aipolos, or Green Reaped [*2] Wheat-ear, 
or the Fruitful that Amygdalos brought forth, 
Man, Piper . . . Attis!" 

H. He [S.] says that this is the Attis of many forms of whomthey [NN., in H.'s opinion] sing as follows: 

S. "Of Attis will I sing, of Rhea's [Beloved];-- 
not with the boomings [*3] of bells, 
nor with the deep-toned [*4] pipe of Idaean Kuretes; 
but I will blend my song with Phoebus' music of the lyre. 
Evoi! Evan!--for [thou art] Pan, [thou] Bacchus [art], 
and Shepherd of bright stars!" 

HIPPOLYTUS' CONCLUSION 

H. For these and suchlike reasons these [Naassenes] frequent what are called the Mysteries of the Great Mother, believing that they obtain the clearest view of the Universal Mystery from the things done in them. 

For they have nothing beyond the [mysteries] therein enacted except that they are not emasculated. Their sole "accomplishment," [however,] is the business of the Eunuch, for they most severely and vigilantly enjoin to abstain, as though emasculated, from intercourse with women. And the rest of their business, as we have stated at length, they carry out just like the Eunuchs. 

[p. 187]

And they honour nothing else but "Naas," [*1] being called Naasseni. And Naas is the Serpent--

J. [*2]--from whom (H. he says) are all those [things] called naous [*3] under heaven, from naas. 

To that Naas alone every shrine and every rite of initiation and every mystery (H. he says) is dedicated; and, in general, no initiation can be found under heaven in which a naos does not play a part, and [also] the Naas in it, from which it has got the name of naos. 

(H. Moreover, they say that) the Serpent is the Moist Essence--

H. --just as [did] also Thales the Milesian [*4]--

J. --and (H. that) naught at all of existing things, immortal or mortal, animate or inanimate, can hold together without Him. 

[And they say] (H. that) all things are subject to Him, and (H. that) He is Good, and has all things in Him as in "the horn of the one-horned bull"; [*5] so that He distributes beauty and bloom to all that exist according to each one's nature and peculiarity, as though permeating all, just as [the River] "proceeding forth out of Eden and dividing itself into four sources." [*6] 

H. And they say that Eden is His Brain, as though it were bound and constricted in its surrounding vestures like heavens; while Paradise they consider to be the Man as far as His Head only. 

This River, then, coming forth out of Eden (H. that is, from His Brain), is divided into four streams. 

[p. 188]

And the name of the first river is called Pheison. "This is that which encircles all the land of Evilat, there where is the gold, and the gold of that land is fair; there too is the ruby and the green stone." [*1] 

This (H. he says) is His Eye--by its dignity and colours bearing witness to what is said. 

The name of the second river is Geon. "This is that which encircles all the land of Aethiopia." [*2] 

This (H. he says) is [His organ of] Hearing; for it is labyrinth-like. 

And the name of the third is Tigris. "This is that which flows the opposite way to the Assyrians." [*3] 

This (H. he says) is [His organ of] Smell, for the current of it is very rapid; and it "flows the opposite way to the Assyrians," because after the breath is breathed out, on breathing in again, the breath that is drawn in from without, from the air, comes in more rapidly, and with greater force. For this (H. he says) is the nature of respiration. 

"And the fourth river [is] Euphrates." [*4] 

This (H. they say) [is] the mouth, through which by the utterance of prayer and entrance of food, the (? C.--spiritual, perfect) man is rejoiced, and nourished and expressed. [*5] 

This [River] (H. he says) is the Water above the Firmament. [*6] 

C. Concerning which (H. he says) the Saviour hath said: 

"If thou hadst known Who it is Who asketh, thou wouldst have asked from Him [in return], and He would have given thee to drink of Living Water bubbling [forth]." [*7] 

[p. 189]

J. To this Water (H. he says) every nature comes, each selecting its own essence, and from this Water there comes to each nature what is proper [to it] (H. he says), more surely than iron to magnet, [*1] and gold to the bone [*2] of the sea-hawk, and chaff to amber. 

C. And if any man (H. he says) is "blind from birth," [*3] and hath not seen "the True Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world," [*4]--let him see again through us, and let him see as it were through--

J. [*5] --Paradise, planted with Trees and all kinds of seeds, the Water flowing amid all the Trees and Seeds, and [then] shall he see that from one and the same Water the Olive selects and draws Oil, and the Vine Wine, and each of the rest of the Trees according to its kind. 

[p. 190]

But (H. he says) that Man is of no honour in the World, though of great honour [in Heaven, betrayed] [*1] by those who know not to those who know Him not, being accounted "as a drop from a cask." [*2] 

But we (H. he says)--

C. --are the spiritual [men] who--

J. --choose for ourselves from--

C. --the Living Water--

J. --the Euphrates, that flows through the midst of Babylon, what is proper [to each of us]--journeying through the True Gate--

C. --which is Jesus the Blessed. 

And of all men we alone are Christians, [*3] accomplishing the Mystery at the third Gate--

J. --and being anointed with the Ineffable Chrism from the Horn, [*4] like David [was], not from the flask [*5] of clay, like Saul--

C. --who was fellow-citizen with an evil daemon of fleshly desire. 

H. These things, then, we have set down as a few out of many.For innumerable are the attempts of their folly, silly and crazy.But since we have, to the best of our ability, exposed theirunknowable Gnosis, it seems best to set down the following also. 

This is a Psalm which they have improvised; by means ofwhich they fancy they thus sing the praises of all the mysteriesof their Error. [*6] 

[p. 191]

J. [*1] "First [was there] Mind the Generative [*2] Law of All; [*3]
 Second to the Firstborn was Liquid Chaos; 
 Third Soul through toil received the Law. 
Wherefore, with a deer's [*4] form surrounding her, 
She labours at her task beneath Death's rule. 
Now, holding sway, [*5]  she sees the Light; 
And now, cast into piteous plight, she weeps; 
Now she weeps, and now rejoices; 
Now she weeps, and now is judged; 
Now is judged, and now she dieth; 
Now is born, with no way out for her; in misery 
She enters in her wandering the labyrinth of ills. 
(? C.--And Jesus [*6] said): O Father, see! 
[Behold] the struggle still of ills on earth!

[p. 192]

Far from Thy Breath [*1] away she [*2] wanders!
She seeks to flee the bitter Chaos, [*3]
And knows not how she shall pass through.
Wherefore, send me, O Father!
Seals in my hands, I will descend;
Through Aeons universal will I make a Path;
Through Mysteries all I'll open up a Way!
And Forms of Gods will I display; [*4]
The secrets of the Holy Path I will hand on,
And call them Gnosis." [*5]

CONCLUSION OF ANALYSIS

All this may have seemed, quite naturally, contemptible foolishness to the theological prejudices ofour worthy Church Father; but it is difficult for me,even in the twentieth century, not to recognise thebeauty of this fine Mystic Hymn, and I hope it may beequally difficult for at least some of my readers. 

But to return to the consideration of our much overwritten Source. 

This Source is plainly a commentary, or elaborateparaphrase, of the Recitation Ode, "Whether, blest Childof Kronos," which comes at the end ( section 30) and not, aswe should expect, at the beginning, and has probablybeen displaced by Hippolytus. It is an exegetical 

[p. 193]

commentary written from the standpoint of theAnthropos-theory of the Mysteries (? originally Chaldaean), the Man-doctrine. 

This commentary seems for the most part to run onso connectedly, that we can almost persuade ourselvesthat we have most of it before us, the lacunae beingpractically insignificant. Paragraphs 6 and 7 S., however, are plainly misplaced, and  section section 17 and 18 S. alsoas evidently break the connection. [*1] 

THE HELLENIST COMMENTATOR 

The writer is transparently a man learned in thevarious Mystery-rites, and his information is of thegreatest possible importance for a study of this exceedingly obscure subject from an historical standpoint. 

With  section 8 S., and the Egyptian Mystery-doctrine, wecome to what is of peculiar interest for our presentTrismegistic studies. Osiris is the Heavenly Man, theLogos; not only so, but in straitest connection withthis tradition we have an exposition of the Hermes-doctrine, set forth by a system of allegorical interpretations of the Bible of Hellas--the Poems of theHomeric cycle. Here we have the evident syncrasiaThoth = Osiris = Hermes, a Hermes of the "GreekWisdom," as the Recitation Ode phrases it, and adoctrine which H., basing himself on the commentator( section 10), squarely asserts the Greeks got from Egypt. 

Nor is it without importance for us that in closestconnection with Hermes there follow the apparentlymisplaced sections 17 and 18, dealing with the"Heavenly Horn," or drinking-horn, of the GreekWisdom, and the "Cup" of Anacreon; with which wemay compare the Crater, Mixing-bowl or Cup, in which, 

[p. 194]

according to Plato's Timaeus, the Creator mingled andmixed the elements and souls, and also the spiritualCup of the Mind in our Trismegistic treatise, "TheCrater or Monas," C. H., iv. (v.). 

But above all things is it astonishing that we shouldfind the commentator in S. quoting ( section 9) a logos froma document which, as we have shown in the noteappended to the passage, is in every probability aTrismegistic treatise of the Poemandres type. 

THE JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN OVERWRITERS 

This commentary S. was worked over by a JewishHellenistic mystic J., whose general ideas and methodof exegesis are exactly paralleled by those of Philo.In my opinion, he was a contemporary of that periodand a member of one of those communities whom Philoclasses generally as Therapeut. He was, moreover,not a worshipper of the serpent, but a worshipper ofthat Glorious Reality symbolised as the Serpentof Wisdom, and this connects him with initiationinto Egypto-Chaldaean or Chaldaeo-Egyptian Mysteries.These he finds set forth allegorically in the propheticalscriptures of his race. His quotations from the LXX.show him to be, like Philo, an Alexandrian HellenisticJew; the LXX. was his Targum. 

J. again was overwritten by C., a Christian Gnostic,no enemy of either J. or S., but one who claimed thathe and his were the true realisers of all that had gonebefore; he is somewhat boastful, but yet recognisesthat the Christ-doctrine is not an innovation but aconsummation. The phenomena presented by the NewTestament quotations of C. are, in my opinion, of extraordinary interest, especially his quotations from orparallels with the Fourth Gospel. His quotations from 

[p. 195]

or parallels with the Synoptics are almost of the samenature as those of Justin; he is rather dealing with"Memoirs of the Apostles" than with verbatim quotations from our stereotyped Gospels. His parallelswith the Fourth Gospel also seem to me to open up thequestion as to whether or no he is in touch with"Sources" of that "Johannine" document. 

On top of all our strata and deposits, we have--tocontinue the metaphor of excavation, and if it be notthought somewhat uncharitable--the refutatory rubbishof Hippolytus, which need no longer detain us here. 

I would, therefore, suggest that C. is to be placedsomewhere about the middle of the second century A.D.;J. is contemporary with Philo--say the first quarter ofthe first century A.D.; the Pagan commentator of S. isprior to J.--say somewhere in the last half of the firstcentury B.C.; while the Recitation Ode is still earlier,and can therefore be placed anywhere in the earlyHellenistic period, the termini being thus 300-50 B.C. [*1] 

And if the redactor or commentator in S. is tobe placed somewhere in the last half of the firstcentury B.C. (and this is, of course, taking only theminimum of liberty), then the Poemandres type ofour literature, which J. quotes as scripture, must, in itsoriginal Greek form, be placed back of that--say atleast in the first half of the first century B.C., as amoderate estimate. [*2] If those dates are not proved, 

[p. 196]

[paragraph continues] I am at anyrate fairly confident they cannot bedisproved. 

ZOSIMUS AND THE ANTHROPOS-DOCTRINE 

That, moreover, the Anthropos-doctrine, to the spiritof which the whole commentary of our S. exegete isaccommodated, was also fundamental with the adherents of the Trismegistic tradition, may be clearlyseen from the interesting passage (which we give in theFragments at the end of the third Volume) of Zosimus,a member of what Reitzenstein calls the PoemandresCommunity, who flourished somewhere at the end ofthe third and beginning of the fourth century A.D. [*1] 

The sources of Zosimus for the Anthropos-doctrine,he tells us, are, in addition to the Books of Hermes,certain translations into Greek and Egyptian of bookscontaining traditions (mystery-traditions, presumably)of the Chaldaeans, Parthians, Medes, and Hebrews onthe subject. This statement is of the very first importance for the history of Gnosticism as well as forappreciating certain elements in Trismegisticism.Though the indication of this literature is vague, itnevertheless mentions four factors as involved in theHebrew tradition; the Gnostic Hebrews, as we should 

[p. 197]

expect, were handing on elements from Chaldaean,Parthian, and Median traditions. Translations of thesebooks were to be found scattered throughout Egypt,and especially in the great library at Alexandria. 

There is, in my opinion, no necessity precisely, withReitzenstein (p. 106, n. 6), to designate these books the"Ptolemaic Books," and so to associate them with anotice found in the apocryphal "Eighth Book ofMoses," where, together with that of the ArchangelicBook of Moses, there is mention of the Fifth Book of the"Ptolemaic Books," described as a book of multifariouswisdom under the title "One and All," and containingthe account of the "Genesis of Fire and Darkness." [*1] 

Another source of Zosimus was the Pinax of Bitosor Bitys, of whom we shall treat in considering theinformation of Jamblichus. 

From all of these indications we are assured thatthere was already in the first centuries B.C. a well-developed Hellenistic doctrine of the descent of manfrom the Man Above, and of his return to that heavenlystate by his mastery of the powers of the cosmos. 

PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA ON THE MAN-DOCTRINE 

This date is further confirmed by the testimony ofPhilo (c. 30 B.C.-45 A.D.). 

For, quoting the verse: "We are all sons of OneMan," [*2] he addresses those who are "companions ofwisdom and knowledge" as those who are "Sons ofone and the same Father--no mortal father, but animmortal Sire, the Man of God, who being the Reason(Logos) of the Eternal, is of necessity himself eternal." [*3] 

And again, a little further on: 

[p. 198]

"And if a man should not as yet have the goodfortune to be worthy to be called Son of God, let himstrive manfully to set himself in order [*1] according toHis First-born Reason (Logos), the Oldest Angel, who isas though it were the Angel-chief of many names; forhe is called Dominion, and Name of God, and Reason,and Man-after-His-Likeness, and Seeing Israel. 

"And for this reason I was induced a little beforeto praise the principles of those who say: 'We areall sons of One Man.' For even if we have not yetbecome fit to be judged Sons of God, we may at anyrate be Sons of His Eternal Likeness, His Most HolyReason (Logos); for Reason, the Eldest of all Angels,is God's Likeness [or Image]." [*2] 

Thus Philo gives us additional proof, if more wereneeded, for the full Anthropos-doctrine was evidentlyfundamental in his circle--that is to say, in thethought-atmosphere of the Hellenistic theology, or thereligio-philosophy, or theosophy, of his day, the beginning of the first century A.D. 

This date alone is sufficient for our purpose; but itis not too bold a statement even to say that theMan-Mystery was a fundamental concept of thebrilliant period of the Hellenistic syncretism whichsucceeded to the founding of Alexandria--the periodof the expansion of Hellas beyond her national borders;in other words, her birth into the greater world. 

It is enough to know that the Mystery was hiddenand yet revealed in the shadow-garments of Chaldaean,Babylonian, Magian, Phoenician, Hebrew, Egyptian,Phrygian, Thracian, and Greek mystery-traditions. Itwas, in brief, fundamental in all such wisdom-shows,and necessarily so, for it was the Christ-Mystery. 

Footnotes

^139:1 C. H., i, 12.

^139:2 Contra Om. Haer., I. xxx.; ed. A. Stieren (Leipzig, 1853), i. 263 ff.

^139:3 Haer. Fab., I. xiv.

^140:1 F. F. F., pp. 188 ff.

^142:1 Both h and ch being transliteration devices for the same Hebrew letter ch in the word nchsh.

^142:2 We know of the two titles, The Greater and The Lesser Questions of Mary; the general title is thought by some to be the proper designation of one of the sources of the composite document known as Pistis Sophia, and has been suggested as its more appropriate general epigraph.

^143:1 Philos., v. 1-11, of which I published a preliminary translation, under the heading "Selections from the 'Philosophumena,'" in The Theosophical Review (August and September 1893), xii. 559-569, xiii. 42-52, and a summary in F. F. F., pp. 198-206.

^143:2 Ed. L. Duncker and F. G. Schneidewin (Gottingen, 1859); and ed. P. Cruice (Paris, 1860).

^144:1 The date of the writing of the Philosophumena is placed somewhere about 222 A.D.

^146:1 S. 132, 1--134, 80; C. 139, 1--141, 2.

^146:2 The worship of the serpent, according to H.

^146:3 Cf. the strange logos, preserved in Matt. x. 16 alone: "Be ye therefore wise as serpents."

^146:4 The reading can be slightly emended by H.'s epitome in x. 9; but the phrase para ton aytun logon still remains an enigma.

^146:5 The Celestial Adam, the Adam Kadmon of Kabalistic tradition, or the Intelligible Cosmos of Hellenistic theology. See Cruice, note in loc.

^146:6 Or hymns of subtle meaning.

^146:7 That is, Man as Cause and Substance of all things.

^146:8 Sc. Powers.

^146:9 That is, presumably, "names of power" (Egyptice); the Adam who gave their "names" to all the "animals."

^147:1 Geryon, the triple-headed or triple-bodied Giant, who plays a prominent part in the myth of Hercules.

^147:2 Or spiritual, psychic, and earthy.

^147:3 That is, the learning to know.

^147:4 Cf.  section 25, J.

^147:5 That is, as we shall see later, C.

^147:6 logun.

^147:7 Celsus (c. 150-175 A.D.) knows of groups of Harpocratians--that is, worshippers of Horus--some of whom derived their tradition from Salome, others from Mariamne, and others again from Martha (Origen, C. Celsum, v. 62). This suggests an Egyptian setting. (For Salome and Maria or Miriam (Mariamne), the Sisters of Jesus, see D. J. L., 405 f .; for Martha, Our Lady, see ibid., 375 ff.) In the Gnostic Acts of Philip, Mariamne, or Mariamme (both forms being found in the MSS., according to R. A. Lipsius, Die apokr. Apostelgeschichten--Brunswick, 1884--iii. 12), is the "virgin sister" of Philip, and plays an important role as prophetess. She is to Philip as Thekla to Paul, or Helen to Simon. Compare with this the "sister wife" whom Paul demands the right to take about like "the rest of the Apostles and the Brethren of the Lord and Cephas" (1 Corinth. ix. 5; D. J. L., 229). Salmon (art. "Mariamne" in Smith and Wace's D. of Christ. Biog., iii. 830) refers to the Mary (Magdalene) of the Pistis Sophia, the chief questioner of the Master and His favourite disciple, the sister of Martha. The tradition of the Gnosis from James, the Brother of the Lord, is asserted by Clement of Alexandria in Book VI. of his lost work, The Institutions, where he writes: "The Lord imparted the Gnosis to James the Just, to John and Peter, after His resurrection; these delivered it to the rest of the Apostles, and they to the Seventy" (Euseb., Hist. Eccles., ii. 1; cf. D. J. L., 226).

^148:1 From here onwards we use the revised critical text of Reitzenstein (pp. 83-98), who appends what we may call an apparatus criticus of the emendations and conjectures of the various editions of our solitary MS. R., as usual, however, gives no translation.

^148:2 Is. liii. 8--same reading as LXX. Cf. also 25  section J.

^148:3 A remark of the writer of S., which, as we shall see at the end, is divided into Texts and Commentary.

^148:4 The "he says" may be ascribed to any subsequent hand; I have marked them all H. to avoid further complication.

^149:1 "Burstings forth," inspirations, revealings, or mysteries.

^149:2 In Greek transformation, son of Apollo and the daughter of Minos, born in Libya. This points to a very ancient myth-connection with the old Cretan civilisation. Garamas was also called Amphithemis (q.v. in Roscher's Lex.); he appears also, according to one tradition, to have been the father of Ammon. (See "Garamantis Nympha," ibid.)

^149:3 This passage is doubly interesting, for it is not only a source, but a source within a source. Already a number of scholars have recognised it as an Ode; and not only so, but conjectured with much probability that it is by no less a master than Pindar himself. Nay, further, it is part of a Hymn to Jupiter Ammon--an additionally interesting point for us as showing strong Egyptian influence. It is true that in our text of Hippolytus the order of the words has been frequently changed to bring it into prose form; but the reconstruction of most of it is not difficult, and quite convincing. I translate from the text of Bergk's final revision, as given S. 134, 135; C. 142. R., for some reason or other, does not refer to this interesting side-light.

^150:1 Sc. of the Fate-Sphere.

^150:2 This looks back, though with variants, to Ephes. iii. 15.

^150:3 Sc. the image-man, or Adam of "red" earth.

^150:4 Sc. the Chaldaeans.

^150:5 tupui.

^150:6 Sc. the Naassenes.

^150:7 This is a further indication of the environment of the Naassenes. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 7.

^150:8 That is from Man (Father), Man Son of Man (Son), or Flowing Chaos (Mother)--corresponding in Hellenic mythology to Kronos, Zeus, and Rhea. For Rhea (from reein, "to flow") is the Moist or Liquid Nature, as with the Stoics; she is the a-cosmic or unordered Earth, the Prima Materia (the First Earth, the Spouse of Heaven--Uranus), Hyle Proper, who carries in her bosom the Logos. For references, see R., p. 99, n. 2.

^151:1 Cf. Ex. viii. 8.

^151:2 The preceding paragraph is evidently composed of selections from S. R. (p. 85, n. 1) thinks that we have here the description of only one aspect of Soul, and that the description of the remaining two aspects has been omitted by H.

^151:3 Sc. the Naassenes, in H.'s view.

^152:1 morfeis--lit., either form or beauty.

^152:2 Sc. of cosmos.

^152:3 This paragraph and  section 7, together with the accompanying overworkings, seem to have been misplaced by H., according to R. (pp. 99, 100).

The sudden introduction of the name Attis without any preliminaries, indicates another lacuna; the transition from the Assyrian to the Phrygian Mysteries of the Great Mother is too brusque.

^152:4 The threefold nature of the Soul is thus distinguished by: (i.) The union (or marriage) which joins it to generation, or to earth-life--the nature of things on earth; (ii.) The union which joins it with death--the nature of the things "beneath" the earth; (iii.) The union which joins it with formal beauty, or beauty in form (morfe')--the nature of super-terrene (or sublunary) things, here regarded as the Elysian state. 

The love of the Mother of the Gods for the Soul represents the "fourth state" (the turiya of Vedantic mystic psychology), or the absorption of the masculine power of the Soul by its own higher Feminine Nature. Cf. in Damascius' "Life of Isidores" (Photius, Bibl., ed. Bekker, 345 a. 5: "I fell asleep, and in a vision Attis seemed to appear to me, and, on behalf of the Mother of the Gods, to initiate me into the feast called Hilaria--a mystery which discloses the way of our salvation from Hades." Hades, the realm of Selene, is not Tartarus, the realm of Death.

^153:1 Compare the so-called Second Epistle of Clement (an early homily incorporating extra-canonical Gospel-materials), xii. 2: "For the Lord Himself being asked by some one when his Kingdom should come, said: When the two shall be one, and the outside as the inside, and the male with the female neither male nor female"; and also the well-known logoi, from The Gospel according to the Egyptians, quoted several times by Clement of Alexandria: "When Salome asked how long Death should prevail, the Lord said: So long as ye women bear children; for I am come to destroy the work of the Female. And Salome said to Him: Did I therefore well in bearing no children? The Lord answered and said: Eat every Herb, but eat not that which hath bitterness. When Salome asked when these things about which she questioned should be made known, the Lord said: When ye trample upon the Garment of Shame; when the Two become One, and Male with Female neither male nor female." And with the last logos of the above compare the new-found fragment of a lost Gospel: "His disciples say unto Him: When wilt thou be manifest to us, and when shall we see Thee? He saith: When ye shall be stripped and not be ashamed."--Grenfell and Hunt, New Sayings of Jesus (London, 1904), p. 40. The environment is Egyptian and ascetic; it is a saying addressed to a community, as may be seen from one of the previous logoi: "Having one garment what do ye [lack]?"

^153:2 See Rom. i. 20-23, 25-27.

^153:3 aorata.

^153:4 aidios--evidently a word-play.

^153:5 The received Pauline text is slightly shortened here.

^154:1 Evidently a reference to the Chaldaean fourfold (man-eagle-lion-bull) glyph of what Later Orphicism and Platonism called the Autozoon, representing the four main types of Animal Life; the same mystery which Ezekiel saw in the Vision of the Mercabah, or Celestial Chariot--a reflected picture, I believe, from the Chaldaean Mysteries.

^154:2 Verses 24 and 25 of the Received Text are omitted.

^154:3 asxemosune--meaning also "formlessness."

^154:4 Cf. Ex. v. 2.

^154:5 That is, baptism.

^154:6 We wonder what "they" really did say? They may have argued in their private circles that even in the foulest things the clean soul could recognise the reversed signs of the Mysteries of Purity; for certainly these things require an explanation--nay, more urgently do they require an interpretation in proportion to their foulness. The hateful suggestion of Hippolytus that these ascetic and spiritually-minded folk--for their doctrines plainly show them to be so--were as foul as those of the Flood, only shows the ineradicable prejudice of unwitting self-righteousness.

^155:1 Completion of R.

^155:2 Picking up "Blessed Nature" from the first paragraph of 6.

^155:3 Cf. Ex. viii. 6, note.

^155:4 At fourteen a boy took his first initiation into the Egyptian priesthood.

^155:5 Cf. Littre, Traduct. des Oeuvres d'Hippocrate, tom. i. p. 396.

^155:6 Presumably referring to Seed.

^155:7 Perhaps, however, they meant something very different, and perhaps even their analogies are not so foolish as they seemed to H.

^155:8 The material here seems to follow directly on  section 5. It is a summary by H.; but seeing that there is more in it of S. than of H., we will print it as S., indicating H. when possible.

^156:1 Isis, or Nature, as the seven spheres and the eighth sphere (? the "black" earth).

^156:2 That is the Celestial Nile or Heaven-Ocean, which fructifies Mother Nature. "The Alexandrians honoured the same God as being both Osiris and Adonis, according to their mystical god-blending (syncrasia)." Damascius, "Life of Isidorus" (Phot., Bibl., 242; p. 342 a. 21, ed. Bek.).

^156:3 Sc. the Egyptians.

^156:4 Prov. xxiv. 16--same reading as LXX. Cf. Luke xvii. 4.: "If he trespass against thee seven times in a day and turn again to thee, saying, 'I repent'; thou shalt forgive." This saying is apparently from the "Logia" source; cf. Matt, xviii. 21, and compare the idea with the scheme of the "repentance" of the Pistis Sophia.

^156:5 The seven planetary spheres; but it may also connect with the idea of the falling "stars" as the souls descending into matter, according to the Platonic and Hermetic doctrine.

^156:6 Probably the Egyptians in their Mysteries, connecting with what is summarised by H. at end of  section 6 and beginning of  section 7.

^157:1 Evidently a logos from some Hellenistic scripture. In the evidence of Zosimus which we adduce at the end of our Trismegistic Fragments, he quotes ( section section 15 and 7) from the "Inner Door"--a lost treatise of Hermes Trismegistus--as follows: "For that the Son of God having power in all things, becoming all things that He willeth, appeareth as He willeth to each." Thus we have S. quoting the original logos, which, I suggest, belongs to the "Poemandres" type of Trismegistic literature. Therefore that type was in existence before S. This confirms our attribution of the "they declare" to the Egyptians and their Mysteries (Trismegisticism being principally the Hellenised form of those Mysteries), and also the completion of R. at the end of the first paragraph of  section 7 above.

^157:2 Cf. Matt. xix. 17 = Mark x. 18 = Luke xviii. 19. The first clause agrees with Mark and Luke, the second with Matthew (omitting "the" before "Good"). The presumably primitive reading of the positive command, "Call me not Good," has disappeared entirely from this phase of tradition.

^157:3 A different form from Matt. v. 45, but the same idea; for the other tradition, see Luke vi. 35.

^158:1 Cf. Matt v. 15 = Mark iv. 21 = Luke viii. 16 and xi. 33.

^158:2 Cf. Matt. x. 27 = Luke xii. 3.

^158:3 That is, symbolically distinguished statues of Hermes.

^158:4 The text is faulty; but compare Pausanias, VI. xxvi. 5, where, speaking of Cyllene, he says: "The image of Hermes which the people of the place revere exceedingly, is nothing but an ithyphallus on a pedestal." This famous symbolic figure at Cyllene is mentioned also by Artemidorus, Oneirocr., i. 45; and by Lucian, Jupiter Tragaedus, 42. Cf. J. G. Frazer's Pausanias (London, 1898), iv. 110.

^159:1 Psychagogue and psychopomp--or leader and evoker of souls--apparently here meaning him who takes souls out of body and brings them back again to it.

^159:2 mneste'run--lit., meaning "recalling to mind"; and also "suitors." Cf. Od., xxiv. 1 ff.

^159:3 Empedocles, On Purifications (Diels, 119; Stein, 390; Karsten, 11; Fairbanks, First Philosophers of Greece, 206); Empedocles continues: " . . . have I fallen here on the earth to consort with mortals!"

^159:4 The Naassenes, in H.'s opinion.

^159:5 The souls.

^159:6 Some editors think this is a mistake for Ialdabaoth. The name, however, appears in the system of Justinus (Hipp., Philos., v. 26) as Esaddaios, evidently the transliteration of El Shaddai, as one of the twelve Paternal Angels, the Sons of Elohim, the Demiurge of the sensible world, and of Eden, the Maternal Potency or Nature.

^159:7 tou idikou kosmoy--the cosmos of species and not of wholes. Cf.  section 17 below for the passage of C. from which H. takes this. Compare Ptah-Hephaistos, the Demiurge by Fire, the Fourth, in the Inscription of London given in Chap. VI. above.

^160:1 Sc. Hermes.

^160:2 The continuation of the above quotation--Od., xxiv. 2 ff.

^160:3 Cf. C. H., i. 14: "he who hath power over the lives of cosmos."

^160:4 Ps. ii. 9--same reading as LXX.

^160:5 Or "get back memory," or "become suitors."

^160:6 Eph. v. 14--a shortened form of the present Pauline text; Paul himself, however, seems to be quoting from some older writing. If the intermediate reading (epipsausei for epifausei) can stand (see W. H., Ap. 125), it would mean "Christ shall touch thee" with His rod.

^160:7 Cf. Plutarch, De Is. et Os., xxxiv. After saying that Osiris, or the Logos, is symbolised as Ocean and Water, and that Thales took his idea of Primal "Water, as the cause of things, from the Egyptians, the initiated priest of Apollo and learned comparative mythologist continues: "The Greeks say that 'son' (yion) comes from 'water' (ydatos) and 'to moisten' (ysai), and they call Dionysus 'Hyes' (yen) as Lord of the Moist (ygras) Nature, he being the same as Osiris." Stoll in Roscher's Lex. (sub vv.) says that "Hyes" and "Hye" were respectively designations of Dionysus and Semele, and that the meaning is the "Moistener" and the "Moistened" (references loc. cit.). The nymphs who reared Bacchus were also called Hyades (Pherecydes, 46; p. 108, ed. Sturz). Hyes was also a popular epithet of Zeus as god of rain. See also Lobeck, Aglaophamus, 782 and 1045 ff.; Anecd., Bekk., p. 202: Some say that Hyes = Attis, others that Hyes = Dionysus; "for Zeus poured (yse) ambrosia upon him." One of the names of Bacchus was Ambrosia (Pherecy., ibid.; Non., xxi. 20). I would therefore suggest that the mystic cry "Hye Kye" meant "O Moistener beget!"

^161:1 Ps. xix. 4. That is the Sound (= Word) of the Heavens; quoted also in Rom. x. 18.

^161:2 Cf. Od., xxiv. 5. And compare also Hamlet, I. i.:                                 "The sheeted dead
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets."

^161:3 Od., ibid. ff.

^161:4 Ps. cxviii. 22. Quoted in Matt. xxi. 42; Mark xii. 10; Luke xx. 17; Acts iv. 11.

^162:1 Taken by C. from S. and J.,  section 20; but I think that C. has missed the true meaning of the "corner-stone" in the brain.

^162:2 Cf. Eph. iii. 15.

^162:3 Is. xxviii. 16--reading entassu for emballu of LXX.; quoted also in Eph. ii. 20 and 1 Pet. ii. 7.

^162:4 Sc. Isaiah.

^162:5 Completion of the lacuna by R.

^162:6 xarakuma--a technical term also for the "Gnostic" supernal Horos or Boundary.

^162:7 Dan. ii. 15.

^162:8 Compare the "complaints of the souls" in the K.K. fragments.

^162:9 Od., xxiv. 9 f.

^162:10 Od., ibid.

^163:1 Cf. Il., xiv. 201, 246; Hymn. Orph., lxxxiii. 2.

^163:2 Ps. lxxxii. 6.

^163:3 Cf. Gal. iv. 27: "But Jerusalem Above is free, which is our Mother." (W. and H. text.)

^163:4 The final quotation within the quotation is also from Ps. lxxxii. 6. Here, then, we have a quotation from a scripture ("what is written"), glossed by J. with his special exegesis, but already being an exegesis of an Old Testament logos. It is not only a halacha, to use a term of Talmudic Kabbinism, but it is an authoritative apocalypse of the Jewish Gnosis.

^163:5 John iii. 6.

^163:6 Sc. the Naassenes, according to H.

^164:1 I am persuaded that this stood originally in J., and not in C.--being LXX. for Joshua.

^164:2 This paragraph summarises S. See next S.

^164:3 absileytos--that is, presumably, those who have learned to rule themselves, the "self-taught" race, etc., of Philo.

^164:4 Eusebius (Praep. Evang., IX. xxviii. and xxix. 5 ff.; ed. Dind. i. 505 ff. and 508 ff.), quoting from Alexander Cornelius (Polyhistor), who nourished about 100 B.C., has preserved to us a number of verses from a tragedy (called The Leading Forth) on the subject of Moses and the Exodus story, by a certain Ezechiel, a (? Alexandrian) Hebrew poet writing in Greek. In these fragments of Ezechiel's tragedy, Mariam, Sepphora, and Jothor are all dramatis personae. These spellings and that of Madiam are, of course, all LXX. (that is, Greek Targum) forms of our A.V. Miriam, Jethro, Zipporah, and Midian.

^165:1 Il., xv. 189.

^165:2 Cf. Luke viii. 10. Luke seems to preserve the reading of the source more correctly than Matt. xiii. 13 or Mark iv. 12. The Saying looks back to Is. vi. 9.

^165:3 Cf.  section 30 J.

^165:4 These three names are based on the Hebrew text of Is. xxviii. 13, A.V.: "But the Word of the Lord was unto them precept upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, there a little." LXX.: "kai estai aytois to logion kyrioy tou theou, thlipsis epi thlipsin elpis ep' elpidi, eti mikron eti mikron." That is: "And the logion [oracle, the Urim-and-Thummim, or instrument of the Logos, according to Philo] of God shall be to them tribulation on tribulation, hope on hope, still little still little." See Epiphanius, Haer., xxv. 4. "Saulasau saulasau" = "tribulation on tribulation, tribulation on tribulation;" "kaulakau kaulakau" = "hope on hope, hope on hope;" "zeesar [zeesar]" = "still little still little"--that is, the "Height of Hope," the "Depth of Tribulation," and the "As yet Very Little"--evidently referring to the as yet small number of the Regenerate. Cf. Pistis Sophia, 354: "One out of a thousand, and two out of ten thousand." See Salmon's article, "Caulacau," in Smith and Wace's D. of Ch. Biog., i. 424 f. It is also to be noticed that Epiphanius ascribes the origin of these names to the Nicolaitans. In Hebrew the corresponding name would be Balaamites; and Balaam or Bileam (Nico-laus) was one of the Rabbinical by-names for Jeschu (Jesus). See D. J. L., p. 188.

^165:5 This and the following paragraph seem to have been misplaced by J. or C., for  section 19 connects directly with the exposition concerning the ithyphallic Hermes. See R. 100, n. 4.

^166:1 us ek geis rheonta I`e-ryon-en.

^166:2 Men was the Phrygian Deus Lunus. See Drexler's admirable art. s.v. in Roscher, ii. 2687-2770.

^166:3 kekerake--a word-play on keras (horn), unreproducible in English.

^166:4 John i. 3, 4. So the present text; but it must have been "nothing" in the text which lay before C.

^166:5 Cf. the logos, from The Book of the Great Logos according to the Mystery: "Jesus, the Living One, answered and said: Blessed is the man who knoweth this [Word (Logos)], and hath brought down the Heaven, and borne the Earth and raised it heavenwards, and he becometh the Middle, for it (the Middle) is 'nothing.'"--Schmidt (C.), Gnostische Schriften in koptischer Sprache aus dem Codex Brucianus (Leipzig, 1892), p. 144; and Koptisch-gnostische Schriften (Leipzig, 1905), p. 259.

^166:6 That is the world of phenomena, or cosmos of species (idikos) and not of genera or wholes.

^166:7 The fourth Demiurgic Power of the Sensible World was Esaldaios, as we have already seen from J.,  section 12. The indications are too vague to recover the "measures" and "numbers" of the system. But the "third and fourth" are apparently both "fiery"--the former giving "light," the latter "heat." Compare  section 23 C., who speaks of the third Gate, or entrance to the third Heaven. This Heaven, the third from below, would correspond with the first aetheric sphere--there being, presumably, three before the fourth or middle, the "Fiery Ruler."

^167:1 Sc. "Heavenly Horn of Men."

^167:2 Cf. Gen. xliv. 5.

^167:3 Bergk includes these verses among the Anacreontica, n. 63, p. 835. Cf. Anacr., i. 10 (Bergk, 50, 10).

^167:4 The last line is reconstructed by Cruice (not. in loc.). Cf. Anacr., xxvi. 25, 26. Was Omar Khayyam, then, "Anacreon palingenes," or was the same spirit in each?

^167:5 Cf. John ii. 11. The reading of our quotation, however, is very different from that of the familiar Textus Receptus.

^167:6 Cf. Luke xvii. 21.

^167:7 Cf. Matt. xiii. 44.

^167:8 Cf. Matt. xiii. 33 = Luke xiii. 20.

^168:1 This seems to connect immediately with the end of  section 16. See R. 100, n. 4.

^168:2 S. probably had "For," which was glossed by J. into "Moreover."

^168:3 But this "statue," as we have seen, was the ithyphallus simply.

^168:4 Or Typal Man.

^168:5 Or, generated or born from Above.

^168:6 Cf. John vi. 53, which reads in T. R.: "Amen, Amen, I say unto you, if ye eat not the Flesh of the Son of Man and drink His Blood, ye have not Life in yourselves."

^168:7 Cf. Matt. xx. 22 = Mark x. 38 (where the phrase is put in a question).

^168:8 Cf. John viii. 21 and xiii. 33. It is remarkable that in the text of our Gospels these logoi are addressed to the Jews; C., however, takes them as sayings addressed to the disciples. It is possible that we may have here a "source" of the Fourth Gospel!

^169:1 These "tribes," then, were not the Jewish tribes, ten of which did not return, but twelve typical natures of men, and something else.

^169:2 See Immisch's excellent art., "Kureten u. Korybanten," in Roscher, ii. 1587-1628.

^169:3 Korubas, the Lord of the Corybantes, or frenzied priests of Cybele, is thus feigned by mystical word-play to be o apo-koryfeis-bas, "he who descends from the head."

^169:4 Cf. C.,  section 14.

^169:5 Apparently a quotation from some Jewish apocryphon. Cf. John v. 37: "Ye have never at any time heard His voice nor have ye seen His form."

^170:1 Cf. Ps. xxviii. 10.

^170:2 Ibid., 3.

^170:3 Conflation of LXX. of Ps. xxiv. 17 and Ps. xxi. 21.

^170:4 A paraphrase of LXX.--Is. xli. 8.

^170:5 A paraphrase of LXX.--Is. xliii. 1.

^170:6 Isaiah; or the Word speaking through the prophet.

^170:7 Is. xliii. 1.

^170:8 Sc. Isaiah.

^170:9 Paraphrase of LXX.--Is. xlix. 15.

^170:10 Is. xlix. 16.

^171:1 Ps. xxiii. 7 and 9.

^171:2 Ps. xxiii. 10.

^171:3 Sc. a "Serpent."

^171:4 Ps. xxi. 6.

^171:5 Ps. xxiii. 10 and 8.

^171:6 Sc. the psalmist; or, rather, the Logos through the psalmist.

^171:7 Job xl. 27.

^171:8 Gen. xxviii. 7.

^171:9 Sc. Jacob.

^171:10 Gen. xxviii. 17.

^171:11 Cf. John x. 9--"true" not appearing in the traditional text.

^171:12 Sc. "Jacob"--using the name in the Philonean sense.

^172:1 This is the Zeus Phrygius of Diodor. iii. 58, and Eustathius, 565, 3. Cf. R. 163, n. 3, and Zwei relig. Fragen, 104, n. 3.

^172:2 epayse.

^172:3 paue paue, a mystical word-play on pa-pa.

^172:4 Cf. Eph. ii. 17.

^172:5 Cf. what underlies Matt, xxiii. 27, Luke xi. 44, and Acts xxiii. 3.

^172:6 Cf. "Jesus, the Living [One]" in the Introduction to the newest found Sayings; and also passim in the Introduction (apparently an excerpt from another document) to the First Book of Ieou, in the Codex Brucianus.

^172:7 Cf. what underlies Matt, xxvii. 52, 53.

^173:1 Some words have apparently been omitted, corresponding to the final clause of the last sentence in S. See R., p. 101.

^173:2 Cf. 2 Cor. xii. 2-4.

^173:3 Cf. 1 Cor. ii. 13, 14.

^173:4 Cf. John vi. 44. Instead of "Heavenly Father," T. R. reads "the Father who sent me." Compare with this the longest of the newest found logoi, concerning "them who draw us" towards self-knowledge or the "kingship within." (Grenfell and Hunt, op. cit., p. 15.)

^173:5 Cf. Matt. vii. 21.

^174:1 Cf. Matt. xxi. 31. T. R. reads "The Kingdom of God."

^174:2 Or perfectionings, or completions, or endings, or initiations; also taxes--here a mystical synonym for pleromata (fullnesses) or logoi (words).

^174:3 Or, collectors of dues.

^174:4 1 Cor. x. 11.

^174:5 Cf. the logos underlying Matt. xiii. 3 ff. = Mark iv. 3 ff. = Luke viii. 5 ff.

^174:6 Slightly paraphrased from LXX.--Deut. xxxi. 20.

^174:7 In that they are rulers of themselves, members of the "self-taught" Race--abasileutoys, that is, free from the Rulers of Destiny, or Karmic bonds.

^175:1 Cf. Matt. iii. 10= Luke iii. 9. Cf. also Hipp., Philos., vi. 16, in his maltreatment of the "Simonian" Gnosis.

^175:2 That is, Sons of the Logos.

^175:3 Cf. note on the third Ruler in  section 17 C.

^175:4 Presumably the Phrygians.

^175:5 If our attribution of this to J. is correct (R. gives it to C.), we have perhaps before us a logos from the Phrygian Mysteries.

^175:6 This may possibly be assigned to C.; but C. usually comments on J. and does not lead, and the terminology is that of J. and not of C.

^175:7 A simple form of Matt. vii. 6. Is it by any means possible an underlying mystical word-play on the Eleusinian logos "ye kue"; hence ys (pig)--a synonym of xoiros and kuun (dog)?

^175:8 This section seems to be misplaced, and  section 25 probably followed  section 23 immediately in the original; the antithesis of Fruitful and Unfruitful following one another, as above ( section 22), the antithesis of Dead and God.

^175:9 ai-polos, vulg. = "goat-herd."

^176:1 S. had probably "ignorant."

^176:2 aeipolos, toytesti aei polun. Cf. Plato, Cratylus, 408 C, D.

^176:3 This is not very clear. But see Mozley's article, "Polus," in Smith, Wayte, and Marindin's D. of Gk. and Rom. Antiquities (London, 1891), ii. 442, 443: "Both in [Plato's] Timaeus, 40 B. and [Aristotle's] De Caelo, ii. 14, polos is used, not for the entire heaven, but for the axis of heaven and earth, around which the whole revolved. Again in the De Caelo, ii. 2, the poloi are the poles, north and south, in our sense of the word." Compare also the rubric in one of the rituals in the Greek Magic Papyri--C. Wessely, Griechische Zauberpapyrus, in Denkschr. d. Akad., ph. hist. Kl., xxxvi. (Vienna, 1888)--where it is said that the Sun will then move towards the Pole, and the theurgist will see Seven Virgins (the Seven Fortunes of Heaven) approach, and Seven Youths, with heads of bulls (the Pole-lords of Heaven), who make the axis turn (661-670). Compare this with the "cylinder" idea in the fragment of K. K. Then there will appear the Great God "in a white robe and trowsers, with a crown of gold on his head, holding in his right hand the golden shoulder of a heifer, that is the Bear that sets in motion and keeps the heaven turning in due seasons." This God will pronounce an oracle, and the theurgist will then receive the gift of divination. The special interest of this tradition is that it contains a Magian element (to wit, the "trowsers"), and this connects closely with Phrygia and the cult that was wedded most closely with the Mithriaca, namely, that of the Mother of the Gods.

^176:4 Od., iv. 384. In the Proteus myth Egypt is the Nile--that is, the "Great Green," the Heaven Ocean. Proteus was also said to have been the messenger or servant of Poseidon, the special God, it will be remembered, of Plato's Atlantis.

^177:1 piprasketai, a synonym of puleitai, which, besides the meaning of "coming and going," or "moving about," also signifies "is sold"; but I do not see the appositeness of the remark, unless the "ignorant" so understood it.

^177:2 Is. liv. 1; quoted also in Gal. iv. 27. Cf. Philo, De Execrat.,  section 7; M. ii. 435, P. 936 (Ri. v. 254): "For when she [the Soul] is a multitude of passions and filled with vices, her children swarming over her--pleasures, appetites, folly, intemperance, unrighteousness, injustice--she is weak and sick, and lies at death's door, dying; but when she becomes sterile, and ceases to bring them forth, or even casts them from her, forthwith, from the change, she becometh a chaste virgin, and, receiving the Divine Seed, she fashions and engenders marvellous excellencies that Nature prizeth highly--prudence, courage, temperance, justice, holiness, piety, and the rest of the virtues and good dispositions."

There are, thus, seen to be identical ideas of a distinctly marked character in both J. and Philo. Did J., then, belong to Philo's "circle"? Or, rather, did Philo represent a propagandist side of J.'s circle? In other words, can we possibly have before us in J. a Therapeut allegorical exercise, based on S., by an exceedingly liberal-minded Hellenistic Jewish mystic?

^178:1 Cf. Matt. ii. 18, which depends on Jer. xxxi. 15 (LXX. xxxviii. 15). In T. R., however, the reading is by no means the same as in LXX. C. favours the Gospel text rather than that of LXX.

^178:2 This shows a very detached frame of mind on behalf of J. Perhaps it may be an interpolation of C.

^178:3 Jer. xvii. 9.

^178:4 This has all the appearance of a quotation from some mystic apocryphon of the Gnosis.

^178:5 See Cumont (F.), Mysteres de Mithra (Brussels, 1898). In the monuments representing the bull-slaying myth of the Mithriaca, the bull's tail is frequently terminated in "une truffe d'epis"--the number varies, being either one, three, five, or seven. In the Bundahish all things are generated from the body, especially from the spinal marrow, of the slain bull. Sometimes the wheat-ears are represented as flowing like blood from the wound above the heart inflicted by the dagger of Mithras, the Bull-slayer (op. cit., i. 186, 187). The constellation of the Wheat-ear in the Virgin, which was supposed to give good harvests, presumably refers to the same idea (cf. Eratosth., Cataster., 9). See op. cit., i. 202, 205, n. 2. The wheat-ear, therefore, symbolised in one aspect the "generative seed"--in animals and men-animals the spermatozoa, in man a mystery. Mithraicism had the closest connection with the Phrygian Mystery Cult; indeed, the Magna Mater Mysteries were used by it for the initiation of women, who were excluded from the Mithriaca proper.

^179:1 The Light-spark of Pistis Sophia nomenclature.

^179:2 That is, the hierophant initiate of the Great Mother.

^179:3 ypo pollui puri, lit., "to the accompaniment of much fire." This refers, I believe, to the brilliant illumination of the Temple, or, as it was variously called, the Initiation Hall (teleste'rion), the Mystic Enclosure (mystikos sekos)--though this was probably the inner court surrounding the Temple proper the Great Hall (megaron), or Palace (agaktoron). As Hatch says, in the tenth of his famous Hibbert Lectures for 1888: "And at night there were the mystic plays: the scenic representations, the drama in symbol and for sight. The torches were extinguished; they stood outside the Temple [in the Mystic Enclosure, presumably] in the silence and darkness. The door opened--there was a blaze of light--before them was enacted the drama." Hatch (E.), The Influence of Greek Ideas and Usages upon the Christian Church (4th ed., London, 1892). See also my "Notes on the Eleusinian Mysteries," in The Theosoph. Rev. (April 1898), xxii. p. 151.

^180:1 See especially Lobeck, Aglaophamus, 587 ff.

^180:2 elthomen, this verb forming its tenses from  sqrter and  sqrtelyth, and eleysis meaning also "coming."

^180:3 Emend, by Keil.

^180:4 anelthein.

^180:5 It need hardly be said that this is all mystical word-play; anaktoreion is philologically derived from the same stem as anax, "a king." Cf. the Anaktoron or Palace as the name of the Eleusinian Temple of Initiation.

^180:6 Heracleitus, Fr. (25, Diels; 101, Fairbanks, First Philosophers of Greece). "Deaths" may also be rendered destinies, fates, or dooms.

^181:1 Sc. the first path.

^181:2 These verses are from some unknown poet, who is conjectured variously to have been either Parmenides or Pamphus of Athens. See notes in loc. in both Schneidewin and Cruice.

^181:3 Sc. those of Persephone.

^181:4 Sc. the Greater Mysteries; in which, presumably, the candidate went through some symbolic rite of death and resurrection.

^181:5 Or true virility, apersenumenoys, which equates with ap-androymenoys, I believe, and does not mean demasculati, or exuta virilitate, as translated respectively by Schneidewin and Cruice. For the "death" mentioned above and the "casting away of the garments," see the Mystery Ritual in The Acts of John (F. F. F., 431-434); and for the latter and the "Virginal Spirit," the passages on the Sacred Marriage which I have collected in the chapter on the main doctrines of Philo.

^182:1 A loose reference to LXX.--Is. vii. 14.

^182:2 Or Eternity of Eternities.

^182:3 Cf. Matt. vii. 13, 14; our text, however, is an inversion of the clauses, with several various readings, of T. R.

^182:4 This seems to connect with the Fruitful of  section 25. See below, in the Hymn "Whether blest Child," the "cut wheat-ear" that Amygdalos brought forth.

^182:5 This refers to the First Man.

^182:6 Vulg., Almond-tree.

^182:7 In the Mithriaca, Mithras, in the most ancient myth, was represented as in (? born from) a Tree. See Cumont.

^182:8 Reading oionei diafuzonta with S., C., and R.; but the Codex has oion idia sfuzonta. If we read uion for the corrupt oion, we get "the Egg throbbing apart" or in separation--and so link on with the Orphic (Chaldaean) tradition.

^182:9 die'myxe, the synonym of a term which occurs frequently in the Pistis Sophia, "I tore myself asunder."

^182:10 That is, to Man Son of Man.

^183:1 The somewhat boastful tone, shown in several passages already, probably betrays C.; it may, however, be assigned to J.

^183:2 amuxai, a play on Amygdalos.

^183:3 That is, "scarifications."

^183:4 Cf. John i. 3., reading, however, oyden and not the oyde en of W. H.

^183:5 The Piper; properly, the player on the syrinx or seven-reeded Pan-pipe. Compare the Mystery Ritual in The Acts of John: "I would pipe; dance all of you!" (F. F. F., p. 432); and, "We have piped unto you and ye have not danced" (Matt. xi. 17 = Luke vii. 27).

^183:6 Or harmonised; that is, cosmic or ordered. Cf. C. H., i. 15: "For being above the Harmony, He became a slave enharmonised"; also Orph. Hymn., viii. 11; and also Acts of John, where the Logos is spoken of as "Wisdom in harmony" (F. F. F., 436).

^183:7 Cf. John iv. 24.

^183:8 A conflation of John iv. 21 and 23. The "mountain," when used mystically, signifies the inner "Mount of initiation." Jerusalem in the text signifies the Jerusalem Below. The true worshippers worship in the Jerusalem Above.

^184:1 Sc. the Son.

^184:2 Sc. the Piper.

^184:3 reima--used also by Philo and LXX.

^184:4 With slight verbal omissions the opening lines down to "foundation" are identical with the beginning of The Great Apocalypse or Announcement of the "Simonian" tradition, an exceedingly interesting document from which some quotations have been preserved to us by Hippolytus elsewhere (Philos., vi. 9). The "Simonian" tradition was regarded by all the Church Fathers as the source of all "heresy"; but modern criticism regards The Great Announcement as a late document of the Christian Gnosis. The quotation of this document by J., however, makes this opinion, in my view, entirely untenable. If my analysis stands firm, The Great Announcement is thus proved to be pre-Christian, according to the traditional date. I am also inclined to think that in this quotation itself we have already the work of a commentator and not the original form of the Apocalypse.

^185:1 Cf.  section 16 J.

^185:2 Cf. Matt. xiii. 31 = Mark iv. 30 = Luke xiii. 18.

^185:3 Sc. the Heavens of the Psalm, that is, the Aeons and the rest above.

^185:4 Ps. xviii. 3.

^185:5 The Naassenes, in H's view.

^185:6 apronoe'tus.

^185:7 kitharan--the ancient cithara was triangular in shape and had seven strings.

^185:8 The text of the following Ode has been reconstructed by Wilamowitz in Hermes, xxxvii. 328; our translation is from his reconstruction.

^185:9 akoysma--a hearing, an instruction, lesson, discourse, sermon, applied to the public lectures of Pythagoras (Jamb., V. P., 174). It means also a song or even a "singer," a "bard." "Their singers (akousmata) are thus called 'bards'" (Posid. ap. Athen., vi. 49). The Hearers (oi akoysmatikoi) were the Probationers in the School of Pythagoras (see s.vv. in Sophocles' Lex.). Schneidewin and Cruice adopt Hermann's "emendation," akrisma (mutilation), but I prefer the reading of the Codex, as referring to the "mournful piper," or Logos, in the flowing "discord" of Rhea or Chaos, and therefore the "song" that Rhea is beginning to sing as she changes from Chaos to Cosmos.

^186:1 Perhaps Quick, for theos is from the-ein, "to run," to imitate the word-play of our mystics.

^186:2 Or cut.

^186:3 bombois.

^186:4 Lit., "bellower."

^187:1 The Hebrew Nahash, as we have already seen.

^187:2 There being more of J. than of H. in this, I have printed it as J. though it is a defaced J. I am also persuaded that in what follows we have a quotation from a "Simonian" document by J. rather than J. himself.

^187:3 That is, temples.

^187:4 Who derived all things symbolically from "Water."

^187:5 Cf. Deut. xxxiii. 17.

^187:6 Cf. Gen. ii. 10 (LXX.).

^188:1 Cf. Gen. ii. 11, 12.

^188:2 Ibid., 13.

^188:3 Ibid., 14.

^188:4 Ibid.

^188:5 The substance of this is also to be found in the "Simonian" tradition "refuted" by Hippolytus.

^188:6 Cf. Gen. i. 7.

^188:7 Cf. John iv. 10.

^189:1 Lit., the Heracleian stone.

^189:2 kerkidi. Cf. Hipp., Phil., v. 17, on system of Sethiani (S. 198, 36). Both S. and C. translate it correctly as "spina," meaning "backbone"; it has, however, been erroneously translated as "spur." Plutarch, De Is. et Os., lxii. 3, tells us that the load-stone was called by the Egyptians "bone of Horus"; and Horus is the "hawk" par excellence, the "golden hawk." Cf. Budge, Gods of the Egyptians, ii. 246, who says that we are informed by Manetho (thus making Manetho the main source of Plutarch) that the "load-stone is by the Egyptians called the 'bone of Horus,' as iron is the 'bone of Typho.'" In the chapter of the Ritual dealing with the deification of the members, the backbone of the deceased is identified with the backbone of Set (xlii. 12). Elsewhere (cviii. 8) the deceased is said "to depart having the harpoon of iron in him." This seems to suggest the black backbone of death and the golden backbone of life.

^189:3 Cf. John ix. 1; tyflos ek geneteis, perhaps mystically meaning "blind from (owing to) genesis." Cf. the "blind accuser" in the Trismegistic treatise quoted by Zosimus in our Fragments.

^189:4 John i. 9.

^189:5 This is evidently to be attributed to J., or rather his "Simonian" source, as it follows directly on the sentence about "every nature selecting." Either C. has suppressed the opening words of J.'s paragraph and substituted his own gloss, or H. has mangled his text.

^190:1 A lacuna in the Codex which is thus completed by S. and C.

^190:2 Cf. Is. xl. 15.

^190:3 That is, Messiah-ites, or Anointed-ones.

^190:4 Cf. 1 Sam. xvi. 13.

^190:5 1 Sam. x. 1.

^190:6 The text of this Hymn is in places very corrupt; I have followed Cruice's emendations mostly. Schneidewin, for some reason or other which he does not state, omits it bodily from his Latin translation.

^191:1 This attribution may be thought by some to be questionable; but as it is far more similar to the thought-sphere of J. than to that of C., I have so assigned it. It belonged to the same circles to which we must assign the sources of J.

^191:2 genikos--perhaps "general" simply.

^191:3 Or, of the Whole.

^191:4 The Codex has elafon, which, with Miller, we correct into elafoy. Is this a parallel with the "lost sheep" idea? Can it possibly connect with the conception underlying the phrases on the golden tablets found in tombs of "Orphic" initiates, on the territory of ancient Sybaris: "A kid thou hast fallen into the milk" ("Timpone grande" Tablet a, Naples Museum, Kaibel, C.I.G.I.S., 642); and, "A kid I have fallen into milk" ("Campagno" Tablet a, ibid., 641, and Append., p. 668)? But this connection is very hazy; it more probably suggests the nebris or "fawn-skin" of the Bacchic initiates (see my Orpheus, "The Fawn-skin," pp. 243 ff., for an explanation). Cruice proposes to substitute ydaron ("watery"); but there seems no reason why we should entirely reject the reading of the Codex, especially as C.'s suggestion breaks the rule of the "more difficult" reading being the preferable.

^191:5 basileian--kingdom or kingship.

^191:6 The Codex reads eipen diesous esor. Can this possibly be a glossed and broken-down remains of Iau Zeesar (Iao Zeesar)?

^192:1 Cruice thinks this refers to the breath of God's anger; but surely it refers to the Holy Spirit of God?

^192:2 Sc. the soul, the "wandering sheep."

^192:3 Cf. "the bitter Water," or "Darkness," or "Chaos," of the Sethian system in Hipp., Philos., v. 19; and see the note to the comments following Hermes-Prayer v., p. 92.

^192:4 The Logos in His descent through the spheres takes on the Forms of all the Powers.

^192:5 Is it, however, possible that the original Hymn had Naas (Naan) and not Gnosis (Gnusin)?

^193:1 Cf. R. 99, 100; and 100, n. 4.

^195:1 Wilamowitz' hesitating attribution of it to the reign of Hadrian (117-138 A.D.) is, in my opinion, devoid of any objective support whatever. (See R., p. 102.) Reitzenstein himself (p. 165) would place it in the second century B.C.

^195:2 Incidentally also it may be pointed out that this analysis gives the coup de grace to Salmon's contention ("The Cross-references in the Philosophumena," Hermathena, 1885, v. 389 if.) that the great systems of the Gnosis made known to us only by Hippolytus are all the work of a single forger who imposed upon the credulity of the heresy-hunting Bishop of Portus. This contention, though to our mind one of the most striking instances of "the good Homer nodding," was nevertheless practically endorsed by Stahelin (Die gnostische Quellen Hippolyts in seiner Hauptschrift gegen die Haeretiken, 1890; in Texte u. Untersuchungen, VI.), who went over the whole ground opened up by Salmon with minute and scrupulous industry. The general weakness of this extraordinary hypothesis of forgery has, however, been well pointed out by De Faye in his Introduction a l'Etude du Gnosticisme au IIe et au IIIe Siecle (Paris, 1903), pp. 24 ff.; though De Faye also maintains a late date.

^196:1 R. p. 9.

^197:1 Dieterich, Abraxas, 203 ff.

^197:2 Gen. xlii. 11.

^197:3 De Confus. Ling.,  section 11; M. i. 411, P. 326 (Ri. ii. 257).

^198:1 To make himself a cosmos like the Great Cosmos.

^198:2 Ibid.,  section 28; M. i. 426, 427, P. 341 (Ri. ii. 279).

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 199]

VIII

PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA AND THE HELLENISTIC THEOLOGY 

CONCERNING PHILO AND HIS METHOD 

SEEING that a study of the Trismegistic literature is essentially a study in Hellenistic theology, no introduction to this literature would be adequate which did not insist upon the utility of a careful review of the writings of Philo, the famous Jewish Hellenist of Alexandria, and which did not point to the innumerable parallels which are traceable between the basic principles of the Jewish philosopher-mystic and the main ideas embodied in our tractates. To do this, however, in detail would require a volume, and as we are restricted to the narrow confines of a chapter, nothing but a few general outlines can be sketched in, the major part of our space being reserved for a consideration of what Philo has to say of the Logos, or Divine Reason of things, the central idea of his cosmos. 

In perusing the voluminous writings [*1] of our witness, the chief point on which we would insist at the very outset, is that we are not studying a novel system devised by a single mind, we are not even face to face with a new departure in method, but that the writings 

[p. 200]

of our Alexandrian [*1] came at the end of a line of predecessors; true that Philo is now, owing to the preservation of his writings, by far the most distinguished of such writers, but he follows in their steps. His method of allegorical interpretation is no new invention, [*2] least of all is his theology. 

In brief, Philo is first and foremost an "apologist"; his writings are a defence of the Jewish myths and prophetic utterances, interpreted allegorically, in terms not of Hellenic philosophy proper, but rather of Hellenistic theology, that is, of philosophy theologised, or of theology philosophised; in other words, in the language of the current cultured Alexandrian religio-philosophy of his day. 

As Edersheim, in his admirable article, [*3] says, speaking 

[p. 201]

of this blend of the faith of the synagogue with the thinking of Greece: "It can scarcely be said that in the issue the substance and spirit were derived from Judaism, the form from Greece. Rather does it often seem as if the substance had been Greek and only the form Hebrew." 

But here Edersheim seems to be not sufficiently alive to the fact that the "Greek thinking" was already in Hellenistic circles strongly theologised and firmly wedded to the ideas of apocalypsis and revelation. How, indeed, could it have been otherwise in Egypt, in the face of the testimony of our present work? 

Philo, then, does but follow the custom among the cultured of his day when he treats the stories of the patriarchs as myths, and the literally intractable narratives as the substance of an ethical mythology. It was the method of the religio-philosophy of the time, which found in allegorical interpretation the "antidote of impiety," and by its means unveiled the supposed under-meaning (ypnoia) of the myths. 

The importance of Philo, then, lies not so much in his originality, as in the fact that he hands on much that had been evolved before him; for, as Edersheim says, and as is clear to any careful student of the Philonean tractates: "His own writings do not give the impression of originality. Besides, he repeatedly refers to the allegorical interpretation of others, as well as to canons of allegorism apparently generally recognised. He also enumerates differing allegorical interpretations of the same subjects. All this affords evidence of the existence of a school of Hellenist [Hellenistic, rather] interpretation" (p. 362). 

[p. 202]

But this does not hold good only for the interpretation of "the myths of Israel" by Hellenistic Jews; it holds good of the whole cultured religious world of the time, and pre-eminently of the Hellenistic schools of every kind in Egypt. In brief, Philo's philosophy was often already philosophised myth before he ingeniously brought it into play for the interpretation of Hebrew story. 

In short, the tractates of Philo and our Trismegistic sermons have both a common background--Hellenistic theology or theosophy. Both use a common language. 

Philo, of course, like the rest of his contemporaries, had no idea of criticism in the modern sense; he was a thorough-going apologist of the Old Covenant documents. These were for him in their entirety the inerrant oracles of God Himself; nay, he even went to the extent of believing the apologetic Greek version to be literally inspired. [*1] 

Nevertheless he was, as a thinker, confronted with the same kind of difficulties as face us to-day with immeasurably greater distinctness. The ideas of God, of the world-order, and of the nature of man, were so far advanced in his day beyond the frequently crude and repugnant representations found in the ancient scriptures of his people, that he found it impossible to claim for them on their surface-value the transcendency of the last word of wisdom from God to man, at anyrate among the cultured to whom he addressed himself. These difficulties he accordingly sought to remove by an allegorical interpretation, whereby he read into them the views of the highest philosophical and religious environment of his time. 

Having no idea of the philosophy of history, or of the history of religion, or of the canons of literary

[p. 203]

criticism, as we now understand these things, he never stopped to enquire whether the writers of the ancient documents intended their narratives to be taken as myths embodying an esoteric meaning; much less did he ask himself, as we ask ourselves to-day, whether these writers had not in all probability frequently written up the myths of other nations into a history of their own patriarchs and other worthies; on the contrary, he relieved them of all responsibility, and entirely eliminated the natural human element, by his theory of prophecy, which assumed that they had acted as impersonal, passive instruments of the Divine inspiration. 

But even Philo, when he came to work it out, could not maintain this absolutism of inspiration, and so we find him elsewhere unable to ascribe a consistent level of inspiration to his "Moses," who of course, in Philo's belief, wrote the Pentateuch from the first to the last word. Thus we find him even in the "Five Fifths" making a threefold classification of inspiration: (i.) The Sacred Oracles "spoken directly of God by His interpreter the prophet"; (ii.) Those prophetically delivered "in the form of question and answer"; and (iii) Those "proceeding from Moses himself while in some state of inspiration and under the influence of the deity." [*1] 

But what is most pleasant is to find that Philo admitted the great philosophers of Greece into his holy assembly, and though he gives the pre-eminence to Moses, yet it is, as it were, to a first among equals--a wide-minded tolerance that was speedily forgotten in the bitter theological strife that subsequently broke forth. 

[p. 204]

THE GREAT IMPORTANCE OF HIS WRITINGS 

But what makes the writings of our Alexandrian so immensely important for us is, that the final decade of his life is contemporary with the coming into manifestation of Christianity in the Graeco-Roman world owing to the energetic propaganda of Paul. 

Philo was born somewhere between 30 and 20 B.C., and died about 45 A.D. There is, of course, not a single word in his voluminous writings that can in any way be construed into a reference to Christianity as traditionally understood; but the language of Philo, if not precisely the diction of the writers of the New Testament documents, has innumerable points of resemblance with their terminology; for the language of Hellenistic theology is largely, so to speak, the common tongue of both, while the similarity of many of their ideas is astonishing. 

Philo, moreover, was by no means an obscure member of the community to which he belonged; on the contrary, he was a most distinguished ornament of the enormous Jewish colony of Alexandria, which occupied no less than two out of the five wards of the city. [*1] His brother, Alexander, was the head of the largest banking firm of the capital of Egypt, which was also the intellectual and commercial centre of the Graeco-Roman world. Indeed, Alexander may be said to have been the Rothschild of the time. The operations of the firm embraced the contracting of loans for the Imperial House, while the banker himself was a personal friend of the Emperor, and his sons intermarried with the family of the Jewish King Agrippa. 

Philo, himself, though he would have preferred the solitude of the contemplative life, took an active part 

[p. 205]

in the social life of the great capital; and, at the time of the greatest distress of his compatriots in the city, when they were overwhelmed by a violent outbreak of anti-semitism, their lives in danger, their houses plundered, and their ancient privileges confiscated, it was the aged Philo who was chosen as spokesman of the embassy to Caius Caligula (A.D. 40). 

Here, then, we have a man in just the position to know what was going on in the world of philosophy, of letters, and religion, and not only at Alexandria, but also wherever Jewish enterprise--which had then, as it now has, the main commerce of the world in its hands--pushed itself. The news of the world came to Alexandria, and the mercantile marine was largely owned by Hebrews. 

Philo is, therefore, the very witness we should choose of all others to question as to his views on the ideas we find in our Trismegistic tractates, and this we may now proceed to do without any further preliminaries. 

CONCERNING THE MYSTERIES 

Speaking of those who follow the contemplative life, [*1] Philo writes: 

"Now this natural class of men [lit. race] is to be found in many parts of the inhabited world; for both the Grecian and non-Grecian world must needs share in the perfect Good." [*2] 

In Egypt, he tells us, there were crowds of them in every province, and they were very numerous indeed about Alexandria. Concerning such men Philo tells us elsewhere: 

[p. 206]

"All those, whether among Greeks or non-Greeks, who are practisers of wisdom (asketai sofias), living a blameless and irreproachable life, determined on doing injury to none, and on not retaliating if injury be done them," avoid the strife of ordinary life, "in their enthusiasm for a life of peace free from contention." 

Thus are they "most excellent contemplators of nature (theuroi teis fuseus) and all things therein; they scrutinise earth and sea, and air and heaven, and the natures therein, their minds responding to the orderly motion of moon and sun, and the choir of all the other stars, both variable and fixed. They have their bodies, indeed, planted on earth below; but for their souls, they have made them wings, so that they speed through aether (aitherobatountes), and gaze on every side upon the powers above, as though they were the true world-citizens, most excellent, who dwell in cosmos as their city; such citizens as Wisdom hath as her associates, inscribed upon the roll of Virtue, who hath in charge the supervising of the common weal. . . . 

"Such men, though [in comparison] but few in number, keep alive the covered spark of Wisdom secretly, throughout the cities [of the world], in order that Virtue may not be absolutely quenched and vanish from our human kind." [*1] 

Again, elsewhere, speaking of those who are good and wise, he says: 

"The whole of this company (thiasos) have voluntarily deprived themselves of the possession of aught in abundance, thinking little of things dear to the flesh. Now athletes are men whose bodies are well cared for and full of vigour, men who make strong the fort, their body, against their soul; whereas the [athletes] of 

[p. 207]

[this] discipline, pale, wasted, and, as it were, reduced to skeletons, sacrifice even the muscles of their bodies to the powers of their own souls, dissolving, if the truth be told, into one form--that of the soul, and by their mind becoming free from body. 

"The earthly element is, therefore, naturally dissolved and washed away, when the whole mind in its entirety resolves to make itself well-pleasing unto God. This race is rare, however, and found with difficulty; still it is not impossible it should exist." [*1] 

And in another passage, when referring to the small number of the "prudent and righteous and gracious," Philo says: 

"But the 'few,' though rare [to meet with], are yet not non-existent. Both Greece and Barbary [that is, non-Greek lands] bear witness [to them]. 

"For in the former there nourished those who are pre-eminently and truly called the Seven Sages--though others, both before and after them, in every probability reached the [same] height--whose memory, in spite of their antiquity, has not evanished through the length of time, while that of those of far more recent date has been obliterated by the tide of the neglect of their contemporaries. 

"While in non-Grecian lands, in which the most revered and ancient in such words and deeds [have nourished], are very crowded companies of men of worth and virtue; among the Persians, for example, the [caste] of Magi, who by their careful scrutiny of nature's works for purpose of the gnosis of the truth, in quiet silence, and by means of [mystic] images of piercing clarity (tranuterais emfasesin) are made initiate into the mysteries of godlike virtues, and in their turn initiate [those who come after them]; in 

[p. 208]

[paragraph continues] India the [caste] of the Gymnosophists, who, in addition to their study of the lore of nature, toil in [the fields of] morals, and [so] make their whole life a practical example of [their] virtue. 

"Nor are Palestine and Syria, in which no small portion of the populous nation of the Jews dwell, unfruitful in worth and virtue. Certain of them are called Essenes, in number upwards of 4000, according to my estimate." [*1] 

Philo then proceeds to give an account of these famous mystics. 

In Egypt itself, however, he selects out of the many communities of the Therapeutae and Therapeutrides (which the Old Latin Version renders Cultores et Cultrices pietatis) [*2] only one special group, with which he was presumably personally familiar and which was largely Jewish. Of this order (sustema) [*3] Philo gives us a most graphic account, both of their settlement and mode of life. By means of this intensely interesting sketch of the Contemplative or Theoretic Life, and by the parallel passages from the rest of Philo's works which Conybeare has so industriously marshalled in his "Testimonia," we are introduced into the environment and atmosphere of these Theoretics, and find ourselves in just such circumstances as would condition the genesis of our Trismegistic literature. 

The whole of Philo's expositions revolve round the idea that the truly philosophic life is an initiation into the Divine Mysteries; for him the whole tradition of Wisdom is necessarily a mystery-tradition. Thus he tells us of his own special Therapeut community, south of Alexandria: 

[p. 209]

"In every cottage there is a sacred chamber, [*1] which is called semneion and monasterion [*2] in which, in solitude, they are initiated into the mysteries of the solemn life." [*3] 

With this it will be of interest to compare Matt, vi. 6: "When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in the Hidden; and thy Father who seeth in the Hidden, shall reward thee." 

It is said that among the "Pharisees" there was a praying-room in every house. 

We may also compare with the above reference to the Mysteries Luke xii. 2 = Matt. x. 26, from a "source" which promised the revelation of all mysteries, following on the famous logos also quoted in Mark iv. 22 and Luke viii. 17: 

"For there is nothing veiled which shall not be revealed, and hidden which shall not be made known." "Therefore, whatsoever ye (M., I) have spoken in darkness, shall be heard in the light, and what ye have spoken (M., heard) in the ear in the closets, shall be heralded forth on the house-tops." 

Both Evangelists have evidently adapted their "source" to their own purposes, but the main sense of the original form is not difficult to recover. 

It is further of interest to compare with the first clause of the above passages the new-found logos: 

"Jesus saith, Everything that is not before thy face and that which is hidden from thee, shall be revealed to thee. For there is nothing hidden that shall 

[p. 210]

not be made manifest, nor buried that shall not be raised." [*1] 

But there are other and more general mysteries referred to in Philo; for, in speaking of the command that the unholy man who is a speaker of evil against divine things, should be removed from the most holy places and punished, our initiated philosopher bursts forth: 

"Drive forth, drive forth, ye of the closed lips, and ye revealers [*2] of the divine mysteries, [*3] the promiscuous and rabble crowd of the defiled--souls unamenable to purification, and hard to wash clean, who wear ears that cannot be closed, and tongues that cannot be kept within the doors [of their lips]--organs that they ever keep ready for their own most grievous mischance, hearing all things and things not law [to hear]." [*4] 

Of these "ineffable mysteries," [*5] he elsewhere says, in explaining that the wives of the patriarchs stand allegorically as types of virtues: 

"But in order that we may describe the conception and birth-throes of the Virtues, let bigots [*6] stop their ears, or else let them depart. For that we give a higher teaching of the mysteries divine, to mystae who are worthy of the holiest rites [of all]. 

"And these are they who, free from arrogance, practise real and truly genuine piety, free from display 

[p. 211]

of any kind. But unto them who are afflicted with incorrigible ill--the vanity of words, close-sticking unto names, and empty show of manners, who measure purity and holiness by no other rule [than this]--[for them] we will not play the part of hierophant." [*1] 

Touching on the mystery of the Virgin-birth, to which we will refer later on, Philo continues: 

"These things receive into your souls, ye mystae, ye whose ears are purified, as truly sacred mysteries, and see that ye speak not of them to any who may be without initiation, but storing them away within your hearts, guard well your treasure-house; not as a treasury in which gold and silver are laid up, things that do perish, but as the pick and prize of all possessions--the knowledge of the Cause [of all] and Virtue, and of the third, the child of both." [*2] 

Now the "Divine Spirit" (theion pneuma), says Philo, does not remain among the many, though it may dwell with them for a short time. 

"It is [ever] present with only one class of men--with those who, having stripped themselves of all the things in genesis, even to the innermost veil and garment of opinion, come unto God with minds unclothed and naked. 

"And so Moses, having fixed his tent outside the camp--that is, the whole of the body [*3]--that is to say, having made firm his mind, so that it does not move, begins to worship God; and, entering into the darkness, the unseen land, abideth there, being initiated into the most holy mysteries. And he becomes, not only a mystes, but also a hierophant of revelations, [*4] and 

[p. 212]

teacher of divine things, which he will indicate to those who have had their ears made pure. 

"With such kind of men, then, the Divine Spirit is ever present, guiding their every way aright." [*1] 

Referring to the ritual sacrifices of a heifer and two rams, Philo declares that the slaying of the second ram, and the symbolic rite of sprinkling certain portions of the bodies of the priests with its blood, was ordained "for the highest perfectioning of the consecrated by means of the purification of chastity [*2]--which [ram] he ['Moses'] called, according to its meaning, the '[ram] of perfectioning,' since they [the priests] were about to act as hierophants of mysteries appropriate to the servants (therapeytais) and ministers of God." [*3] 

So also Philo's language about the Therapeuts proper, and not the allegorically interpreted temple-sacrificers, is that of the Mysteries, when he writes: 

"Now they who betake themselves to this service (therapeian) [of God do so], not because of any custom, or on some one's advice and appeal, but carried away with heavenly love, like those initiated into the Bacchic or Corybantic Mysteries, they are a-fire with God until they see the object of their love." [*4] 

These Mysteries were, of course, not to be revealed except to the worthy. Therefore he says: 

"Nor because thou hast a tongue and mouth and organ of speech, shouldst thou tell forth all, even things that may not be spoken." [*5] 

[p. 213]

And in the last section of the same treatise he writes: 

"Wherefore I think that [all] those who are not utterly without [proper] instruction, would prefer to be made blind than to see things not proper [to be seen], to be made deaf than to hear harmful words, and to have their tongue cut out, to prevent them divulging aught of the ineffable Mysteries. . . . Nay, it is even better to make oneself eunuch than to rush madly into unlawful unions." [*1] 

With which we may usefully compare Matt. v. 29: "If thy right eye offend thee, cut it out and cast it from thee"; and Matt. xix. 12: "There are some who have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of the heavens; he that can receive it, let him receive it." Both passages are found in the first Gospel only. 

For the comprehension of virtue man requires the reason only; but for the doing of ill, the evil man requires the organs of the body, says our mystic dualist; "for how will he be able to divulge the Mysteries, if he have no organ of speech?" [*2] 

This continual harping on the divulging of the Mysteries, shows that Philo considered it the greatest of all enormities; we might almost think that he had in view some movement that was divulging part of the mystery-tradition to the untrained populace. 

Elsewhere, speaking of those "who draw nigh unto God, abandoning the life of death, and sharing in immortality," he tells us these are the "Naked"--(that is, "naked" of the trammels of the flesh)--who sacrifice all to God. And he adds that only these "are permitted to see the ineffable Mysteries of God, who 

[p. 214]

are able to cloak them and guard them" from the unworthy. [*1] 

With regard to these Mysteries, they were, as we might expect, divided into the Lesser and the Greater--in the former of which the neophytes "worked on the untamed and savage passions, as though they were softening the [dough [*2] of their] food with reason (logos)." 

The manner of preparing this divine food, so that it becomes the bread of life, was a mystery. [*3] 

One of the doctrines revealed in these Lesser Mysteries was plainly that of the Trinity; for, commenting on Gen. xviii. 2: "And he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him"--Philo writes: 

"'He lifted up his eyes,' not the eyes of his body, for God cannot be seen by the senses, but by the soul [alone]; for at a fitting time He is discovered by the eyes of wisdom. 

"Now the power of sight of the souls of the many and unrighteous is ever shut in, since it lies dead in deep sleep, and can never respond and be made awake to the things of nature and the types and ideas within her. But the spiritual eyes of the wise man are awake, and behold them; nay, they are sleeplessly alert, ever watchful from desire of seeing. 

"Wherefore it is well said in the plural, that he raised not one eye, but all the eyes that are in the soul, so that one would have said that he was altogether all eye. Having, then, become the eye, he begins to see the holy and divine vision of the Lord, in such a fashion that the one vision appeared as a trinity, and the trinity as a unity." [*4] 

[p. 215]

Elsewhere, referring to the same story, and to the words of Abraham to Sarah "to hasten and knead three measures of fine meal, and to make cakes upon the hearth," [*1] Philo expounds the mystery at length as follows. It refers to that experience of the inner life: 

"When God, accompanied by His two highest Potencies, Dominion (arxe') and Goodness, making One [with Himself] in the midst, produces in the seeing soul a triple presentation, of which [three persons] each transcends all measure; for God transcendeth all delineation, and equally transcendent are His Potencies, but He [Himself] doth measure all. 

"Accordingly, His Goodness is the measure of things good, and His Dominion is the measure of things subject, while He Himself is chief of all, both corporeal and incorporeal. [*2] 

"Wherefore also these Potencies, receiving the Reason (Logos) of His rules and ordinances, measure out all things below them. And, therefore, it is right that these three measures should, as it were, be mingled and blended together in the soul, in order that, being persuaded that He is Highest God, who transcendeth His Potencies, both making Himself manifest without them, and also causing Himself to be seen in them, it [the soul] may receive His impressions (xarakteiras), and powers, and blessings, and [so] becoming initiate into the perfect secrets, may not lightly disclose the divine Mysteries, but, treasuring them up, and keeping sure silence, guard them in secret. 

"For it is written: 'Make [them] secret,'--for the sacred sermon (logon) of initiation (musten) about the Ingenerable and about His Potencies ought to be kept 

[p. 216]

secret, since it is not within the power of every man to guard the sacred trust (parakatathe'ken) of the divine revelations (orgiun)." [*1] 

CONCERNING THE SACRED MARRIAGE 

But the chief of all the mysteries for Philo was, apparently, the Sacred Marriage, the mystic union of the soul, as female, with God, as male (Deo nubere). In this connection he refers to Gen. iv. 1: 

"And Adam knew his wife. And she conceived and bare Cain. And she said: I have gotten a man by means of the Lord. And He caused her also to bring forth Abel his brother." [*2] 

We are, of course, not concerned with the legitimacy or consistency of Philo's allegorising system, whereby he sought to invoke the authority of his national scriptures in support of his chosen doctrines; but we are deeply concerned with these doctrines themselves, as being the favourite dogmas of his circle and of similar circles of allied mystics of the time. 

His views on the subject are clearly indicated, for he tells us in the same passage that he is speaking of a secret of initiation, not of the conception and parturition of women, but of Virtues--that is, of the virtuous soul. Accordingly he continues in  section 13: 

"But it is not lawful for Virtues, in giving birth to their many perfections, to have part or lot in a mortal husband. And yet they will never bring forth of themselves, without conceiving their offspring of another. 

"Who, then, is He who soweth in them their glorious [progeny], if not the Father of all universal things--

[p. 217]

the God beyond all genesis, who yet is Sire of everything that is? For, for Himself, God doth create no single thing, in that He stands in need of naught; but for the man who prays to have them [He creates] all things." 

And then, bringing forward Sarah, Leah, Rebecca, and Sepphora, as examples of the Virtues who lived with the great prophets of his race, Philo declares that "Sarah" conceived, when God looked upon her while she was in solitary contemplation, and so she brought forth for him who eagerly longed to attain to wisdom--namely, for him who is called "Abraham." 

And so also in the case of "Leah," it is said "God opened her womb," which is the part played by a husband; and so she brought forth for him who underwent the pains of labour for the sake of the Beautiful--namely, for him who is called "Jacob"; "so that Virtue received the divine seed from the Cause [of all], while she brought forth for that one of her lovers who was preferred above all other suitors." 

So also when the "all-wise," he who is called "Isaac," went as a suppliant to God, his Virtue, "Rebecca," that is Steadfastness, became pregnant in consequence of his supplication. 

Whereas "Moses," without any supplication or prayer, attained to the winged and sublime Virtue "Sepphora," and found her with child by no mortal husband. [*1] 

Moreover, in  section 14, in referring to Jeremiah, Philo writes: 

"For I, having been initiated into the Great Mysteries by Moses, the friend of God, nevertheless when I set eyes upon Jeremiah, the prophet, and learned that he is not only a mystes, but also an adept hierophant, I did not hesitate to go to him as his disciple.

[p. 218]

"And he, in that in much [he says] he is inspired by God, uttered a certain oracle [as] from the Face of God, who said unto the Virtue of Perfect Peace: 'Hast thou not called Me as 'twere House and Father and Husband of thy virginity?' [*1]--suggesting in the clearest [possible] fashion that God is both Home, the incorporeal land of incorporeal ideas, and Father of all things, in that He did create them, and Husband of Wisdom, sowing for the race of mankind the seed of blessedness into good virgin soil. 

"For it is fitting God should converse with an undefiled, an untouched and pure nature, with her who is in very truth the Virgin, in fashion very different from ours. 

"For the congress of men for the procreation of children makes virgins women. But when God begins to associate with the soul, He brings it to pass that she who was formerly woman becomes virgin again. For banishing the foreign and degenerate and non-virile desires, by which it was made womanish, He substitutes for them native and noble and pure virtues. . . . 

"But it is perhaps possible that even a virgin soul may be polluted by intemperate passions, and so dishonoured. 

"Wherefore the oracle hath been careful to say that God is husband not of 'a virgin'--for a virgin is subject to change and death--but of 'virginity' [that is of] the idea which is ever according to the same [principles], and in the same mode. 

"For whereas things that have qualities, have with their nature received both birth and dissolution, the [archetypal] potencies which mould them have obtained a lot transcending dissolution. 

[p. 219]

"Wherefore is it not fitting that God, who is beyond all generation and all change, should sow [in us] the ideal seeds of the immortal virgin Virtues, and not those of the woman who changes the form of her virginity?" [*1] 

But, indeed, as Conybeare says: 

"The words, virgin, virginity, ever-virginal, occur on every other page of Philo. It is indeed Philo who first [*2] formulated the idea of the Word or ideal ordering principle of the Cosmos being born of an ever-virgin soul, which conceives, because God the Father sows into her His intelligible rays and divine seed, so begetting His only well-beloved son, the Cosmos." [*3] 

Thus, speaking of the impure soul, Philo writes: 

"For when she is a multitude of passions and filled with vices, her children swarming over her--pleasures, appetites, folly, intemperance, unrighteousness, injustice--she is weak and sick, and lies at death's door, dying; but when she becomes sterile, and ceases to bring them forth or even casts them from her, forthwith, from the change, she becometh a chaste virgin, and, receiving the Divine Seed, she fashions and engenders marvellous excellencies that nature prizeth highly--prudence, courage, temperance, justice, holiness, piety, and the rest of the virtues and good dispositions." [*4] 

So also, speaking of the Therapeutrides, he writes: 

"Their longing is not for mortal children, but for a deathless progeny, which the soul that is in love with God can alone bring forth, when the Father hath sown into it the spiritual light-beams, by means of which it 

[p. 220]

shall be able to contemplate (theurein) the laws of wisdom." [*1] 

And as to the progeny of such virgin-mothers, Philo elsewhere instances the birth of "Isaac"--"which could not refer to any man," but is "a synonym of Joy, the best of the blessed states of the soul--Laughter, the spiritually conceived (endiathetos) [*2] Son of God, Who bestoweth him as a comfort and means of good cheer on souls of perfect peace." [*3] 

And a little later on he adds: 

"And Wisdom, who, after the fashion of a mother, brings forth the self-taught Race, declares that God is the sower of it." [*4] 

And yet, again, elsewhere, speaking of this spiritual progeny, Philo writes: 

"But all the Servants of God (Therapeuts), who are lawfully begotten, shall fulfill the law of [their] nature, which commands them to be parents. For the men shall be fathers of many sons, and the women mothers of numerous children." [*5] 

So also, in the case of the birth of Joseph, when his mother, Rachael, says to Jacob: "Give me children!"--"the Supplanter, disclosing his proper nature, will reply: 'Thou hast wandered into deep error. For I am not in God's place, who alone is able to open the wombs of souls, and sow in them virtues, and make them pregnant and mothers of good things.'" [*6] 

So too, again, in connection with the birth of Isaac, referring to the exultant cry of Sarah: "The Lord hath 

[p. 221]

made me Laughter; for whosoever heareth, rejoiceth with me" [*1]--Philo bursts forth: 

"Open, then, wide your ears, ye mystae, and receive the most holy mysteries. 'Laughter' is Joy, and 'hath made' is the same as 'hath begotten'; so that what is said hath the following meaning: 'The Lord hath begotten Isaac'--for He is Father of the perfect nature, sowing in the soul and generating blessedness." [*2] 

That all of this was a matter of vital moment for Philo himself, may be seen from what we must regard as an intensely interesting autobiographical passage, in which our philosopher, speaking of the happy childbirth of Wisdom, writes: 

"For some she judges entirely worthy of living with her, while others seem as yet too young to support such admirable and wise house-sharing; these latter she hath permitted to solemnise the preliminary initiatory rites of marriage, holding out hopes of its [future] consummation. 

"'Sarah' then, the Virtue who is mistress of my soul, hath brought forth, but hath not brought forth for me--for that I could not, because I was too young, receive [into my soul] her offspring--wisdom, and righteousness, and piety--because of the brood of bastard brats which empty opinions had borne me. 

"For the feeding of these last, the constant care and incessant anxiety concerning them, have forced me to take no thought for the legitimate children who are the true citizens. 

"It is well, therefore, to pray Virtue not only to bear children, who even without praying brings her fair 

[p. 222]

progeny to birth, but also to bear sons for us, so that we may be blessed with a share in her seed and offspring. 

"For she is wont to bear to God alone, with thankfulness repaying unto Him the first-fruits of the things she hath received, [to Him] who, Moses says, 'hath opened' her ever-virgin 'womb.'" [*1] 

But, indeed, Philo is never wearied of reiterating this sublime doctrine, which for him was the consummation of the mysteries of the holy life. Thus, then, again he sets it forth as follows: 

"We should, accordingly, understand that the True Reason (Logos) of nature has the potency of both father and husband for different purposes--of a husband, when he casts the seed of virtues into the soul as into a good field; of a father, in that it is his nature to beget good counsels, and fair and virtuous deeds, and when he hath begotten them, he nourisheth them with those refreshing doctrines which discipline and wisdom furnish. 

"And the intelligence is likened at one time to a virgin, at another to a wife, or a widow, or one who has not yet a husband. 

"[It is likened] to a virgin, when the intelligence keeps itself chaste and uncorrupted from pleasures and appetites, and griefs and fears, the passions which assault it; and then the father who begot it, assumes the leadership thereof. 

"And when she (intelligence) lives as a comely wife with comely Reason (Logos), that is with virtuous Reason, this self-same Reason himself undertakes the care of her, sowing, like a husband, the most excellent concepts in her. 

"But whenever the soul is bereft of her children of 

[p. 223]

prudence, and of her marriage with Right Reason, widowed of her most fair possessions, and left desolate of Wisdom, through choosing a blameworthy life--then, let her suffer the pains she hath decreed against herself, with no wise Reason to play physician to her transgressions, either as husband and consort, or as father and begetter." [*1] 

Referring to Jacob's dream of the white, and spotted, and ring-straked, and speckled kine, Philo tells us that this, too, must be taken as an allegory of souls. The first class of souls, he says, are "white." 

"The meaning is that when the soul receives the Divine Seed, the first-born births are spotlessly white, like unto light of utmost purity, to radiance of the greatest brilliance, as though it were the shadowless ray of the sun's beams from a cloudless sky at noon." [*2] 

With this it is of service to compare the Vision of Hades seen by Thespesius (Aridaeus), and related by Plutarch. Thespesius' guide in the Unseen World draws his attention to the "colours" and "markings" of the souls as follows: 

"Observe the colours of the souls of every shade and sort: that greasy, brown-grey is the pigment of sordidness and selfishness; that blood-red, inflamed shade is a sign of a savage and venomous nature; wherever blue-grey is, from such a nature incontinence in pleasure is not easily eradicated; innate malignity, mingled with envy, causes that livid discoloration, in the same way as cuttle-fish eject their sepia. 

"Now it is in earth-life that the vice of the soul (being acted upon by the passions, and re-acting upon the body) produces these discolorations; while the purification and correction here have for their object 

[p. 224]

the removal of these blemishes, so that the soul may become entirely ray-like and of uniform colour." [*1] 

Again, in giving the allegorical meaning of the primitive-culture story of Tamar, [*2] Philo not only interprets it by the canon of the Sacred Marriage, but also introduces other details from the Mysteries. Thus he writes: 

"For being a widow she was commanded to sit in the House of the Father, the Saviour; for whose sake for ever abandoning the congress and association with mortal [things], she is bereft and widowed from [all] human pleasures, and receives the Divine quickening, and, full-filled with the Seeds of virtue, conceives, and is in travail with fair deeds. And when she brings them forth, she carries off the trophies from her adversaries, and is inscribed as victor, receiving as a symbol the palm of victory." [*3] 

And every stage of this divine conception is but the shadow of the great mystery of cosmic creation, which Philo sums up as follows: 

"We shall, however, be quite correct in saying that the Demiurge who made all this universe, is also at the same time Father of what has been brought into existence; while its Mother is the Wisdom of Him who hath made it--with whom God united, though not as man [with woman], and implanted the power of genesis. And she, receiving the Seed of God, brought forth with perfect labour His only beloved Son, whom all may perceive [*4]--this Cosmos." [*5] 

[p. 225]

CONCERNING THE LOGOS 

The idea of God found in Philo is that of the more enlightened theology of his time. God is That which transcends all things and all ideas. It would, of course, be a far too lengthy study to marshal the very numerous passages in which our philosopher sets forth his view on Deity; and so we shall select only two passages simply to give the reader who may not be acquainted with the works of the famous Alexandrian, some notion of the transcendency of his conception. For, as he writes: 

"What wonder is it if That-which-[really]-is transcends the comprehension of man, when even the mind which is in each of us, is beyond our power of knowing? Who hath ever beheld the essence of the soul?" [*1] 

This Mystery of Deity was, of necessity, in itself ineffable; but in conception, it was regarded under two aspects--the active and the passive causative principles. 

"The Active Principle, the Mind of the universals, is absolutely pure, and absolutely free from all admixture; It transcendeth Virtue; It transcendeth Wisdom; nay, It transcendeth even the Good Itself and the Beautiful Itself. 

"The Passive Principle is of itself soulless and motionless, but when It is set in motion, and enformed and ensouled by the Mind, It is transformed into the most perfect of all works--namely, this Cosmos." [*2] 

This Passive Principle is generally taken by commentators to denote Matter; but if so, it must be equated with Wisdom, which we have just seen was regarded by Philo as the Mother of the Cosmos. 

[p. 226]

But beyond all else Philo is useful to us in recording the views of contemporary Hellenistic theology concerning the concept of the Logos, the Mystery of the Heavenly Man. the Son of God. Even as this word of mystic meaning comes forward in almost every tractate and fragment of our Trismegistic literature, so in Philo is it the dominant idea in a host of passages. 

It should, however, never be forgotten that Philo is but handing on a doctrine; he is inventing nothing. His testimony, therefore, is of the greatest possible value for our present study, and deserves the closest attention. We shall accordingly devote the rest of this chapter exclusively to this subject, and marshal the evidence, if not in Philo's own words, at anyrate in as exact a translation of them as we can give; for although much has been written on the matter, we know no work in which the simple expedient of letting Philo speak for himself has been attempted. 

THE SON OF GOD 

The Logos, then, is pre-eminently the Son of God, for Philo writes: 

"Moreover God, as Shepherd and King, leads [and rules] with law and justice the nature of the heaven, the periods of sun and moon, the changes and harmonious progressions of the other stars--deputing [for the task] His own Right Reason (Logos), His Firstborn Son, to take charge of the sacred flock, as though he were the Great King's viceroy." [*1] 

Of this Heavenly Man, who was evidently for Philo the Celestial Messiah of God, he elsewhere writes: 

"Moreover, I have heard one of the companions of Moses uttering some such word (logos) as this: 

[p. 227]

[paragraph continues] 'Behold Man whose name is East,' [*1]--a very strange appellation, if you imagine the man composed of body and soul to be meant; but if you take him for that Incorporeal Man in no way differing from the Divine Image, you will admit that the giving him the name of East exactly hits the mark. 

"For the Father of things that are hath made him rise as His Eldest Son, whom elsewhere He hath called His First-born, and who, when he hath been begotten, imitating the ways of his Sire, and contemplating His archetypal patterns, fashions the species [of things]." [*2] 

Here we notice first of all Philo's graphic manner (a commonplace of the time) of quoting Ezekiel as though he were still alive, and he had heard him speak; and, in the second place, that the First-born Son is symbolically represented as the Sun rising in the East. 

THE TRUE HIGH PRIEST 

That, moreover, the Logos is the Son of God, he explains at length in another passage, when writing of the true High Priest: 

"But we say that the High Priest is not a man, but the Divine Reason (Logos), who has no part or lot in any transgressions, not only voluntary errors, but also involuntary ones. For, says Moses, he cannot be defiled either 'on account of his father,' the Mind, nor 'on account of his mother,' [*3] the [higher] Sense--in that, as I think, it is his good fortune to have incorruptible 

[p. 228]

and perfectly pure parents,--God for father, who is as well Father of all things, and for mother Wisdom, through whom all things came into genesis; and because 'his head hath been anointed with oil,'--I mean his ruling principle [*1] shineth with ray-like brilliance, so that he is deemed fit for robing in his vestures. 

"Now the Most Ancient Reason (Logos) of That-which-is is vestured with the Cosmos as his robe;--for he wrappeth himself in Earth and Water, Air and Fire, and what comes from them; the partial soul [doth clothe itself] in body; the wise man's mind in virtues. 

"And 'he shall not take the mitre from off his head,' [signifies] he shall not lay aside the royal diadem, the symbol of his admirable rule, which, however, is not that of an autocrat-emperor, but of a viceroy. 

"Nor 'will he rend his garments,'--for the Reason (Logos) of That-which-is, being the bond of all things, as hath been said, both holds together all the parts, and binds them, and does not suffer them to be dissolved or separated." [*2] 

In another passage Philo treats of the same subject still more plainly from the point of view of the Mysteries, writing as follows: 

"For there are, as it seems, two temples of God;--the one is this Cosmos, in which there is also the High Priest, His First-born Divine Reason (Logos); the other is the rational soul, whose [High] Priest is the True Man, a sensible copy of whom is he who rightly performs the prayers and sacrifices of his Father, who is ordained to wear the robe, the duplicate of the 

[p. 229]

universal heaven, in order that the cosmos may work together with man, and man with the universe." [*1] 

THE ELDER AND YOUNGER SONS OF GOD 

The Cosmic Logos is not the sensible cosmos, but the Mind thereof. This Philo explains at length. 

"It is then clear, that He who is the generator of things generated, and the artificer of things fashioned, and the governor of things governed, must needs be absolutely wise. He is in truth the father, and artificer, and governor of all in both the heaven and cosmos. 

"Now things to come are hidden in the shade of future time, sometimes at short, and sometimes at long distances. But God is the artificer of time as well. For He is father of its father; and time's father is the cosmos, which manifests its motion as the genesis of time; so that time holds to God the place of grandson. 

"For that this cosmos [*2] is the Younger Son of God, in that it is perceptible to sense. The Son who's older than this one, He hath declared to be no one [perceivable by sense], for that he is conceivable by mind alone. But having judged him worthy of the elder's rights, He hath determined that he should remain with Him alone. 

"This [cosmos], then, the Younger Son, the sensible, being set a-moving, has caused time's nature to appear and disappear; so that there nothing is which future is with God, who has the very bounds of time subject to Him. For 'tis not time, but time's archetype and paradigm, Eternity (or Aeon), which is His life. But 

[p. 230]

in Eternity naught's past, and naught is future, but all is present only." [*1] 

YET GOD IS ONE 

The Logos, then, is not God absolute, but the Son of God par excellence, and as such is sometimes referred to as "second," and once even as the "second God." Thus Philo writes: 

"But the most universal [of all things] is God, and second the Reason (Logos) of God." [*2] 

In his treatise entitled Questions and Answers, however, we read: 

"But why does He say as though [He were speaking] about another God, 'in the image of God I made "man",' [*3] but not in His own image? 

"Most excellently and wisely is the oracle prophetically delivered. For it was not possible that anything subject to death should be imaged after the supremest God who is the Father of the universes, but after the second God who is His Reason (Logos). 

"For it was necessary that the rational impress in the soul of man should be stamped [on it] by the Divine Reason (Logos), since God, who is prior even to His own Reason, transcendeth every rational nature; [so that] it was not lawful that aught generable should be made like unto Him who is beyond the Reason, and established in the most excellent and the most singular Idea [of all]." [*4] 

[p. 231]

From this passage we see that though it is true Philo calls the Logos the "second God," he does not depart from his fundamental monotheism, for the Logos is not an entity apart from God, but the Reason of God. Nevertheless, this solitary phrase of Philo's is almost invariably trotted out in the forefront of all enquiry into Philo's Logos-doctrine, in order that the difference between this phrase and the wording of the Proem to the Fourth Gospel may be insisted on as strongly as possible for controversial apologetical purposes. 

That, however, Philo is a strict monotheist may be seen from the following passage, in which he is commenting on the words of Gen. xxxi. 13: "I am the God who was seen by thee in the place of God" [*1]--where, apparently, two Gods are referred to. 

"What, then, should we say? The true God is one; they who are called gods, by a misuse of the term, are many. On which account the Holy Word [*2] has, on the present occasion, indicated the true [God] by means of the article, saying: 'I am the God'; but the [one so named] by misuse of the term, without the article, saying: 'who was seen by thee in the place,' not of the God, but only 'of God.' And what he (Moses) here calls 'God' is His Most Ancient Word (Logos)." [*3] 

THE LOGOS IS LIFE AND LIGHT

This Logos, moreover, is Life and Light. For, speaking of Intelligible or Incorporeal "Spirit" and "Light," Philo writes: 

[p. 232]

"The former he ['Moses'] called the Breath of God, because it is the most life-giving thing [in the universe], and God is the cause of life; and the latter the Light [of God], because it is by far the most beautiful thing [in the universe]. 

"For by so much more glorious and more brilliant is the intelligible [Light] than the visible, as, methinks, the sun is than darkness, and day than night, and the mind, which is the guide of the whole soul, than the sensible means of discernment, and the eyes than the body. 

"And he calls the invisible and intelligible Divine Reason (Logos) the Image of God. And of this [Image] the image [in its turn] is that intelligible light, which has been created as the image of the Divine Reason who interprets it [that is, Light's] creation. 

"[This Light] is the [One] Star, beyond [all] heavens, the Source of the Stars that are visible to the senses, which it would not be beside the mark to call All-brilliancy, and from which the sun and moon and the rest of the stars, both errant and fixed, draw their light, each according to its power." [*1] 

The necessity and reason of forming some such concept of the Logos is that man cannot bear the utter transcendency of God in His absoluteness. And applying this idea further to theophanies in human form, Philo writes: 

"For just as those who are unable to look at the sun itself look upon its reflected rays as the sun, and the [light-] changes round the moon, as the moon itself, so also do men regard the Image of God, His Angel, Reason (Logos), as Himself." [*2] 

[p. 233]

THE DIVINE VISION 

Such Divine Vision is the object of the contemplative life, for: 

"It is the special gift of those who dedicate themselves to the service (therapeyontun) of That-which-is . . . to ascend by means of their rational faculties to the height of the aether, setting before themselves 'Moses'--the Race that is the friend of God, [*1] as the leader of the way. 

"For then they will behold 'the place that is clear,' [*2] on which the immovable and unchangeable God hath set His feet, and the [regions] beneath His feet, as it were a work of sapphire stone, and as it might be the form of the firmament of heaven, the sensible cosmos, which he ['Moses'] symbolises by these things. 

"For it is seemly that those who have founded a brotherhood for the sake of wisdom, should long to see Him; and if they cannot do this, to behold at least His Image, Most Holy Reason (Logos), [*3] and after him also the most perfect work in [all] things sensible, [namely] this cosmos. 

"For the work of philosophy is naught else than the striving clearly to see these things." [*4] 

THE SONS OF GOD ON EARTH 

And later on, in the same treatise ( section 28), Philo writes still more interestingly and instructively as follows: 

[p. 234]

"But they who have attained unto wisdom, are, as they should be, called Sons of the One God, as Moses admits when he says: 'Ye are the Sons of the Lord God,' [*1] and 'God who begat thee,' [*2] and 'Is not He Himself thy father?' [*3] . . . 

"And if a man should not as yet have the good fortune to be worthy to be called a Son of God, let him strive manfully to set himself in order according to His First-born Reason (Logos), the Oldest Angel, who is as though it were the Angel-chief, of many names; for he is called Dominion, [*4] and Name of God, and Reason, and the Man-after-the-likeness, and Seeing Israel. 

"And for this reason I was induced a little before to praise the principles of them who say: 'We are all Sons of One Man.' [*5] For even if we have not yet become fit to be judged Sons of God, we may at anyrate be Sons of His Eternal Likeness, His Most Holy Reason; for Reason, the Eldest [of all Angels], is God's Likeness [or Image]." [*6] 

And so also we read elsewhere: 

"But the Reason (Logos) is God's Likeness, by whom [sc. Reason] the whole Cosmos was fashioned." [*7] 

This Divine Reason of things, then, was the means by which the Cosmos came into existence. And so we find Philo writing: 

"But if anyone should wish to make use of naked 

[p. 235]

terms, he might say that the intelligible order of things [*1] is nothing else than the Reason (Logos) of God perpetually creating the [sensible] world-order. 

THE CITY OF GOD 

"For the Intelligible City is nothing else but the reasoning of the Architect determining in His Mind to found a city perceivable by the senses after [the model of] the City which the mind alone can perceive. 

"This is the doctrine of Moses and not [only] mine. At any rate in describing the genesis of man he expressly agrees that he [man] was fashioned in the image of God. And if this is the case with the part--the image of the Image--it is plainly also the case with the whole Form, that is the whole of this sensible cosmos, which is a [far] greater imitation of the Divine Image than the human image is. 

"It is plain, moreover, that the Archetypal Seal, which we call Cosmos which is perceptible only to the intellect, must itself be the Archetypal Pattern, [*2] the Idea of ideas, the Reason (Logos) of God." [*3] 

And elsewhere also he writes: 

"Passing, then, from details, behold the grandest House or City, namely, this cosmos. Thou shalt find that the cause of it is God, by whom it came into existence. The matter of it is the four elements, out of which it has been composed. The instrument by means of which it has been built, is the Reason (Logos) of God. And the object of its building is the Goodness of the Creator." [*4] 

And again: 

[p. 236]

GOD'S SHADOW 

"Now the Reason (Logos) is the Likeness of God, by which the whole cosmos was made." [*1] 

And still more clearly: 

"But God's Shadow is His Reason (Logos), which using, as it were an instrument, He made the cosmos. And this Shadow is as it were the Archetypal Model of all else. For that as God is the Original of His Image, which he ['Moses'] now calls [His] Shadow, so, [in its turn] that Image is the model of all else, as he ['Moses'] showed when, at the beginning of the law-giving, he said: 'And God made man according to the Image of God,' [*2]--this Likeness being imaged according to God, and man being imaged according to this Likeness, which received the power of its Original." [*3] 

Moreover, the Divine Reason, as an instrument, is regarded as the means of separation and division: 

"So God, having sharpened His Reason (Logos), the Divider of all things, cut off both the formless and undifferentiated essence of all things, and the four elements of cosmos which had been separated out of it, [*4] and the animals and plants which had been compacted by means of these." [*5] 

With this we may compare the following passage from The Acts of John, where we read of the Logos: 

"But what it is in truth, as conceived of in itself, and as spoken of to thee, [*6]--it is the marking-off [or delimitation] of all things, the firm necessity of those 

[p. 237]

things that are fixed and were unsettled, the Harmony of Wisdom." [*1] 

But to return to the concept of the Logos as symbolised by the idea of a City; speaking of the six "cities of refuge," Philo allegorises them as follows: 

"Is not, then, the most ancient and most secure and best Mother-city, and not merely City, the Divine Reason (Logos), to which it is of the greatest service to flee first? 

"The other five, as though they were colonies [from it], are the Powers of the Speaker [of this Word (Logos)], of which the chief is the Creative [Potency], according to which He who creates by Reason [or Word], fashioned the cosmos. The second is the Sovereign [Potency], according to which He who created, ruleth that which is brought into existence. The third is the Merciful [Potency], by means of which the Artist hath compassion and hath mercy on His own work. The fourth is the Legislative Providence, by means of which He doth forbid the things that may not be. . . ." [*2] 

Philo then regards these "cities" as symbolising the refuges to which the various kinds of erring souls should flee to find comfort. If the Divine Reason, and the Creative and Sovereign (Kingly) Powers are too far off for the comprehension of the sinner's ignorance, then he should flee to other goals at a shorter distance, the "cities" of the Necessary Powers, namely, the Powers of Mercy and of the Law, which latter are twofold, Enjoining and Forbidding, the latter again of which is referred to vaguely, at the end of the chapter, as the "averting of evils" without further definition. 

[p. 238]

Moreover, Philo continues, there are symbols of these five Potencies mentioned in the Scriptures: 

"[The symbols] of Command and Prohibition are the [two tables of the] laws in the ark; of the Merciful Potency, the top of the ark, which he ['Moses'] calls the Mercy-seat; of the Creative and Sovereign [Potencies], the winged Cherubim, who are set over it. 

"But the Divine Reason (Logos) above them did not take any visible shape, inasmuch as no sensible object answers to it, for it is the very Likeness of God, the Eldest of all beings, one and all, which are cognisable by mind alone, the nearest to the [One and] Only One-that-is, without a space of any kind between, copied inerrantly. 

"For it is said: 'I will speak to thee from above the Mercy-seat, from between the two Cherubim.' [*1] 

"So that he who drives the Chariot [*2] of the Powers is the Word (Logos), and He who is borne in the Chariot is He who speaks [the Word], giving commandment to the Driver for the right driving of the universe." [*3] 

THE TRUE SHEPHERD 

Again, speaking of God as the True Shepherd of the universe and all things therein, the elements and all therein, the sun, moon, and planets, the stars and heavens, Philo writes: 

"[He placed] at the head His own True Reason (Logos), His First-born Son, who shall succeed unto the care of this sacred flock, as though he were the lieutenant of the Great King." [*4] 

[p. 239]

The Divine Reason of things, moreover, is regarded as the Pleroma or Fullness of all powers,--ideal space, and ideal time, if such terms can be permitted. The Logos is the Aeon or Eternity proper. And so Philo speaks of: 

"The Divine Reason (Logos) whom God Himself hath full-filled entirely and throughout with incorporeal powers." [*1]

THE APOSTLES OF GOD

This Supreme Logos, then, is filled full of powers--words, logoi, in their turn, energies of God. As Philo writes: 

"For God not disdaining to descend into the sensible world, sends forth as His apostles His own 'words' (logoi) to give succour to those who love virtue; and they act as physicians and expel the diseases of the soul." [*2] 

These "words" or "reasons" are men's angels; they are the "light-sparks" or "rays" in the heart--of which we hear so much in "Gnostic" and allied literature--all from the Father-Sun, the Light of God, or Logos proper, which Philo calls "the Light of the invisible and supremest Deity that rays and shines transcendently on every side." 

THE LADDER OF THE "WORDS" 

"When this Light shineth into the mind, the secondary beams of the 'words' (logoi) set [or are hidden]." [*3] 

In treating of the allegorical Ladder set up from earth to heaven, Philo first gives what he considers to 

[p. 240]

be its cosmic correspondences and then applies the figure to the little world of man: 

"The ladder (klimax), then, symbolically spoken of, is in the cosmos somewhat of the nature I have suggested. But if we turn our attention to it in man, we shall find it is the soul; the foot of which is as it were its earthly part--namely, sensation, while its head is as it were its heavenly part--the purest mind. 

"Up and down through all of it the 'words' (logoi) go incessantly; whenever they ascend, drawing it up together with them, divorcing it from its mortal nature, and revealing the sight of those things which alone are worth the seeing; not that when they descend they cast it down, for neither God nor yet God's Word (Logos) is cause of any loss. 

"But they accompany them [*1] [in their descent] for love of man and pity of our race, to succour, and give help, that they, by breathing into them their saving breaths, may bring the soul to life, tossed as it is upon the body ['s waves] as on a river ['s bosom]. 

"It is the God and Governor of the universe alone who doth, transcending sound and sight, walk 'mid the minds of them who have been throughly purified. For them there is an oracle, which the sage prophesied, in which is said: 'I will walk amid you; and I will be your God.' [*2] 

"But in the minds of them who are still being washed, and have not yet had throughly cleansed the life that is befouled and stained with bodies' grossness, it is the angels, the 'words' (logoi) divine, making them bright for Virtue's eyes." [*3] 

This Light of God is, as has repeatedly been said before, the Divine Reason of things. 

[p. 241]

"'For the Lord is my Light and my Saviour,' [*1] as is sung in the Hymns;--[He is] not only Light, but the Archetype of every other light; nay rather more ancient and sublime than the Archetypal Model [of all things], in that this [latter] is His Word (Logos). For the [Universal] Model is His all-full [*2] Word, the Light, while He Himself is like to naught of things created." [*3] 

THE LOGOS THE SPIRITUAL SUN 

This Word, or Logos, is further symbolised among phenomena as the sun. The Spiritual Sun is the Divine Reason--"the intelligible Model of the [sun] that moves in heaven." 

"For the Word (Logos) of God, when it enters into our earthly constitution, succours and aids those who are Virtue's kinsmen, and those that are favourably disposed to her, affording them a perfect place of refuge and salvation, and shedding on their foes [*4] destruction and ruin past repair." [*5] 

The Logos is thus naturally the panacea of all ills. 

"For the Word (Logos) is, as it were, the saving medicine for all the wounds and passions of the soul, which [Word], the lawgiver declares, we should restore 'before the sun's going down' [*6]--that is, before the 

[p. 242]

most brilliant rays of God, supremest and most manifest, go down [or set]--[rays] which through His pity for our race He has sent forth from [His high] Heaven into the mind of man. 

"For whilst that Light most Godlike abideth in the soul, we shall restore the 'word' (logos) that hath been given to us in pledge, as though it were a garment, that it may be to him who doth receive it, the special property of man--[a garment] both to cover up the shame [*1] of life, and to enjoy the gift of God and have respite in quietude, by reason of the present help of such a counsellor, and of a shielder such as will never leave the rank in which he hath been stationed." [*2] 

From all of which it seems that Philo is drawing a distinction between the Pure Light of the Logos and the reflection of that Light in the reason of man, for he goes on to say: 

"Indeed we have prolonged this long excursus for no other reason than to explain that the trained mind, moved by irregular motions to productiveness and its contrary, and, as it were, continually ascending and descending [the ladder]--when it is productive and raised into the height, then is it bathed in radiance of the archetypal immaterial rays of the Logic [*3] Source of God who bringeth all unto perfection; and when it doth descend and is barren, it is illumined by their 

[p. 243]

images, the 'words' (logoi) immortal, whom it is custom to call angels." [*1] 

THE DISCIPLES OF THE LOGOS

And a little later on Philo proceeds to speak of those who are disciples or pupils of the Holy Word or Divine Reason. 

"These are they who are truly men, lovers of temperance, and orderliness, and modesty,"--whose life he proceeds further to describe in similar terms to those he uses of the Therapeuts. 

Such a life, he concludes, "is adapted not for those who are called men, but for those who are truly so." [*2] 

For those, then, who consciously set their feet upon the ladder of true manhood, there is a Way up even to Deity Itself, for Philo writes: 

"Stability, and sure foundation, and eternally abiding in the same, changeless and immovable, is, in the first place, a characteristic of That-which-is; and, in the second, [a characteristic] of the Reason (Logos) of That-which-is--which Reason He hath called his Covenant; in the third, of the wise man; and in the fourth, of him who goeth forward [towards wisdom]." [*3] 

How, then, continues Philo, can the wicked mind think that it can stand alone--"when it is swept hither and thither by the eddies of passion, which carry the body forth to burial as a corpse?" 

And a little later on he proceeds to tell us that Eden must be taken to stand for the Wisdom of God. 

[p. 244]

"And the Divine Reason (Logos) floweth down like a river, from Wisdom, as from a source, that it may irrigate and water the heavenly shoots and plants of Virtue-lovers, that grow upon the sacred Mountain of the Gods, [*1] as though it were a paradise. 

THE RIVER OF THE DIVINE REASON 

"And this Holy Reason is divided into four sources--I mean it is separated into four virtues--each of which is a queen. For its being divided into sources [*2] does not bear any resemblance to division of space, but rather to a sovereignty, [*3] in order that, having pointed to the virtues, as its boundaries, he ['Moses'] may immediately display the wise man, who makes use of these virtues, as king, elected to kingship, not by the show of men's hands, but by choice of that Nature [namely, Virtue] which alone is truly free, and genuine, and above all bribes. . . . 

"Accordingly, one of the companions of Moses, likening this Word (Logos) to a river, says in the Hymns: 'The river of God was filled with water.' [*4] 

"Now it is absurd that any of the rivers flowing on earth should be so called; but, as it seems, he [the psalmist] clearly signifies the Divine Reason (Logos), full of the flood of Wisdom, having no part of itself bereft or empty [thereof], but rather, as has been said, being entirely diffused throughout the universe, and [again] raised up to the height [thereof], by reason of 

[p. 245]

the perpetual and continuous [circling] course of that eternally flowing fountain. 

"There is also the following song-verse: 'The rapid flow of the river maketh glad the city of God.' [*1] 

JERUSALEM ABOVE 

"What kind of city? For what is now the holy city, [*2] in which is the holy temple, was founded at a distance from sea and rivers; so that it is clear that [the writer] intends to represent by means of an under-meaning something different from the surface-sense. 

"For indeed the stream of the Divine Reason (Logos) continually flowing on with rapidity and regularity, diffuses all things through all and maketh them glad. 

"And in one sense he calls cosmos the City of God, inasmuch as, receiving the whole cup [*3] of the Divine draught it . . ., [*4] and, being made joyous, it shouteth with a joy that can never be taken away or quenched for the eternity. 

"But in another sense [he uses it of] the soul of the wise man, in which God is said to walk as in a city, for 'I will walk in you and I will be your God.' [*5] 

"And for the happy soul that stretches forth its own reasoning [*6] as a most holy drinking vessel [*7]--who is it that poureth forth the sacred measures of true joy, if not the cup-bearer of God, the [Divine] Reason (Logos), who is master of the feast?--he who differs not from 

[p. 246]

the draught, but is himself unmingled delight, and sweetness, forthpouring, good-cheer, the immortal philtre of all joy and of contentment,--if we may use the words of poetry. 

"But the City of God the Hebrews call Jerusalem, which by interpretation signifies the 'Sight of Peace.' Wherefore seek not the City of That-which-is in regions of the earth--for 'tis not made of stocks and stones; but [seek it] in the soul that doth not war, but offers unto them of the keen sight a life of contemplation and of peace." [*1] 

This, then, is how Philo understands the New Jerusalem (or Ogdoad), so familiar to us from the writings of the "Gnostic" schools, beyond which was the Pleroma or Treasure of Light. For elsewhere he writes: 

"He will offer a fair and fitting prayer, as Moses did, that God may open for us His Treasure, yea [His] Reason (Logos) sublime, and pregnant with lights divine, which he ['Moses'] has called Heaven." [*2] 

These "lights" are "reasons" (logoi), for a little further on he says: 

"Thou seest that the soul is not nourished with things earthly and contemptible, but by the reasons God rains down from His sublime and pure nature, which he ['Moses'] calls Heaven." [*3] 

THE LOGOS IS AS MANNA AND CORIANDER SEED 

And a little further on, referring to the allegorical "manna," or heavenly food, "the bread which the Lord hath given you to eat" (Ex. xvi. 13), he writes: 

[p. 247]

"Dost thou not see the food of the soul, what it is? It is the Continuing Reason (Logos) of God, like unto dew, encircling the whole of it [the soul] on all sides, and suffering no part of it to be without its share of it [the Logos]. 

"But this Reason is not apparent everywhere, but [only] in the man who is destitute of passions and vices; yea, subtle is it for the mind to distinguish, or to be distinguished by the mind, exceedingly translucent and pure for sight to see. 

"It is, moreover, as it were, a coriander seed. [*1] For agriculturalists declare that the seed of the coriander can be divided and dissected infinitely, and that every single part and section [thereof], when sown, comes up just as the whole seed. Such also is the Reason (Logos) of God, profitable in its entirety and in every part, however small it be." [*2] 

And he adds a little further on: 

"This is the teaching of the hierophant and prophet, Moses, who will say: 'This is the bread, the food which God hath given to the soul,' [*3] that He hath given [us] for meat and drink, His own Word, [*4] His own Reason, [*5] for this [Reason] is the bread which He hath given us to eat; this is the Word." [*6] 

THE LOGOS IS THE PUPIL OF GOD'S EYE 

Philo also likens the Divine Reason to the pupil of the eye--a figure that will meet us later in considering the meaning of the Kore Kosmoy ("Virgin of the World") treatise--for he writes: 

[p. 248]

"May not [this Reason] be also likened to the pupil of the eye? For just as the eye's pupil, though the smallest part [of it], does yet behold all of the zones of things existing--the boundless sea, and vastness of the air, and all of the whole heaven which the sun doth bound from east to west,--so is the sight of the Divine Reason the keenest sight of all, so that it can behold all things; by which [men] shall behold things worthy to be seen beyond white [light] [*1] itself. 

"For what could be more bright or more far-seeing than Reason Divine, by shining in which the other [lights] drive out all mist and darkness, striving to blend themselves with the soul's light." [*2] 

"MAN SHALL NOT LIVE BY BREAD ALONE" 

And again, in a passage of intense interest we read: 

"For He nourisheth us with His Reason (Logos)--the most general [of all things]. . . . And the Reason of God is above the whole cosmos; it is the most ancient and most general of all the things that are. 

"This Reason the 'fathers' [*3] knew not,--not [our] true [eternal] fathers, but those hoary in time, who say: 'Let us take a leader, and let us return unto'--the passions of--'Egypt.' [*4] 

"Therefore let God announce His [good] tidings to the soul in an image: 'Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word [*5] that proceedeth out of the mouth of God,' [*6]--that is, he shall be nourished by the whole of Reason (Logos) and by [every] part of it. For 'mouth' is a symbol of the [whole] Logos, and 'word' is its part." [*7] 

[p. 249]

These "fathers," then, are those of the lower nature, and not our true spiritual parents; it is these "fathers" that we are to abandon. 

Compare with this Matt. x. 37: "He who loveth father and mother more than Me is not worthy of Me"; and the far more striking form of the tradition in Luke xiv. 26: "If any man cometh unto Me, and doth not hate his own father and mother and wife and children and brethren and sisters, yea and his own soul also, he cannot be My disciple." 

In the Gnostic gospel, known as the Pistis Sophia (341), the mystic meaning of these parents is given at length, as signifying the rulers of the lower nature, and the Master is made to say: "For this cause have I said unto you aforetime, 'He who shall not leave father and mother to follow after Me is not worthy of Me.' What I said then was, 'Ye shall leave your parents the rulers, that ye may be children of the First Everlasting Mystery.'" 

But the most arresting point is that Matt. iv. 4, in the story of the Temptation, quotes precisely the same words of the LXX. text of Deut. viii. 3 which Philo does, beginning where he does and finishing where he does, both omitting the final and tautological "shall man live"--a very curious coincidence. Luke iv. 4 preserves only the first half of the sentence; but it evidently lay in exactly the same form in which Philo uses it before the first and third Evangelists in their second or "Logia" source. It was, then, presumably a frequently quoted text. 

THE LOGOS-MEDIATOR 

The Divine Reason is further figured as a true "Person," the Mediator between God and man. Thus Philo writes: 

[p. 250]

"And on His angel-ruling and most ancient Reason (Logos), the Father who created all, hath bestowed a special gift--that standing between them as a Boundary, [*1] he may distinguish creature from Creator. 

"He [the Reason] ever is himself the suppliant unto the Incorruptible on mortal kind's behalf in its distress, and is the King's ambassador to subject nature. 

"And he exulteth in his gift, and doth majesticly insist thereon, declaring: 'Yea, have I stood between the Lord and you,' [*2]--not increate as God, nor yet create as ye, but in the midst between the [two] extremes, hostage to both: to Him who hath created him, for pledge that the creature never will remove itself entirely [from Him], nor make revolt, choosing disorder in order's place; and to the thing created for good hope that God, the Merciful, will never disregard the work of His own hands. 'For I will herald forth the news of peace to the creation from Him who knows how to make wars to cease, from God the Everlasting Peacekeeper.'" [*3] 

In considering what is claimed to be the elaborate symbolism of the sacred vestments of the High Priest, and the nature of this symbolical office, Philo declares that the twelve stones upon the breast of the High Priest, in four rows of three each, are a symbol of the Divine Reason (Logos), which holds together and regulates the universe; this breastplate, then, is the logion or sacred oracle of God. 

"For it was necessary that he who was consecrated to the Father of the cosmos, should have [His] Son, 

[p. 251]

the most perfect in virtue, as intercessor, [*1] both for the forgiveness [*2] of sins, and for the abundant supply of the most unstinted blessings. 

"It probably also imparts the preliminary teaching to the Servant of God, [*3] that if he cannot be worthy of Him who made the cosmos, he should nevertheless without ceasing strive to be worthy of that cosmos; for when he has [once] been clothed with its likeness, [*4] he is bound forthwith, by carrying about the image of the model [*5] in his head, of his own self to change himself as though it were from man into the nature of the cosmos, and, if we ought to say so [*6]--nay, he who speaks on truth ought to speak truth!--be [himself] a little cosmos." [*7] 

THE YOGA OF PLOTINUS 

With these most instructive indications we may compare the intensely interesting passage of Plotinus in his essay "On Intelligible Beauty," where he gives his yoga-system, so to speak. It is perhaps the most important passage that has come down to us from the coryphaeus of Later Platonism, giving, as it does, in every probability, the method of the school whereby ecstasis was attained. 

[p. 252]

"Let us, then, form a mental image of this cosmos with each of its parts remaining what it is, and yet interpenetrating one another, [imagining] them all together into one as much as we possibly can,--so that whatsoever one comes first into the mind as the 'one' (as for instance the outer sphere), there immediately follows also the sight of the semblance of the sun, and together with it that of the other stars, [*1] and the earth, and sea, and all things living, as though in [one] transparent sphere,--in fine, as though all things could be seen in it. 

"Let there, then, be in the soul some semblance of a sphere of light [transparent], having all things in it, whether moving or still, or some of them moving and others still. 

"And, holding this [sphere] in the mind, conceive in thy self another [sphere], removing [from it all idea of] mass; take from it also [the idea of] space, and the phantom of matter in thy mind; and do not try to image another sphere [merely] less in bulk than the former. 

"Then invoking God who hath made [that true sphere] of which thou holdest the phantom [in thy mind], pray that He may come. 

"And may He come with his own cosmos, [*2] with all the Gods therein--He being one and all, and each one all, united into one, yet different in their powers, and yet, in that one [power] of multitude all one. 

"Nay, rather the One God is all [the Gods] for that He falleth not short [of Himself] though all of them are [from Him]; [and] they are all together, yet each again apart in [some kind of] an unextended state, possessing no form perceptible to sense. 

[p. 253]

"For, otherwise, one would be in one place, another in another, and [each] be 'each,' and not 'all' in itself, without parts other from the others and [other] from itself. 

"Nor is each whole a power divided and proportioned according to a measurement of parts; but this [whole] is the all, all power, extending infinitely and infinitely powerful;--nay, so vast is that [divine world-order [*1]], that even its 'parts' are infinite." [*2] 

THE RACE OF GOD 

But to return to Philo. The rational soul or mind of man is potentially the Intelligible Cosmos or Logos; thus he writes: 

"The great Moses did not call the species of the rational soul by a name resembling any one of the things created, but he called it the image of the Divine and Invisible, deeming it a true [image] brought into being and impressed with the soul of God, of which the Signet is the Eternal Reason (Logos)." [*3] 

All of which the disciplined soul shall realise in himself. Of such a man Abraham is a type, for: 

"Abandoning mortal things, he 'is added to the people of God,' [*4] plucking the fruit of immortality, having become equal to the angels. For the angels are the host of God, incorporeal and happy souls." 

[p. 254]

The angels are the "people" of God; but there is a still higher degree of union, whereby a man becomes one of the "Race" or "Kin" of God. This "Race" is an intimate union of all them who are "kin to Him"; they become one. For this Race "is one, the highest one, but 'people' is the name of many." 

"As many, then, as have advanced in discipline and instruction, and been perfected [therein], have their lot among this 'many.' 

"But they who have passed beyond these introductory exercises, becoming natural Disciples of God, receiving wisdom free from all toil, migrate to this incorruptible and perfect Race, receiving a lot superior to their former lives in genesis." [*1] 

And that the mind is immortal may be shown allegorically from the death of Moses, who, says Philo, migrated "by means of the Word (Logos) of the Cause, [*2] by whom the whole cosmos was created." 

This is said "in order that thou mayest learn that God regards the wise man as of equal honour with the cosmos; for it is by means of the same Reason (Logos) that He hath made the universe, and bringeth back the perfect man from earthly things unto Himself again." [*3] 

But enough of Philo for the moment. Sufficient has been given to let the reader hear the Alexandrian speak for himself on the central idea of his cosmos. Much else could be added--indeed, volumes could be written on the subject--for it gives us one of the most important backgrounds of Christian origins, and without a thorough knowledge of Hellenistic theology it is impossible in any way to get our values of many things correctly. 

Footnotes

^199:1 In all, upwards of sixty Philonean tractates are preserved to us; and in addition we have also numerous fragments from lost works.

^200:1 Philo is known to the Jews as Yedidyah ha-Alakhsanderi.

^200:2 Thus, in D. V. C.,  section 3; M. ii. 475, P. 893 (Ri. v. 309, C. 65), referring to his beloved Therapeuts, he himself says: "They have also works of ancient authors who were once heads of their school, and left behind them many monuments of the method used in allegorical works." Nor was this "allegorising" Jewish only; it was common. It was applied to Homer; it was the method of the Stoics. Indeed, this "treatment (therapeia) of myths" was the only way in which the results of the philosophy and science of the time could be brought into touch with popular faith.

The text I use is that of Richter (M. C. E.), Philonis Judaei Opera Omnia, in Bibliotheca Sacra Patrum Ecclesiae Graecorum (Leipzig, 1828-1830), 8 vols. M. refers to the edition of Mangey; P. to the Paris edition; Ri. stands for that of Richter--thus abbreviated so as not to be confused with R., which elsewhere stands for Reitzenstein; C. stands for Conybeare's critical text of the D. V. C. (Oxford, 1895), the only really critical text of any tractate which we so far possess.

^200:3 "Philo," in Smith and Wace's Dict. of Christ. Biog. (London, 1887), iv. 357-389--by far the best general study on the subject in English. Drummond's (J.) two volumes, Philo Judaeus, or The Alexandrian Philosophy (London, 1888), may also be consulted, but they leave much to be desired. The only English translation is that of Yonge (C. D.), The Works of Philo Judaeus (London, 1854) in Bonn's Library; but it is by no means satisfactory, and I have in every instance of quotation made my own version.

^202:1 Or "divinely prompted" (De Vit. Mos., ii. 5-7).

^203:1 De Vit. Mos., iii. 23, 24.

^204:1 For a sketch of ancient Alexandria, see F. F. F., pp. 96-120.

^205:1 For a translation of the famous tractate on this subject, from the recent critical text of Conybeare, see F. F. F., pp. 66-82.

^205:2 D. V. C.,  section 3; M. ii. 474, P. 891 (Ri. v. 308, C. 56).

^206:1 De Sept.,  section section 3, 4; M. ii. 279, P. 1175 (Ri. v. 21, 22).

^207:1 De Mut. Nom.,  section 4; M. i. 583, P. 1049 (Ri. iii. 163, 164).

^208:1 Quod Om. Prob. L.,  section 11; M. ii. 456, P. 876 (Ri. v. 284, 285).

^208:2 C., p. 146, 1. 13.

^208:3 D. V. C.,  section 9; M. ii. 482, P. 900 (Ri. v. 319, C. 111).

^209:1 Or shrine--a small room or closet.

^209:2 That is, a sanctuary or monastery, the latter in the sense of a place where one can be alone or in solitude. This is the first use of the term "monastery" known in classical antiquity, and, as we see, it bears a special and not a general meaning.

^209:3 Ibid.,  section 3; M. ii. 475, P. 892 (Ri. v. 309, C. 60).

^210:1 Grenfell and Hunt, New Sayings of Jesus (London, 1904), p. 18.

^210:2 Lit., ye mystae and hierophants.

^210:3 Lit., orgies--that is, "burstings forth" of inspiration, or revealings.

^210:4 De Prof.,  section 16; M. i. 558, P. 462 (Ri. iii. 128).

^210:5 Leg. Alleg., i. 39, 4.

^210:6 deisidaimones--here meaning the literalists; it generally signifies the religious in a good sense, and the superstitious in a bad one.

^211:1 De Cherub.,  section 12; M. i. 146, P. 115 (Ri. i. 208).

^211:2 Ibid.,  section 14; M. i. 147, P. 116 (Ri. i. 210).

^211:3 Cf. Leg. Alleg., ii.  section 15; M. i. 76, P. 1097 (Ri. i. 105).

^211:4 Lit., orgies.

^212:1 De Gigan.,  section 12; M. i. 270, P. 291 (Ri. ii. 61).

^212:2 Philo, apparently, would have it that the sacrifice of the ram, which was a symbol of virility, signified the obligation of chastity prior to initiation into the higher rites.

^212:3 De Vit. Mos., iii.  section 17; M. ii. 157, P. 675 (Ri. iv. 216). The Therapeuts, with Philo, then do not mean "Healers," as has been sometimes thought, but "Servants of God."

^212:4 D. V. C.,  section 2; M. ii. 473, P. 891 (Ri. v. 306, C. 41, 42).

^212:5 Quod Det. Pot. Insid.,  section 27; M. i. 211, P. 174 (Ri. i. 295).

^213:1 Ibid.,  section 48; M. i. 224, P. 186 (Ri. i. 314).

^213:2 Leg. Alleg., i.  section 32; M. i. 64, P. 59 (Ri. i. 87).

^214:1 Leg. Alleg., ii.  section xv.; M. i. 76, P. 1097 (Ri. i. 106).

^214:2 Which they brought out of Egypt--that is, the body.

^214:3 De Sacrif.,  section 16; M. i. 174, P. 139 (Ri. i. 245).

^214:4 Quaest. in Gen., iv.  section 2; P. Auch. 243 (Ri. vii. 61).

^215:1 Gen. xviii. 6.

^215:2 That is, apparently, the "good" = the "incorporeal," and the "subject" = the "corporeal."

^216:1 De Sacrif.,  section 15; M. i. 173, 174; P. 139 (Ri. i. 244, 245).

^216:2 De Cherub.,  section 12; M. i. 146, P. 115 (Ri. i. 208).

^217:1 Ibid.,  section 13; M. i. 147, P. 116, 117 (Ri. i. 209).

^218:1 Jer. iv. 3--where A.V. translates: "Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, My father, thou art the guide of my youth?"

^219:1 De Cherub.,  section 14, 15; M. i. 148, P. 116, 117 (Ri. i. 210, 211).

^219:2 In this, however, I venture to think that Conybeare is mistaken; it was a common dogma of the Hellenistic theology of the time.

^219:3 Op. sup. cit., pp. 302, 303.

^219:4 De Execrat.,  section 7; M. ii. 435, P. 936 (Ri. v. 254). See "Myth of Man in the Mysteries," S.  section 25 J.

^220:1 D. V. C.,  section 8; M. ii. 482, P. 899 (Ri. v. 318, C. 108).

^220:2 Elsewhere an epithet of the Logos.

^220:3 De Mut. Nom.,  section 23; M. i. 598, P. 1065 (Ri. iii. 183).

^220:4 Ibid.,  section 24; M. i. 599, P. 1065 (Ri. iii. 184).

^220:5 De Praem. et Paen.,  section 18; M. ii. 425, P. 927 (Ri. v. 241).

^220:6 Leg. Alleg., iii.  section 63; M. i. 122, 123, P. 94 (Ri. i. 175). Cf. Gen. xxx. 2: "Am I in God's stead?"

^221:1 Gen. xxi. 6. A.V.: "God hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear will laugh with me."

^221:2 Leg. Alleg., iii.  section 77; M. i. 131, P. 101 (Ri. i. 187). Cf. also De Cherub.,  section 13; M. i. 147, P. 115 (Ri. i. 209).

^222:1 Gen. xxix. 31. Cong. Erud. Grat.,  section 2; M. i. 520, P. 425 (Ri. iii. 72).

^223:1 De Spec. Leg.,  section 7; M. ii. 275, P. 774 (Ri. v. 15, 16).

^223:2 De Som., i.  section 35; M. i. 651, P. 595 (Ri. iii. 257).

^224:1 De Ser. Num. Vind., 565 C.; ed. Bern. iii. 459. See, for a translation of the whole Vision, my "Notes on the Eleusinian Mysteries," Theosophical Review (April, May, June, 1898), xxii. 145 ff., 232 ff., 312 ff.

^224:2 Gen. xxxviii. 11 ff.

^224:3 Quod Deus Immut.,  section 29; M. i. 293, P. 313 (Ri. ii. 94).

^224:4 Lit., "sensible."

^224:5 De Ebriet.,  section 8; M. i. 361, P. 244 (Ri. i. 189).

^225:1 De Mut. Nom.,  section 2; M. i. 579, P. 1045 (Ri. iii. 159).

^225:2 De Mund. Op.,  section 2; M. i. 2, P. 2 (Ri. i. 6).

^226:1 De Agric.,  section 13; M. i. 308, P. 195 (Ri. ii. 116).

^227:1 Or Rising. Cf. Zech. vi. 12--where A.V. translates: "Behold the man whose name is The Branch." Philo, however, follows LXX., but reads anthrupos instead of ane'r. The Man-doctrine of the "Poemandres" and of the Naassene Document was a fundamental one with Philo.

^227:2 De Confus. Ling.,  section 14; M. i. 414, P. 329 (Ri. ii. 262).

^227:3 Cf. Lev. xxi. 11.

^228:1 to egemonikon--that is, the authoritative or responsible part of the soul, namely, the reason--a Stoic technical term.

^228:2 De Prof.,  section 20; M. i. 562, P. 466 (Ri. iii. 133). The quotations look back to Lev. xxi. 10, but the readings in the first two differ from the LXX.

^229:1 De Som.,  section 37; M. i. 653, P. 597 (Ri. iii. 260).

^229:2 That is the sensible and not the intelligible cosmos.

^230:1 Quod Deus Im.,  section 6; M. i. 277, P. 298 (Ri. ii. 72, 73).

^230:2 Leg. Alleg.,  section 21; M. i. 82, P. 1103 (Ri. i. 113).

^230:3 Cf. Gen. i. 27. Philo reads en eikoni instead of the kat' eikona of LXX., and epoiesa instead of epoiese.

^230:4 Namely, in His Reason. The Greek text is quoted by Eusebius, Praep. Evang., vii. 13 (M. ii. 625, Ri. vi. 175), who gives it as from Bk. i. of Quaest. et Solut. The original text is lost, but we have a Latin Version--q.v. ii.  section 62 (Ri. vi. 356)--which, however, in this instance, has made sorry havoc of the original.

^231:1 Philo and LXX. both have: "egw' eimi o theos o oftheis soi en topui theou"; whereas A.V. translates: "I am the God of Beth-el"--that is, the "House or Place of El or God."

^231:2 Here meaning the Inspiration of Scripture.

^231:3 De Som.,  section i. 39; M. i. 655, P. 599 (Ri. iii. 262, 263).

^232:1 De Mund. Op.,  section 8; M. i. 6, 7, P. 6 (Ri. i. 11).

^232:2 De Som.,  section 41; M. i. 657, P. 600 (Ri. iii. 264).

^233:1 This is the Race of the Logos.

^233:2 Cf. Ex. xxiv. 10. A.V. does not render this reading, but LXX. gives "The place where the God of Israel stood."

^233:3 Which here, as also above, Philo would equate with the "Place of God."

^233:4 De Confus. Ling.,  section 20; M. i. 419, P. 333, 334 (Ri. ii. 268, 269).

^234:1 Deut. xiv. 1. A.V.: "Ye are the children of the Lord your God." LXX.: "Ye are the sons of the Lord your God."

^234:2 Deut. xxxii. 18. A.V.: "God that formed thee." LXX. has the same reading as Philo.

^234:3 Deut. xxxii. 6.

^234:4 arxe', or Source, Beginning, as in the Proem to the Fourth Gospel.

^234:5 Gen. xlii. 11.

^234:6 De Confus. Ling.,  section 28; M. i. 426, 427, P. 341 (Ri. ii. 279).

^234:7 De Monarch., ii.  section 5; M. ii. 225, P. 823 (Ri. iv. 302).

^235:1 Or the cosmos, which is comprehensible by the intellect alone.

^235:2 Or Paradigm.

^235:3 De Mund. Op.,  section 6; M. i. 5, P. 5 (Ri. i. 9).

^235:4 De Cherub.,,  section 35; M. i. 162, P. 129 (Ri. i. 228).

^236:1 De Monarch., ii.  section 5; M. ii. 225, P. 823 (Ri. iv. 302).

^236:2 Gen. i. 26.

^236:3 Leg. Alleg., iii. 31; M. i. 106, 107, P. 79 (Ri. i. 152, 153).

^236:4 Sc. the essence.

^236:5 Sc. elements. Quis Rer. Div. Her.,  section 27; M. i. 492, P. 500 (Ri. iii. 32).

^236:6 John, to whom the Master is speaking.

^237:1 F. F. F., 436.

^237:2 De Prof.,  section 18; M. i. 560, P. 464 (Ri. iii. 130). There is unfortunately a lacuna in the text, so that we do not learn the characteristics of the fifth potency; but this is explained elsewhere,--the Legislative Providence being a twofold potency, namely, the Enjoining and the Forbidding.

^238:1 Ex. xxv. 22.

^238:2 This plainly refers to the Mercabah or Chariot of the Vision of Ezechiel.

^238:3 De Prof.,  section 19; M. i. 561, P. 465 (Ri. iii. 131).

^238:4 De Agric.,  section 12; M. i. 308, P. 195 (Ri. ii. 116).

^239:1 De Som., i.  section 11; M. i. 630, P. 574 (Ri. iii. 227).

^239:2 Ibid.,  section 12; M. i. 631, P. 575 (Ri. iii. 229).

^239:3 Ibid.,  section 13.

^240:1 Sc. the souls.

^240:2 Lev. xxvi. 12.

^240:3 De Som.,  section 23; M. i. 642, 643, P. 587 (Ri. iii. 245, 246).

^241:1 Ps. xxvii. 1. A.V. "salvation." LXX. reads futismos, "illumination"--a technical term among the mystics of Early Christendom for baptism--instead of the fus of Philo.

^241:2 That is, the Logos as Pleroma.

^241:3 De Som.,  section 13.

^241:4 Sc. the vices of the soul.

^241:5 Ibid.,  section 15; M. i. 363, P. 578 (Ri. iii. 232).

^241:6 This seems to be somewhat reminiscent of the custom of evening prayer in the Therapeut and other similar communities, when, at the time of the setting of the sun, it was enjoined that "rational" praises should be restored or given back to God, for benefits received.

Philo, however, is here somewhat laboriously commenting, in allegorical fashion, on the pawnbroking bye-law in Ex. xxii. 26, 27: "But if thou takest in pledge thy neighbour's garment, thou shalt give it him back before the going down of the sun. For this is his covering; this is the only garment of his indecency. In what [else] shall he sleep? If, then, he shall cry unto me, I will give ear to him; for I am pitiful." (See  section 16.) The A.V. translates otherwise.

^242:1 Cf. the well-known logos from the Gospel according to the Egyptians, "Unless ye tread on the garment of shame."

^242:2 De Som.,  section 18; M. i. 637, P. 582 (Ri. iii. 238).

^242:3 Or Rational.

^243:1 Ibid.,  section 19; M. i. 638, P. 582 (Ri. iii. 239).

^243:2 Ibid., 20; M. i. 639, P. 584 (Ri. iii. 241). Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 24.

^243:3 De Som., ii.  section 36; M. i. 690, P. 1140 (Ri. iii. 312).

^244:1 Lit., Olympian.

^244:2 arxai mean sources, but also principles and sovereignties. It is, however, impossible to keep the word-play in English.

^244:3 Or kingdom, namely, "of the heavens," or rulership of the celestial realms, or rather of one's self.

^244:4 Ps. lxv. 9. So also LXX.; but A.V., "Thou greatly enrichest it with the river of God, which is full of water."

^245:1 Ps. xlvi. 4. LXX. has the plural, rivers or streams. A.V. translates: "There is a river the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God."

^245:2 The physical Jerusalem in Palestine.

^245:3 krateira--lit., crater or mixing-bowl.

^245:4 A lacuna occurs here in the text.

^245:5 A loose quotation of Lev. xxvi. 12, as already cited above.

^245:6 logismon.

^245:7 ekpuma.

^246:1 De Som., ii.  section section 37-39; M. i. 690-692, P. 1141, 1142 (Ri. iii. 312-315).

^246:2 Leg. Alleg., iii.  section 34; M. i. 108, P. 80 (Ri. i. 155).

^246:3 Ibid.,  section 56; M. i. 119, P. 90 (Ri. i. 170).

^247:1 The grain of mustard seed of the Gospels and of the "Gnostics."

^247:2 Ibid.,  section 59; M. i. 121, 122, P. 92 (Ri. i. 172, 173).

^247:3 A gloss on Ex. xiv. 15.

^247:4 rheima.

^247:5 logos.

^247:6 Leg. Alleg., iii.,  section 0; M. i. 121, P. 92 (Ri. i. 173).

^248:1 The reading seems to be faulty.

^248:2 Ibid.,  section 59.

^248:3 Cf. Deut. viii. 13.

^248:4 Num. xiv. 4.

^248:5 rhe'mati.

^248:6 Deut. viii. 3.

^248:7 Leg. Alleg., iii.  section 61; M. i. 121, P. 93 (Ri. i. 174).

^250:1 Cf. the "Gnostic" Horos (not the Egyptian Horus) as referred to previously.

^250:2 Perhaps a reflection of Num. xvi. 48.

^250:3 Quis Rer. Div. Her.,  section 42; M. i. 501, 502, P. 504 (Ri. iii. 45, 46).

^251:1 parakle'tui--as paraclete, or intercessor, or defender (a term of the law courts), or comforter.

^251:2 amnesteian--lit., amnesty, or forgetfulness of wrong.

^251:3 ton tou theou therapeyte'n--the Therapeut.

^251:4 The dress of the High Priest, then, symbolised the cosmos--the elements, etc. May we deduce from this that in one of the Therapeut initiations the approyed candidate was clothed in such a symbolic robe?

^251:5 Sc. the Logos as cosmos.

^251:6 Signifying a religious scruple as referring to a matter of initiation.

^251:7 De Vit. Mos., iii.  section 14; M. ii. 155, P. 673 (Ri. iv. 212, 213).

^252:1 Presumably the seven "planetary spheres" of "difference," as set forth in Plato's Timaeus.

^252:2 Sc. the intelligible or spiritual world-order.

^253:1 Intelligible cosmos.

^253:2 Ennead, V. viii. (cap. ix.), 550 A-D.; Plot. Op. Om., ed. F. Creuzer (Oxford, 1835), ii. 1016, 1017. M. N. Bouillet--in Les Enneades de Plotin (Paris, 1861), iii. 122, 123--gives, as usual, an excellently clear rendering, but it is not easy to recognise some of his sentences in the text.

^253:3 De Plant. Noe,  section 5; M. i. 332, P. 216, 217 (Ri. ii. 148).

^253:4 A gloss on Gen. xxv. 8: "And was added (A.V. gathered) to his people."

^254:1 De Sacrif.,  section 2; M. i. 164, P. 131 (Ri. i. 233).

^254:2 Deut. xxxiv. 5. A.V.: "According to the word of the Lord."

^254:3 De Sacrif.,  section 3; M. i. 165, P. 131 (Ri. i. 233).

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 255]

IX

PLUTARCH: CONCERNING THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 

FOREWORD 

IN the chapter on Philo we attempted to set before the reader some outlines of the central doctrine of Hellenistic theology--the sublime concept of the Logos--as envisaged by a learned Jew of the Diaspora, steeped in Hellenism, and living in the capital of Egypt and the centre of the intellectual life of Greater Greece. 

In the present chapter we shall endeavour to give the reader a further insight into this master-idea from another standpoint, and shall reproduce the views of a learned Greek, who, while remaining on the ground of Hellenic traditions proper, turns his eyes to Egypt, and reads what part of its mysterious message he can decipher, in Greek modes of thought. 

Plutarch, of Chaeroneia in Boeotia, nourished in the second half of the first century A.D., and so follows immediately on Philo and on Paul; like Philo, however, he knows nothing of the Christians, though like the Alexandrian he treats of precisely those problems and questions which were and are of pre-eminent interest for Christians. 

Plutarch chooses as his theme the myth and mysteries of Osiris and Isis. He gives the myth in its main outlines, and introduces us into the general religious 

[p. 256]

atmosphere of the Egyptian belief of what we may, perhaps, be allowed to call "Demotic" times. But he does far more than this. Initiated himself into the Osiriaca, of which there was apparently a thiasos at Delphi, though on the one hand he possesses more knowledge of formal details than he feels himself permitted to disclose, on the other hand he is aware that the "true initiate of Isis" is one who goes far beyond any formal reception of the symbolic mysteries; the true initiate must of his own initiative for ever keep searching and probing more deeply into the intimate reason of things, as adumbrated by the "things said and done" in the sacred rites (iii. 3). 

For this task Plutarch is well equipped, not only by his wide knowledge of the philosophy and theology and science of his day, but also by the fact that he held a high office at Delphi in the service of Apollo and also in connection with the Dionysiac rites. He was almost certainly a hierophant, and no merely formal one at that. 

Plutarch accordingly gives a most instructive exposition, which should enable us, if only we are content to put ourselves in his place, and condescend to think in the terms of the thought of his day, to review the ancient struggle between physical reason and formal theology which was then in full conflict--a conflict that has been renewed on a vastly extended scale for the last few centuries, and which is still being fought to a finish or honourable truce in our own day. 

Our initiated philosopher is on the side neither of atheism or pure physicism, nor on that of superstition, as he understood those terms in his day; he takes a middle ground, and seeks final refuge in the fair vision of the Logos; and that, too, in all humility, for he knows well that whatever he can say is at best but a 

[p. 257]

dim reflection of the glory of the Highest, as indeed he expressly tells us when writing: 

"Nor can the souls of men here on the earth, swathed as they are in bodies and enwrapped in passions, commune with God, except so far as they can reach some dun sort of a dream of Him with the perception of a mind trained in philosophy" (lxxiii. 2). 

We accordingly find Plutarch discussing the various theories of his day which professed to explain the mythological and theological enigmas of the ancients, with special reference to the Osiris myth. 

He discusses the theory of Evemerus, that the gods were nothing but ancient kings and worthies, and dismisses it as no really satisfactory explanation (xxiii.). 

He then proceeds to consider the theory that these things refer to the doings of daimones,--which he thinks a decided improvement on that of Evemerus (xxv.). 

Thence he passes to the theories of the Physicists or natural phenomenalists (xxxii.), and of the Mathematici--that is to say, the Pythagorean speculations as to the celestial spheres, and their harmonies (xli.). 

In each of these three latter theories he thinks there is some truth; still each by itself is insufficient; they must be combined (xlv.), and even then it is not enough. 

He next considers the question of first principles, and discusses the theories of the One, the Two, and the Many; again finding something to be said for each view, and yet adopting none of them as all-sufficient. 

But of all attempted interpretations he finds the least satisfactory to be that of those who are content to limit the hermeneutics of the mystery-myths simply to the operations of ploughing and sowing. With this "vegetation god" theory he has little patience, and stigmatises its professors as that "dull crowd" (lxv.). 

[p. 258]

[paragraph continues] And here, perhaps, some of us may think that Plutarch is not out of date even in the twentieth century of grace, and his arguments might be recommended to the consideration of those anthropologists who are just now with such complacency running to death what Mr Andrew Lang humourously calls the "Covent Garden" theory. 

Further on, dealing as he does with the puzzling question of Egyptian "animal worship," Plutarch is brought face to face with many problems of "taboo" and "totemism," and he is not without interest in what he says on these subjects (lxxii. f.), and in the theories of utilitarianism and symbolism which he adduces (lxxiv.). 

Finally, he gives us his view of the rationale of the custom of incense-burning (lxxix.), which should be of some concern to many in present-day Christian communities. 

But the whole of this complex of custom and rites, puzzling and self-contradictory as they may appear, and the whole of the riddles and veiled enigmas of Egyptian priestly tradition, are, Plutarch believes, resolvable into transparent simplicity by a proper understanding of the true nature of man and of his relation to Divine Nature, that Wisdom who is the eternal and inseparable spouse of Divine Reason, the Logos. 

It would perhaps have been simpler for some of my readers--it certainly would have been shorter--had I condensed what Plutarch has to say; but my desire is rather to let this student of the comparative theology of his day speak for himself, and not to give my own views; for I still believe, in spite of the superior formal education of the twentieth century, that we cannot normally know more about the ancient 

[p. 259]

mysteries and their inner purport than the best minds who were initiated into them while they still flourished. 

For not only are we without the precise data which these ancients possessed, but also the phase of thought through which we have recently been passing, and in which we mostly still are, is not one which can sympathetically tolerate those very considerations which, in my opinion, provide the most fertile ground of explanation of the true inwardness of what was best in those mystery-traditions. 

Moreover, I have thought it of service to give a full version of this treatise of Plutarch's from a decent critical text, [*1] for the only translation in English read by me is by no means a careful piece of work, [*2] and manifestly rendered from a very imperfect text; also, the language of Plutarch in some passages appears to me to be deserving of more careful handling than has as yet been accorded it, for a number of sentences seem to have been purposely phrased so as to be capable of conveying a double meaning. 

Finally, with regard to his own interpretation, I would suggest that Plutarch, as was natural to a Greek, has more insisted on intellectual modes of thought than perhaps an Egyptian priest would have been inclined to do; for it seems probable that to the Egyptian mind the chief interest would lie in the possibility of the realisation of immediate contact with the Mystery in all those modes which are not so much intellectual as 

[p. 260]

sensible; in other words, it would be by making himself a vehicle of the Great Breath in his body rather than a mirror of the Mystery in his mind, that the son of the Nile Land would seek for union. 

It is, moreover, of interest to find that Plutarch addresses his treatise to a lady. For though we have extant several moral tractates addressed to wives--such as Porphyry's Letter to Marcella, and Plutarch's Consolation to his own wife, Timoxena--it is rare to find philosophical treatises addressed to women, and nowadays many women are once more interested in such "philosophy." 

Plutarch wrote his essay at Delphi (lxviii. 6), and addressed it to Klea, a lady who held a distinguished position among the Delphic priestesses, and who had herself been initiated into the Osiriac Mysteries--her very name Klea being, perhaps, her mystery-name (xxxv.). The treatise is, therefore, addressed to one who was prepared to read into it more than appears on the surface. 

It should also be remembered that in all probability the main source of Plutarch's information was the now lost treatise of Manetho on the Egyptian Religion, and in this connection it is of interest to record Granger's opinion, who, in referring to Plutarch's De Iside et Osiride, says: 

"First he deals with those opinions which identify the Egyptian gods with natural objects--Osiris with the Nile, Isis with the land, and so on. Then he considers the interpretations of those who identify the gods with the sun and moon, etc. (ch. lxi.). These speculations summarise for us, at first or second hand, some of the Hermetic books current in Plutarch's time." [*1] 

Footnotes

^259:1 I use the texts of Parthey, Plutarch: Uber Isis und Osiris (Berlin, 1850), and of Bernardakis, Plutarchi Chaeronensis Moralia ("Bibliotheca Teubneriana"; Leipzig, 1889), ii. 471 ff.

^259:2 See King (C. W.), Plutarch's Morals: Theosophical Essays (London, 1889), pp. 1-71. S. Squire's Plutarch's Treatise of Isis and Osiris (Cambridge, 1744) I have not read, and few can procure a copy nowadays.

^260:1 Granger (F.), "The Poemander of Hermes Trismegistus," Jour. Theol Stud., vol. v. No. 19, p. 399.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 261]

CONCERNING ISIS AND OSIRIS

ADDRESS TO KLEA CONCERNING GNOSIS AND THE SEARCH FOR TRUTH [*1] 

I. 1. [*2] While all who have mind, O Klea, should ask for all their blessings from the Gods--let us, by pursuing after them, pray to obtain from them those [blessings] of gnosis [*3] concerning them, as far as 'tis within the reach of men; in that there's nothing greater for a man to get, nor more majestic for a God to give, than Truth. 

2. Of other things their God gives men what they require, whereas of mind and wisdom He gives a share [*4] to them--since He [Himself] possesses these and uses [them]. 

For the Divine is neither blest through silver and through gold, nor strong through thunderings and lightnings, but [blest and strong] by gnosis and by wisdom. 

3. And thus most finely of all things which he hath said about the Gods--sounding aloud: 

Yea have they both a common source and one [fair] native land;
But Zeus came into being first and he knew more--

hath Homer made pronouncement of the primacy of Zeus as more majestic, in that in gnosis and in wisdom it [*5] is older. 

4. Nay, I believe that the good fortune of aeonian life--the which the God hath gotten for his lot--is 

[p. 262]

that by reason of His gnosis the things in genesis should not entirely die; for when the knowing of existing things and being wise is taken from it, freedom from death is Time--not Life. 

Footnotes

^261:1 I have added some sub-headings as an indication of contents.

^261:2 I have numbered the paragraphs for greater convenience of reference.

^261:3 episte'mes.

^261:4 A play on didusin and meta-didusin.

^261:5 Sc. the primacy.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

THE ART OF KNOWING AND OF DIVINISING

II. 1. Wherefore the longing for the Godly state is a desire for Truth, and specially the [truth] about the Gods, in so much as it doth embrace reception of the sacred [things]--instruction and research; [*1] a work more holy than is all and every purging rite and temple-service, and not least pleasing to that Goddess whom thou servest, in that she is particularly wise and wisdom-loving, seeing her very name doth seem to indicate that knowing and that gnosis [*2] is more suitable to her than any other title. 

2. For that "Isis" is Greek, [*3] and [so is] "Typhon"--in that he's foe unto the Goddess, and is "puffed up" [*4] through [his] unknowing and deceit, and tears the Holy Reason (Logos) into pieces and makes away with it; the which the Goddess gathers up again and recomposes, and transmits to those perfected in the art of divinising, [*5]--which by the means of a continually sober life 

[p. 263]

and by [their] abstinence from many foods and sexual indulgences, tempers intemperate pleasure-love, and doth accustom [them] to undergo, without being broken down, the rigorous tasks of service in the sacred [rites], the end of which is gnosis of the First and Lordly One, the One whom mind alone can know, [*1] for whom the Goddess calls on [them] to seek, though He is by her side and one with her. 

3. Nay more, the very appellation of the holy [place] doth plainly promise gnosis, that is eidesis, of That-which-is; for it is named Iseion, as though "of them who shall know" [*2] That-which-is, if that with reason (logos) and with purity [*3] we enter in the holy [places] of the Goddess. 

Footnotes

^262:1 ten mathesin . . . kai ze'tesin. Mathesis was the technical Pythagorean term for gnosis.

^262:2 to eid-enai kai ten ep-is-te'men--word-plays on isis.

^262:3 Cf. lx. 2. The Egyptian of Isis is Ast.

^262:4 tetyfumenos--a play on tyfw'n--lit., "wrapped in smoke (tufos)," and because one so wrapped in smoke or clouds has his intelligence darkened, hence "puffed up with conceit," crazy and demented. Typhon is the dark or hidden side of the Father.

^262:5 theiw'seus (not in L. and S. or Soph.); it presumably comes from the stem of theiou, which means: (i.) to smoke with sulphur and so purify; (ii.) to make divine (theios), and so transmute into godship. The sentence may thus also mean "those initiated into the sulphur rite"--a not impossible rendering when we remember the Alchemical literature which had its source in Chemia-Egypt. It will also permit us to connect brimstone with Typhon--hoofs and all!

^263:1 Or the Intelligible--noetou.

^263:2 eis-omenun to on--a play on is-ei-on--fut. of  sqrtfid (vid) from which comes also eidesis above. This may also mean "seeing" as well as "knowing," and thus may refer to the Epopteia or Mystery of Sight, and not the preliminary Mystery of Hearing (Muesis).

^263:3 osius--another play on isis; cf. lx. 3.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

THE TRUE INITIATES OF ISIS 

III. 1. Yet many have set down that she is Hermes' daughter, and many [that she is] Prometheus's,--I holding the latter as discoverer of wisdom and foreknowledge, and Hermes of the art of letters and the Muses' art. 

2. Wherefore, in Hermes-city, they call the foremost of the Muses Isis, as well as Righteousness, [*4] in that she's 

[p. 264]

wise, [*1] as has been said, [*2] and shows [*3] the mysteries of the Gods to those who are with truth and justice called the Carriers of the holy [symbols] and Wearers of the holy robes. [*4] 

3. And these are they who carry the holy reason (logos) about the Gods, purged of all superstition and superfluity, in their soul, as in a chest, and cast robes round it [*5]--in secret disclosing such [things] of the opinion [*6] about the Gods as are black and shadowy, and such as are clear and bright, just as they are suggested by the [sacred] dress. 

4. Wherefore when the initiates of Isis at their "death" are adorned in these [robes], it is a symbol that this Reason (Logos) is with them; and with Him and naught else they go there. [*7] 

5. For it is not the growing beard and wearing cloak that makes philosophers, O Klea, nor clothing in linen and shaving oneself that makes initiates of Isis; but a true Isiac is one who, when he by law [*8] receives them, searches out by reason (logos) the [mysteries] shown and 

[p. 265]

done concerning these Gods, and meditates upon the truth in them. 

Footnotes

^263:4 dikaiosunen, or Justice (Maat), that is, the "power of the Judge," Hermes being Judge of the Scales. The Nine are the Paut of Hermes, he being the tenth, the mystery being here read differently from the Ogdoad point of view--that is to say, macrocosmically instead of cosmically.

^264:1 Or, perhaps, the reading should be "Wisdom."

^264:2 Cf. ii. 1.

^264:3 deiknuoysan--probably a play on dikaiosunen.

^264:4 ieroforois kai ierostolois. Plutarch by his "with truth and justice" warns the reader against taking these words to mean simply the carriers of the sacred vessels and instruments in the public processions, and the sacristans or keepers of the sacred vestments.

^264:5 peristellontes, which also means componere--that is, to lay out a corpse and so to bury.

^264:6 oie'seus = doxes, appearance, seeming--that is, the public myth; as opposed to logos = episte'me, knowledge or reality.

^264:7 Or "walk there"--that is, in "Hades." Or, again, the "death" is the death unto sin when they become Alive and walk among the "dead" or ordinary men.

^264:8 That is, when the initiation is a lawful one, or really takes effect; when a man's karma permits it, that is, after passing the proper tests.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

WHY THE PRIESTS ARE SHAVEN AND WEAR LINEN 

IV. 1. Now, as far as the "many" are concerned, even this commonest and smallest [secret] is hid from them,--namely, why the priests cut off their hair, and wear linen robes; for some do not at all care to know about these things, while others say that they abstain from [the use of] the sheep's wool, as they do from its flesh, because they hold it sacred, and that they shave their heads through being in mourning, and wear linen things on account of the colour which the flax in flower sends forth, resembling the aetherial radiance [*1] that surrounds the cosmos. 

2. But the true cause, [the] one of all, is, as Plato says, [because]: "It is not lawful for pure to touch not pure." [*2] 

Now, superfluity [*3] of nourishment and excretion is nothing chaste or pure; and it is from superfluities that wool and fur and hair and nails spring up and grow. 

3. It would, thus, be laughable for them to cut off their own hair in the purifications, shaving themselves, and making smooth their whole body evenly, and [then] put on and wear the [hair] of animals. [*4] 

4. For indeed we should think that Hesiod, when he says: 

Nor from five-branched at fire-blooming of Gods
Cut dry from green with flashing blade [*5]--

[p. 266]

teaches that [men] ought to keep holy day only when pure of such [superfluities], and not at the sacred operations themselves have need of purification and the removal of superfluities. 

5. Again, the flax grows out of the deathless earth, and yields a fruit that man may eat, and offers him a smooth pure raiment that does not weigh upon the watcher, [*1] but is well joined for every hour, [*2] and is the least cone-bearing, [*3] as they say,--concerning which things there is another reason (logos). 

Footnotes

^265:1 xroan--also meaning surface, skin, and tone in melody.

^265:2 Phaed., 67 B.

^265:3 perissuma--also probably here a play on that which is "round the body" (peri suma)--namely, the hair.

^265:4 thremmatun--lit., "things nourished" (from trefu), presumably a play on the "nourishment" (trofe') above.

^265:5 Op. et Dies, 741 f. This scrap of ancient gnomic wisdom Hesiod has preserved, I believe, from the "Orphic" fragments still in circulation in his day in Boeotia among the people from an Older Greece. I have endeavoured to translate it according to the most primitive meaning of the words. In later days it was thought that "five-branched" was the hand, and that the couplet referred to a prohibition against paring the nails at a feast of the Gods! In this sense also Plutarch partly uses it. But if I am right in my version, we have in the lines a link with that very early tradition in Greece which in later times was revived by the Later Platonic School, in a renewed contact with the ancient Chaldaean mystery-tradition of the Fire. "Five-branched" would thus mean man, or rather purified man, and the saying referred to the "pruning of this tree." In it also we have an example of a "Pythagorean symbol" three hundred years before Pythagoras. Finally, I would remind the reader of the Saying which the Master is said to have uttered as He passed to the Passion of the Crucifixion (Luke xxiii. 31): "For if they do these things in the moist stock [A.V. green tree], what shall be done in the dry?"--presumably the quotation of an old gnomic saying or mystery logos. The "moist nature" is the feminine side of the "fiery" or "dry."

^266:1 Reading skopounti for skeponti--that is, the soul.

^266:2 eyarmoston de pros pasan uran--"well adapted for every season" is the common translation; the "hour," however, is a technical astrological term.

^266:3 Vulg., "lice-producing"--but ftheir also means a special kind of pine producing small cones; and the great cone was a symbol of the Logos, and the small cone of physical generation. It is also connected with ftheiru, meaning to corrupt, and so to breed corruption.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 267]

OF THE REFRAINING FROM FLESH AND SALT AND SUPERFLUITIES 

V. 1. And the priests handle so hardly [*1] the nature of superfluities, that they not only deprecate the many kinds of pulse, and of meats the sheep-flesh [*2] kinds and swine-flesh kinds, as making much superfluity, but also at their times of purification they remove the salts from the grains, [*3] having other further reasons as well as the fact that it makes the more thirsty and more hungry sharpen their desire the more. 

2. For to argue that salts are not pure owing to the multitude of small lives [*4] that are caught [*5] and die in them when they solidify themselves, as Aristagoras said, [*6] is naive. 

3. They are, moreover, said to water the Apis also from a special well, and by all means to keep him from the Nile,--not that they think His [*7] water stained with blood because of the Crocodile, [*8] as some think (for nothing is so precious to Egyptians as the Nile), 

[p. 268]

but that the water of Nile's superfluity [*1] on being drunk seems to make fat, nay, rather to make much too much of flesh. 

4. And [so] they do not wish the Apis to be so nor yet themselves, but [wish] to wear their bodies on their souls compact and light, and neither to com-press nor op-press them by the mortal part prevailing and its weighing down of the divine. 

Footnotes

^267:1 Vulg., "endure with such difficulty" or "feel such disgust at."

^267:2 Referring usually to small animals of the sheep and goat kind, and more generally to all sacrificial animals.

^267:3 Or, perhaps, more generally, "the salt from their food." It more probably refers to mineral and not to vegetable salts.

^267:4 That is animalculae.

^267:5 aliskomena--probably a word-play on alas (salts).

^267:6 Muller, ii. 99. Aristagoras was a Greek writer on Egypt, who flourished about the last quarter of the 4th century B.C.

^267:7 Namely the Nile, as Osiris, or the Great Deep.

^267:8 Mystically the "Leviathan" (e.g. of the "Ophites") who lived in the Great Deep. Cf. also Ps. civ. 26, where, speaking of the Great Sea (25), it is written: "There go the ships [the barides, boats, or vehicles of souls], and there is that Leviathan [LXX. Dragon] whom thou hast fashioned to take his pastime [LXX. sport or mock] therein."

^268:1 to Neiluion ydur--ta Neiluia was the Feast of the Overflowing of the Nile.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

ON THE DRINKING OF WINE 

VI. 1. And as for wine, the servants of the God in Sun-city [*2] do not at all bring it into the sacred place, as 'tis not right [for them] to drink by day while He, their Lord and King, looks on. 

2. The rest [of them [*3]] use it indeed, but sparingly.

They have, however, many times of abstinence at which they drink no wine, but spend them in the search for wisdom, learning and teaching the [truth] about the Gods. 

3. The kings used to drink it, though in certain measure according to the sacred writings, as Hecataeus has narrated, [*4] for they were priests [as well]. 

4. They began to drink it, however, only from the time of Psammetichus; [*5] but before that they used not to drink wine.

Nor did they make libation of it as a thing dear to the Gods, but as the blood of those who fought against the Gods, [*6]--from whom, when they fell and mingled with 

[p. 269]

the earth, they think the vines came, and that because of this wine-drenching makes men to be out of their minds and struck aside, [*1] in that, forsooth, they are full-filled with the forefathers of its [*2] blood. [*3] 

5. These things, at any rate Eudoxus says, in Book II. of his Circuit, [*4] are thus stated by the priests. 

Footnotes

^268:2 Heliopolis--the God being the "Sun."

^268:3 Sc. the priests.

^268:4 Muller, ii. 389. H. flourished last quarter of 6th and first 5th century B.C.

^268:5 Reigned 671-617 B.C.

^268:6 Sc. the Titans or Daimones as opposed to the Gods.

^269:1 Or "de-ranged"--parapleigas. Paraplex is the first of the daimonian rulers in The Books of the Saviour (Pistis Sophia, 367).

^269:2 Sc. the vine's.

^269:3 Or "with the blood of its forefathers."

^269:4 Or Orbit. Eudoxus flourished about the middle of the 4th century B.C.; he was initiated into the Egyptian mysteries, and a great astronomer, obtaining his knowledge of the art from the priests of Isis.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

ON FISH TABOOS 

VII. 1. As to sea-fish, all [Egyptians] abstain generally (not from all [fish] but) from some;--as, for example, those of the Oxyrhynchus nome from those caught with a hook, for as they venerate the sharp-snouted fish, [*5] they fear that the hook [*6] is not pure when "sharp-snout" is caught by it; [*7] while those of the Syene nome [abstain from] the "devourer," [*8] for that it seems that it appears together with the rising of the Nile, and that it shows their [*9] growth to those in joy, seen as a self-sent messenger. 

[p. 270]

2. Their priests, upon the other hand, abstain from all; and [even] on the ninth of the first month, [*1] when every one of the rest of the Egyptians eats a broiled fish before his front door, [*2] the priests do not taste it, but burn their fishes to ashes before the doors [of the Temple]. [*3] 

3. And they have two reasons [for this], of which I will later on take up the sacred and extraordinary [one], according with the facts religiously deduced concerning Osiris and Typhon. The evident, the one that's close at hand, in showing forth the fish as a not necessary and a not unsuperfluous cooked food, bears witness unto Homer, who makes neither the Phaeacians of luxurious lives, nor yet the Ithakesian Island men, use fish, nor yet Odysseus's Companions [*4] in so great a Voyage and on the Sea before they came to the last Strait. [*5] 

4. And generally [the priests] think that the sea's from fire and is beyond the boundaries--nor part nor element [of earth], but of another kind, a superfluity cor-rupted and cor-rupting. 

Footnotes

^269:5 ton oxurygxon--perhaps the pike.

^269:6 agkistron--dim. of agkos, meaning a "bend" of any kind. Perhaps it may be intended as a play on the ankh tie or "noose of life," the well-known Egyptian symbol, generally called the crux ansata.

^269:7 If we read aytui for aytui it would suggest a mystic meaning, namely, "falls into his own snare."

^269:8 fagrou--Vulg., sea-bream; but Hesychius spells it faguros, connecting it with fagein, to devour.

^269:9 Or "his" (the Nile's); but the "self-sent messenger" (aytaggelos) seems to demand "their," and so suggests a mystical sense.

^270:1 Copt. Thoth--corr. roughly with September.

^270:2 pro teis ayleioy thuras--that is, the outside door into the ayle', or court of the house. Cf. the title of the Trismegistic treatise given by Zosimus--"The Inner Door." There may, perhaps, be some mystical connection.

^270:3 Cf. Luke xxiv. 42: "And they gave Him a piece of broiled fish." This was after His "resurrection." Also cf. Talmud Bab., "Sanhedrin," 103a: "That thou shalt not have a son or disciple who burns his food publicly, like Jeschu ha-Notzri" (D. J. L., 189).

^270:4 Compare the Companions of Horus in the Solar Boat.

^270:5 I fancy there must be some under-meaning here, and so I have put the key-words in capitals.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 271]

THE ONION AND PIG TABOOS

VIII. 1. For nothing reasonless, or [purely] fabulous, or from [mere] superstition, as some suppose, has been incorporated into the foundation of the sacred operations, but some things have moral and needful causes, while others are not without a share in the embellishment of science and physics,--as, for instance, in the case of the onion. 

2. [The story] that Diktys, [*1] the nursling of Isis, [*2] fell into the river and was drowned, in trying to catch the onions with his hands, [*3] [is] utterly incredible. 

3. The priests, however, keep themselves pure of the onion, and treat it hardly, being [ever] on the watch against it, because it is the only thing whose nature is to be well nourished and to flourish when the moon's a-wane. 

It's food [*4] for neither fast nor feast,--neither for the former in that it makes those feeding [*5] on it thirst, while for the latter it makes them weep. 

4. And in like manner also they consider the sow an unholy animal, because it seems to be covered especially when the moon is on the wane, while the bodies of those who drink its milk burst forth [*6] into leprosy [*7] and scabrous roughnesses. 

[p. 272]

5. And the tale (logos) they tell after once only [*1] sacrificing and eating pig at the full-moon--[namely] that Typhon when pursuing pig towards full-moon found the wooden coffin in which the body of Osiris lay dead, and scattered it in pieces [*2]--they do not all receive, thinking it is a trifling mis-hearing [of the true tale] like many more. [*3] 

6. But they say their ancients so protected themselves against softness [of living] and extravagance and agreeable sensations, that they said a slab was set up in the holy place at Thebes with deprecations in-lettered on it against Meinis [*4] the King, who first changed the Egyptians from the way of life without riches and without needs and plain. 

7. Moreover, Technactis, father of Bocchoris, [*5] is said, when marching on the Arabs, [*6] when his baggage was delayed, [*7] to have used with joy the food nearest at hand, and afterwards to have fallen into deep sleep on a bed of straw, [*8] and so embraced frugality; and in 

[p. 273]

consequence of this [he is said] to have execrated the Meinian, and, with the approval of the priests, to have graven his execration on stone. 

Footnotes

^271:1 Diktys = the Netter. In other myth-cycles Diktys was son of Poseidon, and is often called simply the Fisher.

^271:2 Cf. xvi., xvii.

^271:3 epidrassomenon. The Fisher-soul, therefore, presumably fell out of the celestial boat or baris of Isis, and the myth may not be quite so apithanon as Plutarch would have us think. Cf. xvii. 3. Ordinary onions do not grow in rivers.

^271:4 Or "fit"--prosforon.

^271:5 tous prosferomenoys--a word-play on "food."

^271:6 exanthei--lit., "flower."

^271:7 lepran--that which makes the skin scaly and rough (lepros, as opposed to leios, smooth); there being also, I believe, a mystical under-meaning in it all.

^272:1 Apparently once a year.

^272:2 Cf. xviii. 1.

^272:3 This makes us doubt whether there may not be a number of similar "mis-hearings" in the myth as handed on by Plutarch.

^272:4 Probably this should be Mneuis (Mnevis), the sacred black bull, venerated as the symbol of the ka of Ra, and so it may contain some mystical allusion. Cf. xxxiii. 5.

^272:5 texnaktis is, perhaps, a word-play on tex ( sqrttek, tiktu), "creative" or "generative," and aktis, "ray"; while bokxoris may also be a play--such as, if one is allowed to speculate wildly, bous, "kine," and xoros, "dance," reflecting the celestial boykolos or Cowherd.

^272:6 It is to be noticed that there was an Arab nome in Egypt, and that Egypt was mapped out into a mystic body; and further, that the different surrounding nations were regarded as representative each of certain powers.

^272:7 Or it may mean "when his filth delayed him," and so contain a mystical implication.

^272:8 epi stibados. It may also mean "on the way."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

THE KINGS, THE RIDDLES OF THE PRIESTS, AND THE MEANING OF AMOUN 

IX. 1. The kings were appointed from the priests or from the warriors,--the one caste possessing worth and honour through manliness, and the other through wisdom. 

2. And he who was appointed from the warriors immediately became [one] of the priests and shared in their philosophy,--which for the most part was hidden in myths and words (logoi), containing dim reflections and transparencies of truth, as, doubtless, they themselves make indirectly plain by fitly setting sphinxes up before the temples, as though their reasoning about the Gods possessed a wisdom wrapped in riddle. [*1] 

3. Indeed, the seat [*2] of Athena (that is Isis, as they think) at Sais used to have the following inscription on it: 

"I am all that has been and is and shall be, and no mortal has ever re-vealed [*3] my robe." [*4] 

4. Moreover, while the majority think that the proper name of Zeus with the Egyptians is Amoun (which we by a slight change call Ammon), Manetho, the Sebennyte, considers it His hidden [one], and that His [power of] hiding is made plain by the very articulation of the sound. 

[p. 274]

5. Hecataeus [*1] of Abdera, however, says that the Egyptians use this word to one another also when they call one to them, for that its sound has got the power of "calling to." [*2] 

6. Wherefore when they call to the First God--who they think is the same for every man--as unto the Unmanifest and Hidden, invoking Him to make Him manifest and plain to them, they say "Amoun!" 

So great, then, was the care Egyptians took about the wisdom which concerned the mysteries of the Gods. 

Footnotes

^273:1 Cf. M. L. ridellus, F. rideau, a curtain or veil.

^273:2 The technical term for the sitting statue of a god or goddess.

^273:3 apekalypsen--that is, no one within duality has expressed or shown that in which this aspect of feminine life veils itself.

^273:4 For this mystical logos of Net (Neith), the Great Mother, cf. Budge, op. cit., i. 459 f.

^274:1 H. flourished 550-475 B.C. A. was a town on the southern shore of Thrace.

^274:2 proskletike'n. H. thus seems to suggest that it (? Amen) was a "word of power," a word of magic for evoking the ka of a person, or summoning it to appear. It does not seem very probable that the Egyptians shouted it after one another in the street.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

OF THE GREEK DISCIPLES OF EGYPTIANS AND OF PYTHAGORAS AND HIS SYMBOLS 

X. 1. And the most wise of the Greeks also are witnesses--Solon, Thales, Plato, Eudoxus, Pythagoras, and, as some say, Lycurgus as well--through coming to Egypt and associating with her priests. 

2. And so they say that Eudoxus was hearer of Chonouphis [*3] of Memphis, and Solon of Sonchis of Sais, and Pythagoras of Oenuphis of Heliopolis. 

3. And the last especially, as it appears, being contemplated and contemplating, [*4] brought back to the 

[p. 275]

memory of his men their [*1] symbolic and mysterious [art], containing their dogmas in dark sayings. 

4. For most of the Pythagoric messages leave out nothing of what are called the hieroglyphic letters; for instance: "Eat not on what bears two"; [*2] "Sit not down on measure"; [*3] "Plant not phoenix"; [*4] "Stir not fire with knife [*5] in house." 

5. And, for myself at least, I think that his men's calling the monad Apollo, [*6] and the dyad Artemis, and the hebdomad Athena, and the first cube [*7] Poseidon, also resembles those whose statues preside over the sacred places, and whose dramas are acted [there], yea and [the names] painted [*8] [there as well]. 

[p. 276]

6. For they write the King and Lord, Osiris, [*1] with "eye" and "sceptre." [*2] But some interpret the name also as "many-eyed," since in the Egyptian tongue os means "many," and iri "eye." 

7. And they write Heaven, as unageing through eternity, [*3] with "heart," [that is] spirit, [*4] [rising] from "altar" [*5] underneath. 

8. And at Thebes there used to be set up hand-less statues of judges, while the [statue] of the chief judge had its eyes tight shut,--seeing that Justice neither gives nor takes gift, and is not worked on. 

9. And for the warriors, "scarab" was their seal-emblem;--for the scarab is not female, but all [scarabs] are male, [*6] and they engender their seed into matter [or material] which they make into spheres, preparing a field not so much of nourishment [*7] as of genesis. 

Footnotes

^274:3 That is, presumably, Knouph or Knef.

^274:4 thaymastheis kai thaymasas, passive and active of the verb of thauma, generally translated "wonder," but meaning radically "look at with awe"; hence contemplate religiously (the art of theuria), and hence the Platonic (? Pythagorean) saying: "The beginning of philosophy is wonder." Compare the variants of the new-found Jesus logos ("Let not him who seeks," etc.), which preserve both thambetheis and thaymasas.

^275:1 That is, to the men of Greece the art of the Egyptians.

^275:2 epi difron (= di-foron)--variously translated "off a chair," "in a chariot," hence "on a journey." "That which bears two" is that which either carries two or brings forth two; the logos is thus, perhaps, a warning against falling into duality of any kind, and hence an injunction to contemplate unity.

^275:3 The xoinix was a dry measure, the standard of a man's (slave's) daily allowance of corn. Hence, perhaps, in one sense the symbol may mean: "Be not content with your 'daily bread' only"; yet any meaning connected with "that which measures" would suit the interpretation, such as, "Best not on measure, but move in the unimmeasurable."

^275:4 foinix means a "Phoenician" (as opposed to an Egyptian), a "date palm" (as opposed to a "pine"), and a "phoenix"; in colour this was "purple red," "purple," or "crimson." The phoenix proper rose again from its ashes; its colour was golden. fytuein means "plant," but also "engender," "beget."

^275:5 maxaira was, in Homeric times, the technical term for the sacred sacrificial knife--the knife that kills and divides the victim's body, while the fire transmutes and consumes it. There may, perhaps, be some connection between the symbol and the gnomic couplet of Hesiod quoted above (iv. 3); it is, however, generally said to mean, "Do not provoke an angry man," but this leaves out of consideration the concluding words "in house."

^275:6 Cf. lxxv. 14.

^275:7 Presumably the ogdoad or eight.

^275:8 Or "written" or "engraved."

^276:1 Eg. Asar.

^276:2 Generally a "throne" in the hieroglyphs. But for the numerous variants, see Budge, Gods of the Egyptians, ii. 113. Cf. li. 1 below.

^276:3 aidioteta--lit., form-(or idea-) less-ness; transcending all forms.

^276:4 thymon, one of the most primitive terms of Greek psychology--spirit or soul, or more generally life-principle.

^276:5 esxara, an altar for burnt offerings; here probably symbolising Earth as the syzygy of Heaven.

^276:6 It is to be remembered that the "mark" of the warriors was their manliness (ix. 1).

^276:7 Matter (yle) being the Nurse, "according to Plato." The legend was that the scarab beetle deposited its seed into dung which it first made into balls (lxxiv. 5).

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

ADVICE TO KLEA CONCERNING THE HIDDEN MEANING OF THE MYTHS 

XI. 1. When, therefore, thou hearest the myth-sayings of the Egyptians concerning the Gods--wanderings and 

[p. 277]

dismemberings, and many such passions [*1]--thou shouldst remember what has been said above, and think none of these things spoken as they [really] are in state and action. 

2. For they do not call Hermes "Dog" as a proper name, but they associate the watching and waking from sleep of the animal, [*2] who by knowing and not knowing determines friend from foe (as Plato says [*3]), with the most Logos-like of the Gods. 

3. Nor do they think that the sun rises as a new-born babe from a lotus, but so they write "sun-rise," riddling the re-kindling of the sun from moist [elements]. [*4] 

4. Moreover, they called the most crude and awesome King of the Persians (Ochus) [*5]--who killed many and finally cut the throat of Apis and made a hearty meal off him with his friends--"Knife," [*6] and they call him so unto this day in the Catalogue [*7] of their kings,--not, of course, signifying his essence by its proper name, [*8] but likening the hardness of his mood [*9] to an instrument of slaughter. 

[p. 278]

5. So too shalt thou, if thou hearest and receivest the [mysteries] about the Gods from those who interpret the myth purely and according to the love of wisdom, and if thou doest ever and keepest carefully the customs observed by the priests, and if thou thinkest that thou wilt offer neither sacrifice nor act more pleasing to the Gods than the holding a true view concerning them,--thou shalt escape an ill no less than being-without-the-gods, [*1] [that is to say] the fearing-of-the-daimones. [*2] 

XII. 1. The myth which is told is--in its very shortest possible [elements], after the purely useless and superfluous have been removed--as follows: 

Footnotes

^277:1 pathe'mata--the technical mystery-term for such experiences, or sensible knowing.

^277:2 Or "of the Animal"--the Living One or Animal Itself or World Soul, if Dog is taken to mean the genus or Great Dog.

^277:3 Rep., ii. 375 F.

^277:4 That is, the ideogram of a new-born child with its finger on its lips seated on the bosom of the lotus signified "sun-rise," and "sun-rise" within as well as without. The "re-kindling" or "lighting up again" was presumably also a symbol of the "new birth from above."

^277:5 Artaxerxes III.; the priests, however, presumably used this incident to illustrate some more general truth. A similar story is also related of Cambyses (xliv. 8); they also called Ochus "Ass" (xxxi. 4).

^277:6 The sacrificial knife again, as in x. 2.

^277:7 Cf. xxxviii. 6.

^277:8 Perhaps even meaning by "his name of power."

^277:9 Or "of the turn," where it might refer to the turn of Egypt's fate-wheel.

^278:1 Or "atheism."

^278:2 Generally rendered "superstition."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

THE MYSTERY-MYTH 

2. They say that when Rhea [*3] secretly united with Kronos, Helios on sensing [*4] it imprecated her not to bring forth in month or year. [*5] 

3. That Hermes being in love with the Goddess, came to conjunction [with her]; then playing draughts [*6] against Selene, [*7] and winning [*8] the seventieth of each 

[p. 279]

of the lights, he con-duced from all [*1] five days and in-duced them into the three hundred and sixty [days]--which Egyptians call the "now in-duced," [*2] and keep as birthdays of the Gods. [*3] 

4. [And they say] that on the first Osiris was born, and that a voice fell out [*4] together with him on his being brought forth--to wit: "The Lord of all forth comes to light." 

5. But some say that a certain Pamyle, [*5] being moistened [*6] from the holy [place] of Zeus, heard a voice directing her to proclaim with outcry that "Great King Good-doing Osiris is born"; and that because of this she nursed Osiris, Kronos entrusting him to her, and they keep with mystic rites the Pamylia in his honour, similar to the Phallephoria. [*7] 

6. And on the second [they say] Aroueris [was born]--whom they call Apollo, and some call Elder Horus. [*8] 

On the third that Typhon, neither in season nor in place, but breaking through with a blow, leapt forth through her side. [*9] 

On the fourth that Isis was born in all moist [conditions]. 

[p. 280]

On the fifth Nephthys, whom they name End and Aphrodite, while some [call] her also Victory. 

7. And [they say] that Osiris and Aroueris were from Helios, Isis from Hermes, and Typhon and Nephthys from Kronos, and therefore the kings considering the third [*1] of the "induced" [days] nefast, used neither to consult nor serve themselves till night. [*2] 

8. And [they say] that Nephthys was married to Typhon; [*3] but Isis and Osiris being in love with each other, united even before they were born, down in the Womb beneath the Darkness. [*4] 

9. Some, moreover, say that Aroueris thus came to birth, and that he is called Elder Horus by Egyptians, but Apollo by Greeks. 

XIII. 1. And [they say] that when Osiris was king, he straightway set free the Egyptians from a life from which they could find no way out and like unto that of wild beasts, [*5] both setting fruits before them, and laying down laws, and teaching them to honour the Gods. 

2. And that subsequently he went over the whole earth, clearing it, [*6] not in the least requiring arms, but drawing the multitude to himself by charming them with persuasion and reason (logos), [*7] with song and every art the Muses give; [*8] and that for this 

[p. 281]

cause he seems to the Greeks to be the same as Dionysus. [*1] 

3. And [they say] that while he was away, Typhon attempted no revolution, owing to Isis keeping very careful guard, and having the power [*2] in her hands, holding it fast; but that when he [Osiris] came back, he made with art a wile for him, con-juring seventy-two men, and having as co-worker a queen coming out of Aethiopia, whom they call Aso. [*3] 

4. But that after measuring out for himself in secret the body of Osiris, [*4] and having devised, according to the size, [*5] a beautiful and extraordinarily ornamented chest, [*6] brought it into the banqueting hall. [*7] 

[p. 282]

5. And that when they were delighted at the sight and wondered, Typhon, in sport, promised to give the chest to him who could make himself exactly equal to it by laying himself down in it. [*1] 

6. And that when all were trying, one after another, since no one fitted, Osiris stepped in and laid himself down. 

7. And they who were present running up, dashed on the lid, and, after some [of them] had closed it down with fastenings, and others had poured hot lead over it, they carried it out to the River, [*2] and let it go into the Sea by way of the Tanitic [*3] mouth, which [they say] Egyptians call even to this day by a hateful and abominable name. 

8. These things they say were done on the seventeenth of the month Athur, [*4] in which [month] the Sun passes through the Scorpion; it being the eight-and-twentieth year of Osiris' reign. 

9. Some, however, say that he had lived and not reigned so long. [*5] 

XIV. 1. And as the Pans and Satyrs [*6] that inhabit round Chemmis [*7] were the first to sense the 

[p. 283]

passion [*1] [of Osiris], and give tongue concerning what was being done, [they say] that on this account sudden disturbances and emotions of crowds are even unto this day called "panics." 

2. But when Isis [*2] sensed it, she cut off one of her curls, and put on a mourning dress, whence the city to this day bears the name Kopto. [*3] 

But others think the name signifies privation, [*4] for they say that koptein is to de-prive. 

3. And [they say] that she, wandering about in every direction, and finding no way out, never approached any one without accosting him; nay, she asked even little children whom she happened to meet, about the chest. 

4. And they happened to have seen, and showed the mouth [*5] through which the friends of Typhon let the vessel [*6] go into the Sea. 

5. Because of this [they say] Egyptians believe that little children have prophetic power, and they especially divine from the sounds of their voices, when playing in the holy places and shouting about anything. 

6. [*7] And [they say] that when [Isis] was aware that 

[p. 284]

[paragraph continues] Osiris in ignorance had fallen in love and united himself with her sister [*1] as with herself, and seeing as proof the honey-clover [*2] wreath which he had left behind with Nephthys, she sought for the babe--(for she [N.] exposed it immediately she bore it, through fear of Typhon [*3]). 

7. And after it was found with toil and trouble--dogs [*4] guiding Isis to it it--was reared and became her guard and follower, being called Anubis, and is said to guard the Gods, as their dogs men. 

XV. 1. It was from him she got intelligence about the chest:--that after it had been wave-tossed out by the Sea to the Byblos [*5] country, the land-wash had gently brought it to rest in a certain heather-bush." [*6] 

2. And the heather-bush, in a short time running up into a most beautiful and very large young tree, enfolded, and grew round it, [*7] and hid it entirely within itself. 

3. And the King, [*8] marvelling at the greatness of the 

[p. 285]

tree, after cutting off the branches, and rounding off the trunk that surrounded the coffin without its being seen, [*1] set it up as the prop of his roof. 

4. And they say that on her hearing of these things by the daimonian spirit of a voice, [*2] Isis came to Byblos, and, sitting down at a fountain-head, downcast and weeping, held converse with no one else, but she embraced and showed affection to the maids of the Queen, curling [*3] their hair and exhaling from herself on their skin a marvellous fragrance. 

5. And when the Queen saw her maids, longing for the ambrosia-smelling hair and skin of the stranger came upon her. 

And so when she had been sent for and had become an inmate [of the palace, the Queen] made her nurse of her little one. 

6. And the name of the King, they say, was Malkander, [*4] while her name according to some was Astarte, according to others Saosis, and according to others Nemanous, [*5]--or whatever is the name for which the Greek equivalent would be Athenais. [*6] 

[p. 286]

XVI. 1. And [they say] that instead of giving it [*1] the breast, Isis reared the little one by putting her finger [*2] into its mouth, and that at night she burnt round [*3] the mortal [elements] of its body, and, turning herself into a swallow, flew round the pillar and twittered a dirge; until the Queen, through spying [on her] and crying out [*4] when she saw the babe being burnt round, deprived it of its immortality. [*5] 

2. That when the Goddess revealed herself, she claimed for herself the pillar of the roof; and, taking it down with the greatest care, she cut away the heather-tree from round it, then wrapping this [*6] up in fine linen, and pouring the juices of sweet herbs over it, [*7] she placed it in the hands of the royal couple; and even unto this day the people of Byblos venerate the wood [*8] lying in the holy place of Isis. 

[p. 287]

3. As for the coffin, she flung herself round it, and kept moaning so long, that the younger of the little ones of the king died away; [*1] and, taking the elder with herself, and placing the coffin on a boat, she sailed away. 

4. And when the River Phaedrus [*2] raised too rough a wind [*3] just after dawn, [*4] waxing wrath, she dried up his stream. 

XVII. 1. And [they say] that when first she found solitude and was by herself, she opened the chest, and laying her face on his face, she kissed [him] and shed tears. 

2. And that when the little one came up in silence from behind and understood, on sensing it she turned herself about, and passionately gave him an awe-ful look. And the little one could not hold himself up against the awe of her, and died. 

3. But some say [it was] not thus, but, as it has been said before, [*5] that he fell out [*6] into the river. 

4. And he has honours owing to the Goddess, for the Maneros [*7] whom Egyptians hymn at their symposia is he. 

5. While others relate that the boy was called Palaestinos [*8] or Pelousios, and that the city [*9] was named after him when it was founded by the Goddess; and that the Maneros who is hymned was the first to discover the art of the Muses. [*10]

[p. 288]

6. But some say that it is the name of no one, but a manner of speech for men drinking and feasting,--with the meaning "May such and such things be present in becoming measure!" For the Egyptians on every such occasion shout out this, it being indicated to them by "Maneros." 

7. Just as, doubtless, also their being shown the image of a dead man carried round in a small wooden coffin, is not a reminder of the Osirian passion, as some suppose; but it is in order to exhort them while filled with wine to make use of things present, in that all will very presently be such [as it], that they bring in an unpleasing after-revel. 

XVIII. 1. And [they say] that when Isis had gone a journey to her son Horus, who was being reared at Boutos, [*1] and had put away [*2] the chest, [*3] Typhon, taking his dogs [*4] out by night towards the moon, came upon it; and recognising the body, tore it into fourteen pieces, and scattered them abroad. 

2. And Isis [they say] on learning this, searched for them in a papyrus skiff (baris) sailing away through the marshes; [*5] whence those who sail in papyrus hulls are not injured by the crocodiles, either because they [*6] fear or rather revere the Goddess. [*7] 

[p. 289]

3. And it is because of this [they say] that many tombs of Osiris are spoken of in Egypt [*1]--through her performing burial rites on meeting with each piece. 

4. Some, however, say no; but that making herself images [of them] she distributed these to each city, [*2] as though she were giving it the [whole] body, in order that it might have honours from the multitude, and that even if Typhon should get the better of Horus, he might renounce his search for the true tomb when many were spoken of and pointed out. 

5. Now, the only one of the parts of Osiris which Isis did not find was that which causes awe; for that it was cast straightway into the River, and the scaly-coat, [*3] and the devourer, [*4] and the sharp-snout [*5] ate it up--which [they say] among fishes are considered specially expiate; [*6] and that Isis, making herself a counterfeit instead of it, consecrated the phallus; in honour of which the Egyptians keep festival even to this day. [*7] 

XIX. 1. Thereafter Osiris, coming to Horus out of 

[p. 290]

the Invisible, [*1] worked through him and trained him for the fight. 

2. He then put this test question to him: "What does he consider fairest?" And when he said: "Helping father and mother in ill plight,"--he asked a second: "What animal does he think most useful for those who go out to fight?" 

3. And when Horus said "Horse," he marvelled at him, and was quite puzzled why he did not say "Lion" rather than "Horse." [*2] 

4. Accordingly Horus said: "'Lion' is a needful thing to one requiring help, but 'Horse' [can] scatter in pieces the foe in flight and consume him utterly." [*3] 

Thus hearing, Osiris rejoiced that Horus was fitly prepared. 

5. And it is said that as many were changing over to the side of Horus, Thueris, [*4] Typhon's concubine, came too; and that a certain serpent pursuing after her was cut in pieces by those round Horus. [*5] And to-day on this account they cast down a small rope and cut it in pieces for all to see. [*6] 

6. The fight lasted for many days, and Horus won. Nevertheless, when Isis received Typhon in bonds, she did not make away with him. Far from it; she unbound him and let him go. 

[p. 291]

7. Horus, however, did not bear this temperately; but, laying hands on his mother, he drew off the crown from her head. Whereupon Hermes [*1] crowned her with a head-dress of cow-horns. 

8. And [they say] that also when Typhon got the chance of bringing a bastardy suit against Horus, and Hermes was counsel for the defence, Horus was judged legitimate by the Gods. [*2] 

And that [afterwards] Typhon was fought under in two other fights. 

9. And that Isis brought forth from her union with Osiris after his death [*3] Harpocrates [*4]--who missed the month and was weak in his limbs from below upwards. [*5] 

Footnotes

^278:3 The Mother of the Gods--"Flowing," that is, motion pure and simple, unordered or chaotic.

^278:4 In the most primitive meaning of the word aisthomenon--from  sqrtais, lengthened form of ai (compare aiu).

^278:5 meni met' eniaytui. Both words are connected with roots meaning "one" in ancient dialects; men = m-eis (Aeol.) and enos = an-nus (Lat.). Cf. eis, m-ia, en; hence eni-aytos = "one-same." The Goddess, therefore, apart from the Sun, could only bring forth in a day.

^278:6 pettia,--pessos was an oval-shaped stone for playing a game like our draughts; it was also used for the board on which the game was played, divided by 5 straight lines each way, and therefore into 36 squares.

^278:7 Sc. the moon.

^278:8 Or "taking away."

^279:1 Sc. the lights.

^279:2 epagomenais--or "now intercalated."

^279:3 This is an exceedingly puzzling statement. The "lights" cannot be the "lights" of the moon, of which there were 30 phases. It more probably has some connectipn with 360, the 70th of which works out at 5*142857--a number not so very far removed from our own calculations. The "each" in the text may thus be an error.

^279:4 A voice from heaven, a Bath-kol, proceeding from the Womb of Rhea.

^279:5 pamile--presumably a play on pan (all) and yle (matter).

^279:6 ydreyomenen--presumably by the Great Moistener; it is, however, generally translated "drawing water."

^279:7 That is the "Phallus-Bearing."

^279:8 Eg. Heru-ur.

^279:9 pleura--meaning in man radically "rib"; also side of a square, and root of a square (or cubic) number. Typhon would be represented by the diagonal.

^280:1 That is, the birthday of Typhon.

^280:2 A strange sentence; but as the kings were considered Gods, they probably worshipped themselves, or at least their own ka, and consulted themselves as oracles.

^280:3 Presumably as being opposite, or as hating one another.

^280:4 Cf. liv. 4.

^280:5 Metaphors reminiscent of the symbolism of the so-called Book of the Dead.

^280:6 Sc. of wild beasts; but may also mean "softening it," when Osiris stands for Water, and again "making it mild," or "civilising it."

^280:7 He himself being the Logos.

^280:8 moysikeis--music, in the modern meaning of the term, was only one of the arts of the Muses, the nine daughters of Zeus.

^281:1 Dio-nysos--that is, "he of the Mount (nusa) of Zeus."

^281:2 That is "sovereignty."

^281:3 Probably the prototype of the Alchemical Azoth. Aethiopia was the land of the black folk south of Egypt, the land par excellence of the black magicians as opposed to the good ones of the Egyptians (this, of course, being the Egyptian point of view). The Osiris-myth was in Egyptian, presumably, as easily interpretable into the language of magic and con-juration as into other values. Compare the Demotic folk-tales of Khamuas, in Grifiith's Stories of the High Priests of Memphis, for how this view of it would read in Egyptian. Aethiopia would also mean the Dark Earth as opposed to the Light Heaven.

^281:4 The "body of Osiris" may mean the cosmos (great or little), as the "body of Adam," its copy in the Kabalah.

^281:5 Or, "according to the greatness"--using "greatness" in its Gnostic signification, as here meaning the great cosmos and also the cosmic body of man.

^281:6 In Pythagorean terms, "an odd-ly ordered rectangular encasement"--referring, perhaps, to a certain configuration of cosmic permanent atoms. But see the plate which Isaac Myer calls "A Medieval Idea of the Makrokosm, in the Heavenly Zodiacal Ark," but which intitles itself "Forma Exterior Arcae Noe ex Descriptione Mosis." This is a coffin, and within it lies the dead Christ. The plate is prefixed to p. 439 of Myer's Qabbalah (Philadelphia, 1888). It also presumably refers to the "germ" of the cosmic robe of the purified man, the "robe of glory." In mysticism the metaphors cannot be kept unmixed, for it is the apotheosis of syncretism.

^281:7 Lit., the "drinking together," referring perhaps to the conjunction of certain cosmic forces, and also microcosmically to souls in a state of joy or festivity or bliss, prior to incarnation.

^282:1 That is, prove the "permanent atoms" were his own--if we think in terms of reincarnation.

^282:2 Sc. the Sacred Nile, Great Jordan, etc., the Stream of Ocean, which, flowing downwards, is the birth of men, and upwards, the birth of Gods.

^282:3 tan-itikou--probably a word-play connected with  sqrttan, "to stretch," and so make tense or thin, or expand, and so the "widestretched mouth of the Great River." Cf. the Titans or Stretchers.

^282:4 Copt. Hathor--corr. roughly to November.

^282:5 Cf. xlii. 4.

^282:6 Two classes of elemental existences.

^282:7 That is Apu, the Panopolis of the Greeks; the name Chemmis, the modern Akhmim, is derived from an old Egyptian name. See Budge, op. cit., ii. 188.

^283:1 pathos--the technical term of what was enacted in the mystery-drama.

^283:2 As Mother Nature.

^283:3 Meaning "I cut"; and in mid. "I cut or beat the breast," as a sign of mourning.

^283:4 "The depriving things of their power" or "negation"; Osiris being the fertilising or generative or positive power.

^283:5 Sc. the way or passage. In little children the life force is not sexually polarised.

^283:6 aggeion--a vase or vessel of any kind, hence funerary urn or even coffin; but metaggizein means "to pour from one vessel into another," and metaggismos is the Pythagorean technical term for metempsychosis or palingenesis.

^283:7 This paragraph, which breaks the narrative, is introduced to give the myth of the birth of Anubis.

^284:1 Sc. Nephthys.

^284:2 Meli-lote--lotos in Greek stands for several plants; it might be translated as "honey-lotus." Cf. xxxviii. 5.

^284:3 Her legitimate spouse.

^284:4 A term used frequently among the Greeks (who presumably got the idea elsewhere) for the servants, agents, or watchers of the higher Gods; thus the Eagle is called the "winged dog" of Zeus Aesch., Pr., 1022). "Dog," as we have seen (xi. 1, n.) signifies a power of the World, Soul or Great Animal, also of individual souls.

^284:5 That is, "Papyrus." This Byblos was a "city in the Papyrus Swamps of the Delta." (So Budge, op. cit., ii. 190.)

^284:6 ereike--probably a play on the root-meaning of ereikein, "to quiver," is intended. The Egyptian erica was taller and more bushy than ours. Or it may be the tamarisk; elsewhere it is called a mulberry-tree.

^284:7 Sc. the "coffin"--perhaps here signifying what has lately been called the "permanent atom" in man.

^284:8 The ruler of the form-side of things.

^285:1 On the erroneously called "Gnostic" gems, the lopped trunk is a frequent symbol; the lopped "five-branched," presumably.

^285:2 Notice the three stages of awareness: (i.) the babbling of children; (ii.) the intelligence given by the dog; (iii.) the daimonian spirit of a voice (Heb. Bath-kol).

^285:3 Isis, when she first lost Osiris, cut off a curl (xiv. 2).

^285:4 Apparently, though curiously, a play on the Semitic MLK or Malek, "king," and the Greek andr, "man"--that is, "king of men."

^285:5 Or "Nemanos." The names seem to have been impartially maltreated by the copyists; thus we find such variants as Asparte, Sooses, Neimanoe.

^285:6 There was among the ancients an art of name-translation, as Plato tells us in the Story of Atlantis, in which the Atlantic names he says, were translated into Greek by Solon or by the priests of Sais. Here, I believe, there is also a word-play intended. Isis, as we have seen, was pre-eminently Nurse, titthe, a further intensification of the intensified ti-the; from  sqrttha, "suckle"; the common form of "nurse" was ti-the'-ne. On the contrary, athenais is a daughter or derivative of a-the'-ne, one who does not give suck; for Athena was born from the head and was the virgin goddess par excellence. Mythologically, Athenais was wife of Alalkomeneus, the eponymous hero of a city in Boeotia, where was a very ancient temple of Athena. In the Pindaric ode quoted in S. (1) of chapter, "Myth of Man in the Mysteries," Alalkomeneus is given as one of the equivalents for the "first man."

^286:1 The child's name was Diktys, according to viii. 2.

^286:2 The  sqrtdek in daktylos is said to be the same as that in deka, "ten," and "ten" is the number of "perfection."

^286:3 Or "away."

^286:4 Lit., "croaking" like a raven, to match the "twittering" of the swallow.

^286:5 This presumably hints that Isis, as the Divine Mother, endeavours to make all perfect and sound, while the earthly mother prevents this.

^286:6 Sc. the erica.

^286:7 Cf. John xix. 40: "So they took the body of Jesus and wrapped it in fine linen together with sweet herbs."

^286:8 to xulon--the term used repeatedly in the New Testament for the cross.

^287:1 Or "swooned," or lost consciousness.

^287:2 faidros--lit., Bright, Beaming, Shining--that is, the Sun-stream.

^287:3 Or "breath" (pneuma).

^287:4 That is "at sun-rise."

^287:5 Cf. viii. 2.

^287:6 Sc. of the boat of Isis.

^287:7 Man-erus. I fancy this is a play, in conjunction with the kata-man-than-onta, and apo-than-onta (the "understanding" and "dying away") above; the name would then mean either "love of understanding" or "understanding of love."

^287:8 palaistinos--perhaps a play on palaiste's, "a wrestler"; hence a "rival" or "suitor."

^287:9 Pelusium; the Pelusian was the eastern mouth of the Nile.

^287:10 See note on xii. 1.

^288:1 Generally supposed to stand for the city Buto, but may be some word-play. Can it be connected with Bootes, the Ploughman--the constellation Arcturus--the voyage being celestial; that is, a movement of the world-soul or change of state in the individual soul? Budge (p. 192) gives its Egyptian equivalent as Per-Uatchit, i.e. "House of the Eye."

^288:2 Lit., from her feet.

^288:3 Lit., vessel; may also mean "cell."

^288:4 Vulg., "hunting."

^288:5 ele--a probable play on the di-elein ("tear to pieces") above.

^288:6 Sc. the crocodiles.

^288:7 It is remarkable how that every now and then Plutarch inserts apparently the most naive superstitions without a word of explanation. They cannot be all simply irresponsible on dits. It is, perhaps, not without significance that the "chest" is first of all drifted to the Papyrus country, and that the baris of Isis should be made of papyrus. It seems almost as if it symbolised some "vehicle" that was safe from the "crocodile" of the deep. In other words, the skiffs are not paper boats and the crocodiles not alligators.

^289:1 "And Egypt they say is the body" to quote a refrain from Hippolytus concerning the "Gnostics."

^289:2 Presumably of the fourteen sacred ones.

^289:3 lepiduton.

^289:4 fagron.

^289:5 oxurygxon.

^289:6 Anthropologically, "taboo."

^289:7 What these "fourteen parts" of Osiris may be is beyond the sphere of dogmatism. I would suggest that there may be along one line some connection with those seeds of life which have lately been called "permanent atoms"; and along another line, that of the birth of the Christ-consciousness, there may be a series of powers derived from past incarnations.

^290:1 Hades.

^290:2 The "Horse" may symbolise purified passion, and "Lion" a certain receptive power of the mind.

^290:3 The white "Horse" was presumably opposed to the red "Ass" of Typhon, as the purified vehicle of the soul contrasted with the impure. "Lion" was one of the grades in the Mithriac Mysteries; it was a sun-animal.

^290:4 Eg. Ta-urt (Budge, op. cit., p. 193).

^290:5 That is, by the Companions of Horus (or Disciples of the Christ)--a frequent scene in the vignettes of the Book of the Dead.

^290:6 That is, in the public mystery processions.

^291:1 The symboliser as well as the interpreter of the Gods.

^291:2 Cf. liv. 3.

^291:3 Or it may mean "completion" (teleyte'n).

^291:4 In Eg. Heru-p-khart, i.e., "Horus the Younger."

^291:5 tois katuthen gyiois--but, presumably, not from above downwards.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

THE UNDER-MEANING A REFLEXION OF A CERTAIN REASON 

XX. I. These are approximately the chief headings of their myth, after the most ill-omened have been removed,--such as, for instance, the one about the cutting up into pieces of Horus, and the beheading of Isis. 

2. That, however, if people suppose and say these things about that Blessed and Incorruptible Nature according to which especially the Divine conceives itself, as though they were actually enacted and really took place, "thou shouldst spit out and cleanse mouth," according to Aeschylus, [*6] there is no need to tell thee; [*7] for of thyself thou showest displeasure at those who hold illegitimate and barbarous notions about the Gods. 

[p. 292]

3. But that these things are not at all like lean tales and quite empty figments, such as poets and prose-writers weave and expand as though they were spiders spinning them out of themselves from a source that has no basis in fact, but that they contain certain informations and statements,--thou knowest of thyself. 

4. And just as the Mathematici [*1] say that "Iris" [*2] is the sun's reflexion many-coloured by the return of its visual impression to the cloud, so the myth down here is a reflexion of a certain reason (logos) that bends its thinking back on other things; as both the sacred offerings suggest by the reflected element of mournfulness and sadness they contain, and also the dispositions of the temples which in one direction open out into side-walks and courts for moving about in, open to the sky and clear of objects, while in the other they have hidden and dark robing-rooms under ground, like places for putting coffins in and burying-spots. 

Footnotes

^291:6 Ed. Nauck, p. 84.

^291:7 Sc. Klea.

^292:1 Presumably, again, the Pythagorean grade above the Hearers.

^292:2 Sc. the rainbow.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

CONCERNING THE TOMBS OF OSIRIS 

5. And not least of all does the belief of the Osirians--since the body [of Osiris] is said to be in many places--[suggest this]. 

6. For they say that both Diochite is called Polichne, [*3] because it alone has the true one; and [also] that it is at Abydos that the wealthy and powerful of the Egyptians are mostly buried,--their ambition being to have a common place of burial with the body of Osiris; and [again] that it is at Memphis that the Apis is 

[p. 293]

reared as the image of the soul of Osiris, because it is there also that his body lies. 

7. And as for the City, [*1] some interpret it as "Harbour of Good Things," but others give it the special meaning of "Tomb of Osiris"; it is, however, the little island one [*2] at Philae [they say] which is in other respects inaccessible and inapproachable by all, and that not even the birds light on it or fish come near it, but at a certain season the priests cross over [to it] and make offerings to the dead, and place wreaths on the monument which is overshadowed by a . . . [*3] tree, which is greater in size than any olive. 

XXI. 1. Eudoxus, however, [says] that, though many tombs are spoken of in Egypt, the body lies at Busiris, for that this had been the native city of Osiris; nevertheless Taphosiris requires no further reason [to establish its claim], for the name explains itself--namely, "Burying of Osiris." 

"But I rede of cutting of wood, of rending of linen, and pouring of pourings, because many of the mystery-[meanings] have been mixed up with them." [*4] 

[p. 294]

2. But the priests say that not only of these Gods, but also of all the other gods also who are not ingenerable and indestructible, the bodies lie buried with them when they [*1] have done their work, and have service rendered them, while their souls shine in heaven as 

[p. 295]

stars; and that [of the former] the [soul] of Isis is called Dog by the Greeks, but Sothis by the Egyptians, while the [soul] of Horus [is called] Orion, [*1] and Typhon's Bear. [*2] 

3. And [they say] that for the burials of the animals to whom honour is paid, the rest [of the Egyptians] pay the [dues which are] mutually determined; but that those alone who inhabit the Thebaid give nothing, since they believe that no God is subject to death, and that he whom they themselves call Kneph is ingenerable and immortal. 

Footnotes

^292:3 Either the reading is at fault, or some word-play is intended. Dio-chite is probably Zeus-something; but I cannot resolve it. While Polichne is a rare diminutive of polis, and would thus mean "Little City."

^293:1 ? Memphis; or, perhaps, as contrasted with the Little City above.

^293:2 Sc. city; nistitanen is a hopeless reading, and as the editors can make nothing out of it, I suggest nesitida or nesidanen (polin).

^293:3 methides--apparently an error; Bernardakis suggests minthes (Lat. mentha) "mint." Can the right reading be medikeis (poas)? The herba medica, was, however, the sainfoin or lucerne, which, though reminding us of the melilote of xiv., is hardly capable of overshadowing a tomb even in the most intricate symbolical sense.

^293:4 Evidently a verbal quotation from Eudoxus. The "cutting of wood" presumably refers to the trunk with lopped branches, which, as we have already mentioned, occurs so frequently on so-called "Gnostic" gems; the "rending of linen" (linoy) might also be made to refer to Linus, the Bard, and his being torn to pieces like Osiris; Linos also means the "Song of Linus," so called, it is supposed by some, because in earliest times the strings of the cithara were made of flax. For other names of singers used for lays or modes of song, compare Maneros and Paean; though, of course, the modern way is to regard the singer as the personification of the lay. Thus in Emil Naumann's History of Music (trans, by F. Praeger; London, 1882), p. 3, we read: "The Greek tribes of Peloponnesus and Hellas, as well as the Egyptians, Phoenicians, the Greeks inhabiting the isles of the Aegean Sea, and especially those of Cyprus, had a primitive 'Lament' which seems to have come originally from Phoenicia. It was a funeral chant on the death of the youthful Adonis. . . . The Egyptians changed its signification into a lament of Isis for Osiris. The Greeks called it Linos, and the Egyptians Maneros." The beginning of the "Maneros," or the Lament of Isis for her Beloved, is given as follows by Naumann (p. 40):"Return, oh, return! 
God Panu, return! 
Those that were enemies are no more here. 
Oh lovely helper, return, 
That thou may'st see me, thy sister, 
Who loves thee. 
And com'st thou not near me?
O beautiful youth, return, oh, return! 
When I see thee not 
My heart sorrows for thee, 
My eyes ever seek thee, 
I roam about for thee, to see thee in the form of the Nai, 
To see thee, to see thee, thou beautiful lov'd one.
Let me the Radiant, see thee
God Panu, All-Glory, see thee again! 
To thy beloved come, blessed Onnofris, 
Come to thy sister, come to thy wife, 
God Urtuhet, oh, come! 
Come to thy consort!"Unfortunately, Naumann does not give any references by which we can control his statements.

^294:1 The bodies; presumably referring to the mummies of those men and women who were believed to have reached the god-stage while living.

^295:1 Cf. xxii. 3.

^295:2 Probably all name-plays: kuun (dog),  sqrtky (conceive)--see lxi. 6; H-or-os, Or-ion; ark-tos (bear),  sqrtark (suffice, endure, bear); Ursa Major is called the Wain.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

CONCERNING THE THEORY OF EVEMERUS 

XXII. 1. Now, since many of such [? tombs] are spoken of and pointed out, those who think these [myths] commemorate the awe-inspiring and mighty works and passions of kings and tyrants who, through surpassing virtue and power, put in a claim for the reputation of divinity, and afterwards experienced reverses of fortune,--employ a very easy means of escape from the [true] reason (logos), and not unworthily transfer the ill-omened [element in them] from Gods to men, and they have the following to help them from the narratives related. 

2. For instance, the Egyptians tell us that Hermes had a short-armed [*3] body, that Typhon was red-skinned, 

[p. 296]

[paragraph continues] Horus white, and Osiris black, as though they were [men] born in the course of nature. 

3. Moreover, also, they call Osiris "General" and Kanobus [*1] "Pilot,"--from whom, they say, the star got its name. 

And [they say] that the ship which Greeks call Argo is an image of the bark of Osiris, constellated in his honour, and that it sails not far from Orion and Dog, the former of which Egyptians consider the sacred [boat] of Horus and the latter of Isis. [*2] 

XXIII. 1. But I am afraid that this is "moving the immoveable," and "warring" not only "against many centuries," according to Simonides, [*3] but "against many nations of men" and races held fast by religious feeling towards these Gods--when people let nothing alone but transfer such mighty names from heaven to earth, and [so] banish and dissolve the sense of worship and faith that has been implanted in nearly all [men] from their first coming into existence, opening up wide entrances for the godless folk, [*4] and reducing the divine [mysteries] to the level of men's doings, and giving a splendid licence to the charlatanries of Evemerus [*5] the Messenian, who of himself composing the counterpleas of a baseless science of myths unworthy of any credit, flooded the civilised world with sheer atheism, listing off level all those who are looked on as gods into names of generals and admirals and kings, who (he is good enough to say) 

[p. 297]

existed in bygone days, and are recorded in letters of gold at Panchon, [*1]--which [records] neither any non-Greek nor any Greek has ever come across, but Evemerus alone, when he went his voyage to the Panchoans and Triphyllians, who never have been nor are anywhere on earth. 

XXIV. 1. And yet mighty deeds of Semiramis are sung of among Assyrians, and mighty [deeds] of Sesostris in Egypt. And Phrygians even unto this day call splendid and marvellous doings "manic," owing to the fact that Manes, one of their bygone kings, proved himself a good and strong man among them--the one whom some call Mazdes. [*2] Cyrus led Persians and Alexander Macedonians, conquering to almost the ends of the earth; still they have the name and memory of good kings [only]. 

2. "And if some elated by vast boastfulness," as Plato says, [*3] "concomitant with youth and ignorance, through having their souls inflamed with pride," have accepted titles like gods and dedications of temples, their glory has flourished for a short time [only], and afterwards they have incurred the penalty of vanity and imposture coupled with impiety and indecency: [*4] 

Death coming swift on them, like smoke they rose and fell. [*5]

And now like runaway [slaves] that can be lawfully 

[p. 298]

taken, torn from the temples and altars, they have naught but their tombs and graves. 

3. Wherefore Antigonus the Elder, when a certain Hermodotus, in his poems, proclaimed him "Son of the Sun and God," remarked: "My night-stool boy has not so exalted an opinion of me." 

And with reason also did Lysippus, the sculptor, blame Apelles, the painter, for putting a thunderbolt in Alexander's hand when painting his portrait; whereas he himself gave him a spear-head,--from which not even time itself shall take away the glory, for it is true and really his. 

Footnotes

^295:3 gali-agkuna--lit., weasel-armed. Now, as we are told further on (lxxiv. 3) that the weasel (galei), or marten, was fabled to conceive through the ear and bring forth through the mouth, this animal was evidently a symbol of mind-conception. "Weasel-armed" may thus symbolise some faculty of the interpretative mind (Hermes).

^296:1 Canopus was fabled to be the pilot of the bark of Osiris; in Greek mythology he was the pilot of the General Menelaos on his return from Troy.

^296:2 Cf. xxi. 2.

^296:3 Bergk, iii. 522.

^296:4 Or "atheists." "An evident allusion to the Christians," says King (in loc.); but we think Plutarch was more impersonal than his commentator.

^296:5 E. flourished in the last quarter of the 4th century B.C.

^297:1 The capital, presumably, of the mythical island of Panchaea, which was supposed to be somewhere on the southern coast of Asia, and to which Evemerus pretended he had sailed on a voyage down the Red Sea.

^297:2 King notes: "The common title of the Sassanean kings was 'Masdesin'--'servant of Ormazd.'"

^297:3 Legg., 716 A.

^297:4 A bold thing to write in an age of Emperor-divinising.

^297:5 Apparently from an otherwise unknown poet. See Bergk, iii. 637.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

THE THEORY OF THE DAIMONES 

XXV. [*1] 1. They, therefore, [do] better who believe that the things related about Typhon and Osiris and Isis are passions neither of gods nor of men, but of mighty daimones, who--as Plato and Pythagoras and Xenocrates and Chrysippus say, following the theologers of bygone days--have been born more manful than men, far surpassing us in the strength of their nature, yet not having the divine unmixed and pure, but proportioned with the nature of soul and sense of body, susceptible of pleasure and pain and all the passions, which as innate to such metamorphoses trouble some [of them] more and others less. 

2. For the Gigantic and Titanic [Passions] sung of among the Greeks, and certain lawless deeds of Kronos and antagonisms of Python against Apollo, and fleeings of Dionysus, and wanderings of Demeter, in no way fall behind the Osiric and Typhonic [Passions], and others which all may hear unrestrainedly spoken of in myth. 

And all these things which, under the veil of mystic 

[p. 299]

sacred rites and perfectionings, are carefully kept from being spoken of to, or being allowed to be seen by, the multitude, have a similar reason (logos). [*1] 

XXVI. 1. Moreover, we hear Homer also on every occasion calling the good variously "godlike" and "equal to gods," and as "having directions [*2] from gods"; whereas he employs epithets connected with the daimones to both worthy and unworthy in common: 

Draw nigh them daimonian! Why so fearest the Argives? [*3] 

And again: 

But when indeed for the fourth time he charged, a daimon's equal. [*4] 

And: 

O thou daimonian! what so great ills do Priam now 
And Priam's sons to thee, that thou dost hotly rage 
Troy's well-built town to rase? [*5] 

--as though the daimones possessed a mixed and an unbalanced nature and propensity. 

2. For which reason Plato [*6] refers unto the God upon Olympus' height things "right" and "odd," [*7] and to the daimones those that respond to these. [*8] 

3. Moreover, Xenocrates [*9] thinks that the nefast days, and all the holy days on which are strikings or beatings or fastings or blasphemies or foul language, have nothing to do with honours paid to gods or to beneficent daimones; but that there are natures in 

[p. 300]

the circumambient, [*1] mighty and powerful indeed, but difficult to turn and sullen, who take pleasure in such things, and when they get them turn to nothing worse. 

4. The beneficent and good ones, again, Hesiod also calls "holy daimones" and "guardians of men"--"wealth-givers and possessors of this sovereign prerogative." [*2] 

5. Plato [*3] again gives to this race the name of hermeneutic and of diaconic [*4] 'twixt Gods and men, speeding up thitherwards men's vows and prayers, and bringing thence prophetic answers hitherwards and gifts of [all] good things. 

6. Whereas Empedocles [*5] says that the daimones have to amend whatever faults they make, or discords they may strike: 

"For aether's rush doth chase them seawards; sea spews them on land's flat; and earth into the beams of tireless sun; and he casts [them again] into the swirls of aether. One takes them from another, and all abhor [them]" [*6]--until after being thus chastened and purified they regain their natural place and rank. 

XXVII. 1. Born from the self-same womb as these and things like them, they say, are the legends about Typhon: how that he wrought dire deeds through envy and ill-will, and after throwing all things into confusion and filling the whole earth and sea as well with ills, he afterwards did make amends. 

[p. 301]

2. But the sister-wife [*1] of Osiris who upheld his honour, after she had quenched and laid to rest Typhon's frenzy and fury, did not allow forgetfulness and silence to overtake the struggles and trials he had endured, and her own wanderings and many [deeds] of wisdom, and many [feats] of manliness; but intermingling with the most chaste perfectionings images and under-meanings and copies of the passion she then endured, she hallowed at one and the same time a lesson of religion and a consolation to men and women placed in like circumstances.

3. And she and Osiris, being changed through virtue from good daimones into gods [*2]--as [were] subsequently Heracles and Dionysus--possess the dignities of gods and daimones at one and the same time, fitly combined everywhere indeed but with the greatest power among those above earth and under earth. 

Footnotes

^298:1 This chapter is quoted by Eusebius, Praep. Ev., V. v. 1.

^299:1 Sc. to the mysteries of the Egyptians.

^299:2 me'dea--also meaning virilia.

^299:3 Il., xiii. 810.

^299:4 Il., v. 438.

^299:5 Il., iv. 31 f.

^299:6 Legg., 717 A.

^299:7 Pythagorean technical terms.

^299:8 ta antifuna--the meaning seeming to be rather that of "concord" than of "discord."

^299:9 An immediate pupil of Plato's.

^300:1 The air or ether that surrounds the earth.

^300:2 Op. et Dies, 126.

^300:3 Symp., 202 E.

^300:4 That is, "interpretative and ministering."

^300:5 E. flourished 494-434 B.C.

^300:6 Stein, 377 ff.; Karsten, 16 ff.; Fairbanks, p. 204. The quotation appears to me inapposite, for Empedocles seems to be speaking of "any who defile their bodies sinfully" and not of daimones; but perhaps the "received" recombination of the fragments is at fault.

^301:1 See the note on "sister-wife" in comment on Mariamne (Hipp., Philos.--Introd.) in chapter on "Myth of Man."--Prolegg., p. 147, n. 7.

^301:2 That is to say, according to this theory the myth represented the degree of initiation by which a man passed from the stage of daimon into the state of god, or from super-man to christ.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

CONCERNING SARAPIS

4. For they say that Sarapis is no other than Pluto, and Isis Persephassa, as Archemachus of Euboea has said, [*3] and Heracleides of Pontus, when he supposes that the seat of the oracle at Canopus is Pluto's. 

XXVIII. 1. And Ptolemy the Saviour [*4] saw in a dream the gigantic statue of Pluto--though he had not previously seen or known what form it was--ordering him to bring it to Alexandria. 

[p. 302]

2. And when he did not know and had no idea where [the statue] was set up even after he had described his vision to his friends, there was found a man, a great traveller, by name Sosibius, who said he had seen at Sinope just such a colossus as the King seemed to have seen. 

3. He [Ptolemy] accordingly sent Soteles and Dionysius, who, after expending much time and pains, not, however, without the help of God's providence, removed it secretly and brought it away. 

4. And when it had been brought [to Alexandria] and set up publicly, the assistants of Timotheus, the interpreter, and of Manethos, the Sebennyte, coming to the conclusion that it was a statue of Pluto--judging by its cerberus and huge serpent--convinced Ptolemy that it was that of no other of the Gods than Sarapis; for it did not come from Sinope with this designation, but after it had been brought to Alexandria it received the Egyptian name for Pluto, namely, Sarapis. 

5. And yet people sink into the opinion of Heracleitus the physicist, when he says: "Hades [*1] and Dionysus are the same, for whomsoever they rage and riot." 

For those who postulate that Hades means the body, because the soul is as it were deranged and drunken in it, put forward a [too] meagre interpretation. 

6. But [it is] better to identify Osiris with Dionysus, and Sarapis [*2] with Osiris, so designated after he had changed his nature. [*3] Wherefore "Sarapis" is common to all, [*4] just as, you know, those who share in the sacred rites know that "Osiris" is. 

[p. 303]

XXIX. 1. For it is not worth while paying attention to the Phrygian writings, in which Isis is said to have been the daughter of Charops, [*1] son of Heracles, and Typhon [son] of Aeacus, [*2] [also] son of Heracles. 

2. Nor [is it worth while] refraining from disregarding Phylarchus, [*3] when he writes that "it was Dionysus who first brought two oxen from India to Egypt, of which the name of one was Apis, and of the other Osiris; and Sarapis is the name of Him who orders [or adorns] the universe from sairein ['sweep,' 'clean'], which some say [means] 'beautifying' and 'adorning'";--for these [remarks] of Phylarchus are absurd. 

3. But still more so are those of them who say that Sarapis is not a god, but that the coffin of Apis [*4] is thus named, and that certain brazen gates at Memphis, called "Gates of Oblivion and Wailing," open with a deep mournful sound, when they bury Apis, and that therefore at every sounding of brass [*5] we are plunged into oblivion. 

4. More moderate are they who claim that the 

[p. 304]

simultaneous motion of the universe is thus called [sc. Sarapis], from seuesthai and sousthai [*1] ["speed"]. 

5. But the majority of the priests say that "Osiris" and "Apis" have been woven together into the same [name], explaining and teaching that we should look on the Apis as an en-formed image of the soul of Osiris. 

6. If, however, the name of Sarapis is Egyptian, I for my part think it denotes "Good Cheer" and "Delight,"--finding a proof in the fact that Egyptians call the feast "Delights"--Sairei. 

And, indeed, Plato says that Hades has been so called as being "sweet" [*2] and gentle to those with him. 

7. And with Egyptians both many other of their names are logoi, [*3] and they call subterrene space, to which they think the souls depart after death, Amenthe--the name signifying "the [space] which takes and gives." [*4] 

8. But whether this, too, is one of the names that left Hellas long ago and have been brought back again, [*5] we will examine later on; for the present, let us continue with the remaining [points] of the belief we have in hand. 

Footnotes

^301:3 Muller, iv. 315.

^301:4 The first Greek King of Egypt, 324-285 B.C.

^302:1 That is, Pluto.

^302:2 Sar-apis--a combination of Osiris and Apis, the soul of Osiris; cf. xxix. 5. In Eg. Asar-Hapi.

^302:3 Presumably from that of a daimon to that of a god.

^302:4 That is, apparently, a common principle in all men.

^303:1 Lit. "Bright- (or Glad-) eyed."

^303:2 Lit., "Wailer."

^303:3 A historian; flourished c. 215 B.C.

^303:4 Apidos soron--another word-play, "sor-apis."

^303:5 exountos . . . xalkw'matos. This has, nevertheless, presumably some mystic meaning. In the myths, cymbals were said to have been used to protect the infant Bacchus, and infant Zeus, and to keep off the Titans--so, presumably, plunging them into oblivion. Compare also 1 Corinth. xiii. 1, where Paul, speaking of the exercise of the "gift of tongues" (glossalaly) without love (agape), uses precisely the same term, when saying: "I am become as sounding brass (xalkos exun) or tinkling cymbal" the latter being, perhaps, a reference to the sistrum, while the former is perhaps a metaphor, derived from the hardness and colour ("red") of brass, or rather bronze or copper, referring to a state of mind which plunges us into oblivion of our better part--namely, spiritual love.

^304:1 A contracted form of the former--from  sqrtsfe or  sqrtsef, with idea of "swiftness." (?) Serapis--sev-a-this--sevesthai.

^304:2 adousion--unknown to the lexicons. I suggest that it may be connected with Edos, from  sqrtsfad of andanu--hence "sweet."

^304:3 Presumably "words of deep meaning"--another technical use of this Proteus-like term.

^304:4 Budge (op. cit., ii. 200) says: "The Egyptian form of the word is Amentet, and the name means 'hidden place.'"

^304:5 How very Greek! Cf. lxi. 4.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

CONCERNING TYPHON 

XXX. 1. Osiris and Isis have, then, changed from good daimones into gods. While as for the dimmed and shattered power of Typhon, though it is at the last 

[p. 305]

gasp and in its final death-throes, they still appease and soothe it with certain feasts of offerings. 

2. Yet, again, every now and then at certain festivals they humiliate it dreadfully and treat it most despitefully,--even to rolling red-skinned men in the mud, and driving an ass over a precipice (as the Koptos folk), because Typhon was born with his skin red and ass-like. While the Busiris folk and Lycopolitans do not use trumpets at all, as they sound like an ass [braying]. 

3. And generally they think that the ass is not clean, but a daimonic animal, on account of its resemblance to that [god]; and making round-cakes for feasts of offerings on both the month of Payni and that of Phaophi, [*1] they stamp on them an "ass tied." [*2] 

4. And on the Feast of Offerings of the Sun, they pass the word to the worshippers not to wear on the body things made of gold nor to give food to an ass. [*3] 

5. The Pythagorics also seem to consider Typhon a daimonic power; for they say that Typhon was produced on the six-and-fiftieth even measure; and again that the [power [*4]] of the equilateral triangle is that of Hades and Dionysus and Ares; that of the square is that of Rhea and Aphrodite and Demeter and Hestia (that is, Hera); that of the dodecagon, that of Zeus; and that of the fifty-six angled [regular polygon], that of Typhon--as Eudoxus relates. [*5] 

[p. 306]

XXXI. 1. And, as Egyptians believe that Typhon was born red-skinned, [*1] they offer in sacrifice even the red ones of the oxen [only] after making the scrutiny so close, that if [the beast] has even a single hair black or white, they consider it ought not to be offered; for if it were sacrificed, it would not be an acceptable offering to the gods, but the contrary, [as are] all those animals which have seized on the souls of impure and unrighteous men in the course of their transformation into bodies other [than human]. 

2. Wherefore after uttering imprecations on the head of the victim, [*2] and cutting off its head, they used to cast it into the river in olden days, but nowadays they give it to strangers. 

3. But as to the one that is to be sacrificed, those of the priests who are called Sealers, set a mark upon it--the seal (as Kastor [*3] relates) having the impression of a man forced down on one knee with his hands drawn round behind him, and a sword sticking in his throat. [*4] 

4. And they think that the ass also has the distinction of its resemblance [to Typhon], as has been said, owing to its aversion to being taught and to its wantonness, no less than on account of its skin. [*5] 

5. For which cause also since they especially detested 

[p. 307]

[paragraph continues] Ochus [*1] of [all] the Persian kings as being blood-polluted and abominable, they gave him the nickname of "Ass." 

But he, with the retort: "This Ass, however, will make a fine feast off your Ox"--slaughtered the Apis, as Deinon has told us. [*2] 

6. Those, however, who say that Typhon's flight from the fight on an ass lasted seven days, and that after reaching a place of safety he begat sons--Hierosolymus and Judaeus--are instantly convicted of dragging Judaic matters into the myth. [*3] 

Footnotes

^305:1 Copt. Paoni and Paopi--corr. roughly with June and October.

^305:2 onon dedemenon. Cf. Matt. xxi. 2: onon dedemenen; cf. also 1. 3, where it is a hippopotamus.

^305:3 That is, presumably, not to weigh down their minds with the superfluity of riches, nor to feed up the stupid and lustful energies of their souls.

^305:4 A "power" in Pythagorean technology is the side of a square (or, perhaps, of any equilateral polygon) in geometry; and in arithmetic the square root, or that which being multiplied into itself produces the square.

^305:5 Eudoxus seems to have been Plutarch's authority for his statements regarding Pythagorean doctrine; cf. vi., lii., lxii. The Typhonic figure might be generated by "sevening" the interior angles of a regular octagon and producing the radii to the circumference of the circumscribed circle, or by "eighting" the interior angles of a regular heptagon.

^306:1 Or "fire-coloured."

^306:2 Compare the Ritual of Azazel (the scape-goat), one of the two goats set apart on the Great Day of Atonement among the Jews (Lev. xvi. 8 ff.).

^306:3 Cf. also Plut., Aetia Romana, x. Castor was a Greek historian who was a contemporary of Cicero and Julius Caesar.

^306:4 The ox was, therefore, the vicarious atonement of the man.

^306:5 It was a red ass, then, which symbolised the Typhonic power.

^307:1 Cf. xi. 4.

^307:2 Muller, ii. 95. Deinon was a contemporary of Alexander the Great, and wrote a history of Persia.

^307:3 This item of ancient scandal would almost seem to have come from the pen of an Apion; it is an interesting specimen of theological controversy in story-form.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

THE THEORY OF THE PHYSICISTS 

XXXII. 1. [*4] The above [data] then afford [us] such and such suggestions. But from another start let us consider the simplest of those who seem to give a more philosophical explanation. 

2. These are those who say that, just as the Greeks allegorise time as Kronos, and air as Hera, and the changes of air into fire as the generation of Hephaestus, so, with the Egyptians, Osiris uniting with Isis (earth) is Neilos, and Typhon is the sea, into which Neilos falling vanishes and is dispersed, except such part [of him] as the earth takes up and receives, and so becomes endowed with productiveness by him. 

3. And there is a sacred dirge made on Kronos [*5]--and it laments "him who is born in the left-hand and died in the right-hand parts." 

[p. 308]

4. For Egyptians think that the eastern [parts] of cosmos are "face," the northern "right hand," and the southern "left hand." 

5. The Nile, accordingly, since it flows from the southern [parts] and is consumed by the sea in the northern, is naturally said to have its birth in the left hand and its death in the right hand. 

6. Wherefore the priests both pronounce the sea expiate and call salt "Typhon's foam"; and one of the chief prohibitions they have is: "Not to set salt on table." And they do not give greeting to sailors, [*1] because they use the sea, and get their living from it. And for this cause chiefly they accuse fish of being a cause of offence, and write up: "Hate fish!" 

7. At anyrate at Sais, in the entrance of the temple of Athena, there used to be chiselled up "babe," "old man," and after that "hawk," then "fish," and last of all "hippopotamus." 

8. This meant in symbols: "O ye who are being born and are dying, God hates shamelessness." 

9. For "babe" is the symbol of birth, and "old man" of death, and by "hawk" they mean God, and by "fish" hatred--as has been said on account of the sea--and by "hippopotamus" shamelessness, for it is fabled that after it has killed its sire it violates its dam. 

10. Moreover, what is said by the Pythagorics, namely, that the sea is the tears of Kronos, would seem to riddle the fact of its not being pure and cognate with itself. 

11. Let these things then be stated from outside sources as matters of common information. 

XXXIII. 1. But the more wise of the priests call not only the Nile Osiris, and the sea Typhon; but [they 

[p. 309]

call] without exception every source and power that moistens, Osiris--considering [him] cause of generation and essence of seed, and Typhon everything dry and fiery, and of a drying nature generally and one hostile to moisture. 

2. And for this cause also, as they think he [Typhon] was born with a reddish-yellow body, somewhat pale, they do not by any means readily meet or willingly associate with men that look like this. 

3. On the other hand, again, they say in the language of myth that Osiris was born black, because all [Nile] water blackens both earth and garments and clouds when mixed [with them], and [because] moisture in the young makes their hair black, whereas greyness comes on those past their prime, as though it were a turning pale owing to its drying up. 

4. The spring, too, is blooming and productive and balmy; but autumn, through lack of moisture, is inimical to plants and baneful to animals. 

5. And the ox that is kept at Sun-city which they call Mnevis--sacred to Osiris, while some also consider it sire of Apis--is black [also] and has second honours after Apis. 

6. Moreover, they call Egypt, since it is especially black-soiled, just like the black of the eye, Chemia, and liken it to a heart; for it is warm and moist, and is mostly confined in, and adjacent to, the southern part of the civilised world, just like the heart [is] in man's left-hand side. 

XXXIV. 1. Moreover, they say that sun and moon do not use chariots for vehicles, but sail round in boats--[thus] riddling their being nourished by and being born in the "Moist." 

2. And they think that Homer also, like Thales, set down Water as source and birth of all things, after 

[p. 310]

learning [it] from Egyptians; for that Oceanus is Osiris, and Tethys [*1] Isis, as nursing all things and rearing them all up together. 

3. For Greeks also call "emission of seed" ap-oysian and "intercourse" syn-oysian, and "son" (yion) from "water" (ydatos) and "moisten" (ysai); [*2] and [they call] Dionysus Hues, as lord of the Moist Nature, in that he is no other than Osiris. 

4. In fact, Hellanicus [*3] seems to have heard Osiris called Hu-siris by the priests; for he persists in thus calling the god, presumably from his nature and power of invention. [*4] 

Footnotes

^307:4 This paragraph and the next is quoted by Eusebius, Praep. Ev., III. iii. 11.

^307:5 That is Nile.

^308:1 Lit., "pilots"; but presumably here used in a more general sense.

^310:1 As connected with Te'the, the Nurse of all, and identified by some with the Primal Earth; and so signified by the word-play Tethun and tithen-oymenen ("nursing").

^310:2 The word-play runs: ap-ous-ia, sun-ous-ia, hu-ion, hud-atos, hus-ai.

^310:3 The most eminent of the Greek logographers; fl. 553-504 B.C.

^310:4 eyreseus--probably another word-play, heuresis and husiris.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

CONCERNING OSIRIS AND DIONYSUS 

XXXV. 1. That, however, he is the same as Dionysus--who should know better than thou thyself, O Klea, who art Archi-charila [*5] of the Thyiades at Delphi, 

[p. 311]

and wast dedicated to the Osiriaca before thou wert born? [*1] 

But if for the sake of others we must quote testimonies, let us leave the things that must not be spoken of in their proper place. 

2. The rites, however, which the priests perform in burning the Apis, when they transport its body on a raft, in no way fall short of a Bacchic Orgy. For they put on fawn-skins and carry thyrsuses, [*2] and shout and dance just like those inspired at celebrations of the Mysteries of Dionysus. 

3. Wherefore many of the Greeks make Dionysus also bull-formed; while the women of the Eleians invoke him praying "the god with the bull's foot to come" to them. 

4. The Argives, moreover, give Dionysus the epithet of "bull-born," and they call him up out of the water with the sound of trumpets, casting a lamb into the abyss for the Gate-keeper. [*3] The trumpets they hide in thyrsi, as Socrates has said in his "[Books] on Rites." [*4] 

5. The Titanic [Passions] also and the [Dionysian] Night-rites agree with what we are told about the tearings-in-pieces and revivings and palingeneses of Osiris; and similarly the [stories] of the burials. 

[p. 312]

6. For both Egyptians point to tombs of Osiris everywhere, as has been said, [*1] and [also] Delphians believe the relics of Dionysus are deposited with them by the side of the Oracle, and the Holy Ones offer an offering, of which we must not speak, in the fane of Apollo, when the Thyiades awake "Him of the winnowing fan." 

7. And that Greeks consider Dionysus to be lord and prince not only of wine, but of every moist nature, Pindar witnesses sufficiently when he sings: 

May gladsome Dionysus make the pasturage of trees to grow--
Pure light of autumn. [*2] 

8. For which cause also they who give worship to Osiris are forbidden to destroy a cultivated tree or to stop up a water-source. 

Footnotes

^310:5 The text reads arxikla--an apparently impossible collection of letters. As no one has so far purged the reading, I would suggest xarilan or arxi-xarilan. Stending (in Roscher, s.v.) reminds us of the myth of the orphan maid Charila, who during a famine begged alms at the gate of the palace of the King of ancient Delphi; the King not only refused her, but drove her away slapping her face with his shoe. Whereupon the little maid for shame hanged herself. After the famine was over the Oracle decreed an atonement for her death. And so every nine years an effigy made to represent Charila was done to death, and then carried off by the leader of the Thyiades (or priestesses of Bacchus), and buried, with a rope round its neck, in a gorge. Cf. Harrison (Jane E.), Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion (Cambridge, 1903), p. 106. As Klea was leader of the Thyiades, this office fell to her; it may, therefore, even be that her name is some play on Charila.

^311:1 Lit., "from father and mother."

^311:2 Symbolic wands, generally cane-like or knotted like a bamboo, and sometimes wreathed in ivy and vine leaves, with a pine-cone at top.

^311:3 tui pylaoxui.

^311:4 Muller, iv. 498. This was probably Socrates of Cos, who is known to have been the author of a work entitled Epikle'seis theun (e.g. Dion. Laert., ii. 4), meaning either "Prayers to the Gods," or "Surnames of the Gods."

^312:1 Cf. xx. 5.

^312:2 Bergk, i. 433.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

THE THEORY OF THE PHYSICISTS RESUMED 

XXXVI. 1. And they call not only the Nile, but also without distinction all that is moist, "Osiris' efflux"; and the water-vase always heads the processions of the priests in honour of the God. 

2. And with "rush" [*3] they write "king" and the "southern climate" of the cosmos; and "rush" is interpreted as "watering" and "conception" of all things, and is supposed to resemble in its nature the generative member. 

3. And when they keep the feast Pamylia, which is phallic, as has been said, [*4] they bring out and carry round an image having a phallus three times the size of it. 

[p. 313]

4. For God is source, and every source by the power of generation makes manifold that which comes from it. And "many times" we are accustomed to call "thrice," as, for instance, "thrice-blessed," and "three times as many, endless, bonds" [*1]--unless, indeed, "three fold" was used in its authentic meaning by those of old; for the Moist Nature, as being source and genesis of all, moved from the beginning the first three bodies--earth, air, and fire. 

5. For the logos that is superadded to the myth--how that Typhon cast the chief part of Osiris into the river, and Isis could not find it, but after dedicating an object answering to it, and having made it ready, she commanded them to keep the Phallephoria in its honour--comes to this: namely, an instruction that the generative and spermatic [powers] of the God had moisture as their first matter, and by means of moisture were immingled with those things which have been produced to share in genesis. 

6. But there is another logos of the Egyptians--that Apophis, as brother of the Sun, made war on Zeus, and that when Osiris fought on his [Zeus'] side and helped him to conquer his foe, Zeus adopted him as his son and called him Dionysus. 

7. Moreover, the mythical nature of this logos goes to show that it connects with the truth about nature. For Egyptians call [Cosmic] Breath [*2] Zeus--to which Dry and Fiery is hostile; this [latter] is not the Sun, but it has a certain kinship with him. And Moisture, by quenching the excess of Dryness, increases and strengthens the exhalations by which the Breath nourishes itself and waxes strong. 

XXXVII. 1. Moreover, both Greeks consecrate the 

[p. 314]

ivy to Dionysus and [also] among Egyptians it is said to be called chen-osiris--the name meaning, they say, "Osiris-plant." 

2. Further, Ariston, who wrote Colonies of the Athenians, came across some Letter or other of Alexarchus's, [*1] in which it is related that Dionysus, as son of Osiris and Isis, is not called Osiris but Arsaphes by the Egyptians--([this is] in Ariston's first book)--the name signifying "manliness." 

3. Hermaeus also supports this in the first book of his Concerning the Egyptians, for he says that "Osiris" is, when translated, "Strong." [*2] 

4. I disregard Mnaseas, [*3] who associated Dionysus and Osiris and Sarapis with Epaphos; [*4] I also disregard Anticleides, [*5] who says that Isis, as daughter of Prometheus, [*6] lived with Dionysus; for the peculiarities which have been stated about the festivals and offerings carry a conviction with them that is clearer than the witnesses [I have produced]. 

XXXVIII. 1. And of the stars they consider Sirius to be Isis's [*7]--as being a water-bringer. And they honour the Lion, and ornament the doors of the temples with gaping lions' mouths; since Nilus overflows: 

When first the Sun doth with the Lion join. [*8] 

[p. 315]

2. And as they hold the Nile to be "Osiris's efflux," so too they think earth Isis's body--not all [of it], but what the Nile covers, sowing [her] with seed and mingling with her; and from this intercourse they give birth to Horus. 

3. And Horus is the season (ura) and [fair] blend of air that keeps and nourishes all in the atmosphere--who, they say, was nursed by Leto in the marshes round Buto; for the watery and soaked-through earth especially nourishes the exhalations that quench and abate dryness and drought. 

4. And they call the extremities of the land, both on the borders and where touching the sea, Nephthys; for which cause they give Nephthys the name of "End," [*1] and say she lives with Typhon. 

5. And when the Nile exceeds its boundaries and overflows more than usual, and [so] consorts with the extreme districts, they call it the union of Osiris with Nephthys--proof of which is given by the 'springing up of plants, and especially of the honey-clover, [*2] for it was by its falling [from Osiris] and being left behind that Typhon was made aware of the wrong done to his bed. Hence it is that Isis conceived Horus in lawful wedlock, but Nephthys Anubis clandestinely. 

6. In the Successions of the Kings, [*3] however, they record that when Nephthys was married to Typhon, she was at first barren; and if they mean this to apply not to a woman but to their Goddess, they enigmatically refer to the utterly unproductive nature of the land owing to sterility. 

XXXIX. 1. The conspiracy and despotism of Typhon, moreover, was the power of drought getting the mastery over and dispersing the moisture which both generates the Nile and increases it. 

[p. 316]

2. While his helper, the Aethiopian queen, [*1] riddles southerly winds from Aethiopia. For when these prevail over the Annuals [*2] (which drive the clouds towards Aethiopia), and prevent the rains which swell the Nile from bursting,--Typhon takes possession and scorches; and thus entirely mastering the Nile he forces him out into the sea, contracted into himself through weakness and flowing empty and low. 

3. For the fabled shutting-up of Osiris into the coffin is, perhaps, nothing but a riddle of the occultation and disappearance of water. Wherefore they say that Osiris disappeared in the month of Athyr, [*3]--when, the Annuals ceasing entirely, the Nile sinks, and the land is denuded, and, night lengthening, darkness increases, and the power of the light wanes and is mastered, and the priests perform both other melancholy rites, and, covering a cow made entirely of gold [*4] with a black coat of fine linen as a mask of mourning for the Goddess--for they look on the "cow" as an image of Isis and as the earth--they exhibit it for four days from the seventeenth consecutively. 

4. For the things mourned for are four: first, the Nile failing and sinking; second, the northern winds being completely extinguished by the southern gaining the mastery; third, the day becoming less than the night; and, finally, the denudation of the earth, together with the stripping of the trees which shed their leaves at that time. 

5. And on the nineteenth, at night they go down to the sea; and the keepers and priests carry out the 

[p. 317]

sacred chest, having within it a small golden vessel, into which they take and pour fresh water; and shouts are raised by the assistants as though Osiris were found. 

6. Afterwards they knead productive soil with the water, and mixing with it sweet spices and fragrant incense, they mould it into a little moon-shaped image of very costly stuffs. And they dress it up and deck it out,--showing that they consider these Gods the essence of earth and water. 

XL 1. And when again Isis recovers Osiris and makes Horus grow, strengthened with exhalations and moist clouds,--Typhon is indeed mastered, but not destroyed. 

2. For the Mistress and Goddess of the earth did not allow the nature which is the opposite of moisture to be destroyed entirely, but she slackened and weakened it, wishing that the blend should continue; for it was not possible the cosmos should be perfect, had the fiery [principle] ceased and disappeared. 

3. And if these things are not said contrary to probability, it is probable also that one need not reject that logos also,--how that Typhon of old got possession of the share of Osiris; for Egypt was [once] sea. [*1] 

4. For which cause many [spots] in its mines and mountains are found even to this day to contain shells; and all springs and all wells--and there are great numbers of them--have brackish and bitter water, as though it were the stale residue of the old-time sea collecting together into them. 

5. But Horus in time got the better of Typhon,--that, is, a good season of rains setting in, the Nile driving out the sea made the plain reappear by filling it up again with its deposits,--a fact, indeed, to which our 

[p. 318]

senses bear witness; for we see even now that as the river brings down fresh mud, and advances the land little by little, the deep water gradually diminishes, and the sea recedes through its bottom being heightened by the deposits. 

6. Moreover, [we see] Pharos, which Homer [*1] knew as a day's sail distant from Egypt, now part [and parcel] of it; not that the [island] itself has sailed to land, [*2] or extended itself shorewards, but because the intervening sea has been forced back by the river's reshaping of and adding to the mainland. 

7. These [explanations], moreover, resemble the theological dogmas laid down by the Stoics,--for they also say that the generative and nutritive Breath [or Spirit] is Dionysus; the percussive and separative, Heracles; the receptive, Ammon [Zeus]; that which extends through earth and fruits, Demeter and Kore; and that [which extends] through sea, Poseidon. [*3] 

Footnotes

^312:3 thruon--confounded by King (in loc.) with thrion, "fig leaf" (perhaps connected with tris, from the three lobes of the leaf); the "rush" is presumably the papyrus.

^312:4 Cf. xii.

^313:1 Bernardakis gives the references as Il., vi. 154 and viii. 340, but I am unable to verify them.

^313:2 Or "Spirit" (pneuma).

^314:1 Ariston and Alexarchus and Hermaeus (cf. xlii. 7) seem to be otherwise unknown to fame.

^314:2 ombrimos = obrimos--strong, virile, manly. Cf. the Eleusinian sacred name Brimos for Iacchos.

^314:3 Flourished latter half of 3rd century B.C.

^314:4 Son of Zeus and Io, born in the Nile, after the long wanderings of his mother. He is fabled by the Greeks to have been subsequently King of Egypt and to have built Memphis. Herodotus (ii. 153; iii. 27, 28) says that Epaphos = Apis.

^314:5 A Greek writer subsequent to the time of Alexander the Great.

^314:6 Cf. iii. 1.

^314:7 But cf. lxi. 5.

^314:8 Aratus, Phoenom., 351.

^315:1 Cf. xii. 6.

^315:2 Cf. xiv. 6.

^315:3 Cf. xi. 4.

^316:1 Aso; cf. xiii. 3.

^316:2 The "Etesian" winds, which, in Egypt blew from the N.W. during the whole summer.

^316:3 Copt. Hathor--corr. roughly with November.

^316:4 Cf. "the golden calf" incident of the Exodus story.

^317:1 Another proof of the common persuasion that there had been a Flood in Egypt.

^318:1 Il., iv. 355.

^318:2 A play on the "day's sail" (dromon) and ana-dramousan.

^318:3 It is, of course, a very poor interpretation of the myth to talk only about floods and desert, sea and rain, etc. These are all facts illustrating the underlying truth, but they are not the real meaning.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

THE THEORY OF THE MATHEMATICI 

XLI. 1. Those, however, who combine with the above [considerations] of the Physicists some of the Mathematic [doctrines] derived from star-lore, think that the solar cosmos is called Typhon and the lunar Osiris. [*4] 

2. For [they think] that the Moon, in that its light is generative and moistening, is favourable both for breedings of animals and sproutings of plants; whereas the Sun, with untempered and harsh fire, burns and 

[p. 319]

withers up [all] that are growing and blowing, and with fiery heat renders the major part of the earth entirely uninhabitable, and in many places utterly masters the Moon. 

3. For which cause Egyptians always call Typhon Seth, [*1]--that is, "that which oppresses and constrains by force." 

4. And they have a myth that Heracles is settled in the Sun and accompanies him in his revolutions, while Hermes does the same with the Moon. 

5. For the [revolutions] of the Moon resemble works of reason (logos) and super-abundant wisdom, while those of the Sun are like penetrating strokes [given] with force and power. [*2] 

6. Moreover, the Stoics say that the sun is kept burning and nourished from the sea, [*3] whereas to the Moon the waters of springs and lakes send up a sweet and mild exhalation. 

XLII. 1. The Egyptian myth runs that the death of Osiris took place on the seventeenth, when the full-moon is most conspicuously at the full. 

2. Wherefore the Pythagoreans call this day also "Interception," [*4] and regard this number as expiable. 

3. For the "sixteen" being square and the "eighteen" oblong [*5]--which alone of plane numbers happen to have their perimeters equal to the areas contained by them [*6]--the mean, "seventeen," coming between them, intercepts and divorces them from one another, and divides 

[p. 320]

the ratio of "nine" to "eight" [*1] by being cut into unequal intervals. 

4. And eight-and-twenty is the number of years which some say Osiris lived, and others that he reigned; [*2] for this is the number of the lights of the Moon, and it rolls out its own circle in this number of days. 

5. And at what they call the Burials of Osiris they cut the tree-trunk and make it into a crescent-shaped coffin, because the Moon, when it approaches the Sun, becomes crescent-shaped and hides itself away. 

6. And the tearing of Osiris into fourteen pieces they refer enigmatically to the days in which the luminary wanes after full-moon up to new-moon. 

7. And the day on which it first appears, escaping from his beams and passing by the Sun, they call "Imperfect Good." 

8. For Osiris is "Good-doer." The name, indeed, means many things, but chiefly what they call "Might energising and good-doing." And the other name of the God,--Omphis, Hermaeus [*3] says, means [also] when translated, "Benefactor." 

XLIII. 1. Moreover, they think that the risings of the Nile have a certain analogy with the lights of the Moon. 

2. For the greatest [rising], about Elephantine, is eight-and-twenty cubits, the same number as are the lights and measures of its monthly periods; and the least, about Mendes and Xois, is of six cubits, [analogous] to the half -moon; while the mean, about Memphis, when it is the right quantity, [is] of fourteen cubits, [analogous] to the full-moon. 

[p. 321]

3. And [they consider] the Apis the animated image of Osiris, and that he is conceived whenever generative light from the Moon fastens on a cow in heat. 

4. For which cause also many of the markings of the Apis--lights shading off into darks--resemble the configurations of the moon. 

5. Moreover, on the new-moon of the month Phamenoth [*1] they keep festival, calling it "Entrance" [*2] of Osiris into the Moon, as it is the beginning of spring. 

6. By thus placing the power of Osiris in the Moon, they mean that Isis consorts with him while being [at the same time] the cause of his birth. [*3] 

7. For which cause also they call the Moon Mother of the cosmos, and think that she has a male-female nature,--for she is filled by the Sun and made pregnant, and again of herself sends forth and disseminates into the air generative principles. 

8. For [they say] she does not always overmaster the destruction wrought by Typhon; [*4] but, though frequently mastered, even when bound hand and foot she frees herself again by her generative power, and fights the way through to Horus. 

9. And Horus is the cosmos surrounding the earth--not entirely exempt from destruction either, nor yet from generation. 

XLIV. 1. Some, moreover, make out of the myth a riddle of the phenomena of eclipses also. 

2. For the Moon is eclipsed at the full, when the Sun has the station opposite it, she entering the shadow of the earth,--just as they say Osiris [entered] the 

[p. 322]

coffin. And she again conceals the Sun and causes him to disappear, on the thirtieth [of the month], though she does not entirely destroy him, as neither did Isis Typhon. 

3. And when Nephthys conceives Anubis, Isis adopts him. For Nephthys is that which is below the earth and non-manifest, while Isis [is] that which is above the earth and manifest. 

4. And the circle just touching them and called "Horizon," as being common to both of them, has been called Anubis, and is likened to a dog for its characteristic; for the dog has the use of its sight both by day and night alike. 

5. And Anubis seems to possess this power among Egyptians--just as Hecate with Greeks--being at one and the same time chthonian and olympian. [*1] 

6. Some, however, think that Anubis is Kronos; [*2] wherefore as he breeds all things out of himself and conceives (kuun) [all] in himself, he got the name of Dog (kyw'n). 

7. There is, then, for the worshippers of Anubis some [mystery] or other that may not be spoken of. [*3] 

8. In olden times, indeed, the dog enjoyed the highest honours in Egypt; but seeing that when Cambyses [*4] slew the Apis and cast it out, no [animal] approached or touched its carcase but only the dog, he [thus] lost the [distinction of] being first and most honoured of the rest of the animals. 

9. There are some, however, who call the shadow of the earth into which they think the Moon falls and is eclipsed, Typhon. 

Footnotes

^318:4 This is a worse guess than even that of the Physicists. Cf. li. 5.

^319:1 Cf. lxii. 2 et al.

^319:2 Cf. the Stoic attributes of Heracles in xl. 7.

^319:3 If this is intended for the Great Sea of Space, it would be credible.

^319:4 antifraxin.

^319:5 Square and Oblong were two of the fundamental "pairs of opposites" among the Pythagoreans. Cf. xlviii. 5.

^319:6 

^320:1 The sesquioctave. In areas 8 is half of 16, and 9 of 18; while in a proportional measuring-rod or canon of 27 units, intervals of 8, 9, and 10 units succeeding one another complete the 27.

^320:2 Cf. xiii. 8, 9.

^320:3 Cf. xxxviii. 2.

^321:1 Copt, the same--roughly corr. to March.

^321:2 embasin--or perhaps "Embarking."

^321:3 That is, is both wife and mother.

^321:4 Typhon being the Sun according to this theory.

^322:1 That is, infernal and celestial.

^322:2 In the sense of Time.

^322:3 This seems to suggest that Plutarch, though he faithfully records what "people say," by no means wishes his readers to believe them.

^322:4 But see xi. 4 and xxxi. 4.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 323]

THE THEORY OF THE DUALISTS

XLV. 1. From [all of] which it seems not unreasonable to conclude that no simple [explanation] by itself gives the right meaning, but that they all collectively do so. 

2. For neither drought nor wind nor sea nor darkness is the essential of Typhon, but the whole hurtful and destructive [element] which is in nature. 

3. For we must neither place the principles of the whole in soulless bodies, as [do] Democritus and Epicurus, nor yet assume one Reason (Logos) [only] and one Providence that prevails over and masters all things as demiurge [or artificer] of quality-less matter, as [do] the Stoics. 

4. For it is impossible either that anything at all of no worth should exist where God is cause of all, or of worth where [He is cause] of nothing. 

5. For "reciprocal" [is] cosmos' "harmony, as that of lyre or bow," according to Heracleitus, [*1] and according to Euripides: 

There could not be apart good things and bad, 
But there's a blend of both so as to make things fair. [*2] 

6. Wherefore this exceedingly ancient doctrine also comes down from the theologers and law-givers to poets and philosophers--[a doctrine] that has its origin set down to no man's name, and yet possessed of credit, strong and not so easy to efface, surviving in many places not in words or voices [*3] only, but also in [secret] 

[p. 324]

perfectionings and [public] offerings, both non-Greek and Greek [ones]--that neither does the universe mindless and reason-less and guidance-less float in "That which acts of its own will," nor is there one Reason [only] that rules and guides, as though with rudder as it were and bits obedient to the reins; but that [the universe] is many things and these a blend of evil things and good. 

7. Or, rather, seeing that Nature produces nothing, generally speaking, unmixed down here, it is not that from two jars a single mixer, like a tavern-keeper, pouring things out like drinks, mixes them up for us, but that from two opposite principles and two antagonistic powers--the one leading [things] to the right and on the straight [road], the other upsetting and undoing [them]--both life has been made mixed, and cosmos (if not the whole, at anyrate this [cosmos] which surrounds the earth and comes after the Moon) irregular and variable, and susceptible of changes of every kind. 

8. For if nothing has been naturally brought into existence without a cause, and Good cannot furnish cause of Bad, the nature of Bad as well as Good must have a genesis and principle peculiar to itself. 

XLVI. [*1] 1. And this is the opinion of most of the most wise. 

2. For some think there are two craft-rival Gods, as it were,--one the artificer of good [things], the other of [things] worthless. Others call the better "God" and the other "Daimon," as Zoroaster the Mage, who, they tell us, lived five thousand years before the Trojan War. 

[p. 325]

3. Zoroaster, then, called the one Oromazes, and the other Areimanios, and further announced that the one resembled light especially of things sensible, and the other, contrariwise, darkness and ignorance, while that between the two was Mithres; wherefore the Persians call Mithres the Mediator. 

4. He taught them, moreover, to make offerings of gladsome prayers to the one, and to the other of melancholy de-precations. 

5. For bruising a certain plant called "moly" [*1] in a mortar, they invoke Hades and Darkness; then mixing it with the blood of a wolf whose throat has been cut, they carry it away and cast it into a sunless spot. 

6. For they think that both of plants some are of the Good God and others of the Evil Daimon; and of animals, dogs, for instance, and birds [*2] and hedgehogs of the Good, and water-rats of the Bad; wherefore they consider fortunate the man who kills the largest number [of the last]. 

XLVII. 1. Not that they also do not tell many mythic stories about the Gods; such as are, for example, the following: 

Oromazes, born from the purest light, and Areimanios, of the nether darkness, are at war with one another. 

2. And the former made six Gods: the first of good mind, the second of truth, the third of good order, and of the rest, one of wisdom, one of wealth, and the producer of things sweet following things fair; while the latter [made] craft-rivals as it were to those equal in number. 

3. Then Oromazes having tripled himself, removed himself from the sun so far as the sun is distant from the earth, and adorned the heaven with stars; and he 

[p. 326]

established one star above all as warder and look-out, [namely] Sirius. 

4. And having made four-and-twenty other gods, he put them into an egg. 

Whereupon those that were made from Areimanios, just the same in number, piercing through the egg . . . [*1]--whence the bad have been mingled with the good. 

5. But a time appointed by Fate will come when Areimanios's letting loose of pestilence and famine must be utterly brought to an end, and made to vanish by these [good gods], and the earth becoming plane and level, there must ensue one mode of life and one way of government for men, all being happy and one-tongued. [*2] 

6. Theopompus, however, says that, according to the Magi, for three thousand years alternately one of the Gods conquers and the other is conquered, and for yet another three thousand years they fight and war, and each undoes the work of the other. 

7. But that in the end Hades fails, and men shall be happy, neither requiring food nor casting shadow; [*3] while the God who has contrived these things is still and at rest for a time--not otherwise long for a God, but proportionate to a man's sleeping. 

8. The style of myth among the Magi, then, is somewhat after this manner. 

[p. 327]

XLVIII. 1. Moreover, Chaldaeans declare that of the planets--which they call birth-presiding gods--two are good workers, two ill-doers, while three are intermediates and common. 

2. As for the dogmas of the Greeks, they are, I take it, plain to all, ascribing as they do the good allotment to Olympian Zeus, and that which has to be averted to Hades. 

3. Moreover, they have a myth that Harmony is the child of Aphrodite and Ares, the latter of whom is harsh and strife-loving, while the former is gentle and a lover of love-striving. 

4. For Heracleitus plainly calls "War"--"father and king and lord of all," [*1] and says that Homer, when he prays "that strife and hatred cease from gods as well," [*2] forgets that he is imprecating the means of birth of all, in that they have their genesis from conflict and antipathy; that: 

"Sun will not o'erstep his proper bounds, for if he do, Furies, Eight's bodyguard, will find him out." [*3] 

5. The Pythagorics [also], in a list of names, set down the predicates of Good as--One, Finite, Abiding, Straight, Odd, Square, Equal, Right, Light; and of Bad as--Two, Infinite, Moving, Curved, Even, Oblong, Unequal, Left, Dark,--on the ground that these are the underlying principles of genesis. 

6. Aristotle [also predicates] the former as Form and the latter as Privation. 

7. While Plato, though in many passages disguising himself and hiding his face, calls the former of the opposite principles Same and the latter Other. 

[p. 328]

8. But in his Laws, being now older, no longer in riddles and in symbols, but with authentic names, he says [*1] cosmos is moved not by one soul, but probably by several, in any case not less than two,--whereof the one is good-doing, the other the opposite to this and maker of things opposite. 

9. He leaves out, however, a certain third intermediate nature, neither soul-less nor reason-less nor motion-less of itself, as some think, [*2] but depending on both of them, and for ever longing for and desiring and following after the better, as the following [passages] of the argument (logos), [*3] combining as it does for the most part the theology of the Egyptians with their philosophy, show. 

XLIX. 1. For though the genesis and composition of this cosmos has been blended from opposing, though not equal-strengthed, powers, the lordship is nevertheless that of the Better [one]. 

2. Still it is impossible the Worse should be entirely destroyed, as it is largely innate in the body and largely in the soul of the universe, and ever in desperate conflict with the Better. 

3. In the Soul [of cosmos], then, Mind and Reason (Logos), the guide and lord of all the best in it, is Osiris; and so in earth and air and water and heaven and stars, that which is ordered and appointed and in health, is the efflux of Osiris, reflected in seasons and temperatures and periods. 

4. But Typhon is the passionate and titanic and reasonless and impulsive [aspect] of the Soul, while of 

[p. 329]

its corporeal [side he is] the death-dealing and pestilent and disturbing, with unseasonable times and intemperate atmospheres and concealments of sun and moon,--as though they were the charges and obliterations of Typhon. 

5. And the name is a predicate of Seth, as they call Typhon; for [Seth] means "that which oppresses and constrains by force;" [*1] it means also, frequently, "turning upside down," and, again, "overleaping." 

6. Some, moreover, say that one of the companions of Typhon was Bebon; [*2] while Manethos [says] that Typhon himself was also called Bebon, and that the name signifies "holding back" or "hindering," since the power of Typhon stands in the way of things going on their way and moving towards what they have to. 

L. 1. Wherefore also of domestic animals they apportion to him the least tractable--the ass; while of wild ones, the most savage--the crocodile and hippopotamus. 

2. As to the ass, we have already given some explanation. At Hermes-city, however, as image of Typhon, they show us a hippopotamus on which stands a hawk [*3] fighting a snake,--indicating by the hippopotamus Typhon, and by the hawk power and rule, of which Typhon frequently possessing himself by force, ceases not from being himself in and throwing [others] into a state of disorder by means of evil. 

3. Wherefore also when they make offerings on the seventh of the month Tybi, [*4]--which [day] they call 

[p. 330]

[paragraph continues] "Arrival of Isis from Phoenicia," they mould on the cakes a bound hippopotamus. [*1] 

4. And at Apollo-city it is the custom for absolutely everyone to eat a piece of crocodile. And on one [particular] day they hunt down and kill as many [of them] as they possibly can, and throw them down right in front of the temple, saying that Typhon escaped Horus by turning himself into a crocodile,--considering as they do that all animals and plants and experiences that are evil and harmful are Typhon's works and parts and movements. 

LI. 1. Osiris, again, on the other hand, they write with "eye" and "sceptre," [*2] the former of which [they say] shows his providence, and the latter his power; just as Homer, when calling him who is ruler and king of all "Zeus supreme counsellor," [*3] seems by "supreme" to signify his supremacy, and by "counsellor" his good counsel and providence. 

2. They frequently write this god with "hawk" [*4] as well; for it excels in tension of sight and swiftness of flight, and can naturally support itself on the smallest quantity of food. 

3. It is said, moreover, to hover over the bodies of the unburied dead and to cast earth upon them. [*5] And when it drops down on the river to drink, it sets its wings upright, and after drinking it lowers them again,--by which it is evident it saves itself and escapes from the crocodile, for if it is caught its wings remain fixed as they were set. [*6] 

[p. 331]

4. And everywhere they exhibit a man-shaped image of Osiris,--ithyphallic, because of his generative and luxuriant [nature]. 

And they dress his statue in a flame-coloured robe,--since they consider the sun as body of the power of the Good, as it were a visible [sign] of an essence that mind only can conceive. 

5. Wherefore also we should pay no attention to those who assign the sphere of the sun to Typhon, [*1]--to whom nothing light or salutary, neither order nor genesis, nor any motion that has measure and reason, belongs, but [rather] their contraries. 

6. And we should not set down drought which destroys many of the animals and plants, as the sun's work, but [rather as that] of the breaths and waters in earth and air not being seasonably blended when the principle of disorderly and unbounded power makes discord and quenches the exhalations. 

LII. 1. And in the sacred hymns to Osiris, they invoke him who is hidden in the Arms of the Sun; [*2] and on the thirteenth of the month of Epiphi [*3] they keep with feast the Birthday of the Eye of Horus, when moon and sun are in the same straight line; as they think that not only the moon but also the sun is eye and light of Horus. 

2. And on the eighth of the waning [half] of Paophi [*4] they keep the Birthday of the Sun's Staff, after the autumnal equinox,--signifying that he needs an under-prop, as it were, and strengthening, deficient as he is 

[p. 332]

in heat and light, declining and moving obliquely from us. 

3. Moreover, just after the winter solstice they carry the Cow round the shrine [seven times], and the circuit is called the Seeking for Osiris, as in winter the Goddess longs for the "water" of the Sun. 

4. And she goes round this number of times, because he completes his passing from the winter to the summer solstice in the seventh month. 

5. Moreover, Horus, son of Osiris, is said to have been the first of all to make offerings to the Sun on the fourth of the waxing moon, as is written in the [books] entitled Birthdays of Horus. 

6. Though indeed every day they offer incense to the Sun in three kinds--resin at his rising, myrrh at mid-heaven, and what is called "kuphi" at his setting; the reason for each of which I will explain later on. [*1] And with all these they think to make the Sun propitious to them and to do him service. 

7. But what need is there to collect many such indications? For there are those who say point-blank that Osiris is Sun and is called Sirius by Greeks--though with Egyptians the addition of the article has caused the name to be mistaken [*2]--and who declare Isis to be no other than Moon; whence also [they say] that the horned ones of her statues are representations of her crescent, while by the black-robed ones are signified the occultations and overshadowings in which she follows Sun longing after him. 

8. Accordingly they invoke Moon for affairs of love; and Eudoxus [*3] says that Isis decides love-affairs. 

[p. 333]

9. And these [explanations] have in a modified way some share of plausibility; whereas it is not worth while even listening to those who make the Sun Typhon. 

10. But let us ourselves again take up the proper reason (logos). 

Footnotes

^323:1 Mullach, i. 319; Fairbanks (45), p. 37. The whole logos of Heracleitus runs: "They know not how differing agrees with itself,--back-flying (palintonos) harmony as though of lyre or bow." That is, as a stretched string flies back again to its original position.

^323:2 Nauck, p. 294.

^323:3 That is, presumably, "in logoi and voices from heaven."

^324:1 For a criticism and notes on this chapter and the following, see Cumont (F.), Textes et Monuments Figures relatifs aux Mysteres de Mithra (Bruxelles, 1896), ii. 33-35.

^325:1 Thought by some to be the Cappadocian equivalent of the haoma or soma plant.

^325:2 That is "cocks."

^326:1 A lacuna occurs here in the text.

^326:2 This may refer to the consciousness of the spiritual life.

^326:3 There are thus three thousand years in which Ahura Mazda has the upper hand, three thousand in which Ahriman is victorious, three thousand in which the forces are balanced, and in the tenth thousand years comes the Day of Light. Cf. Pistis Sophia, 243: "Jesus answered and said unto Mary: 'A Day of Light is a thousand years in the world, so that thirty-six myriads of years and a half myriad of years of the world make a single Year of Light.'" The not casting of a shadow was supposed to he a characteristic of souls not attached to body; but it refers here rather to those who are "straight" with the Spiritual Sun.

^327:1 Fairbanks, (44) pp. 34, 35.

^327:2 Cf. Il., xviii. 107; Fairbanks, (43) pp. 34, 35.

^327:3 Fairbanks, (29) pp. 32, 33.

^328:1 This is a very brief summary of the argument in Legg., x. 896 ff. (Jowett, v. 282 ff.).

^328:2 Cf. xlv. 6.

^328:3 This "argument" is Plutarch's own treatise and not Plato's dialogue, as King supposes.

^329:1 Cf. xli. 2.

^329:2 bebuna, but perhaps rather bebuna--and so bebus, a play on bebun, "steadying" or "straining." In Eg. Bebi or Baba; cf. Budge, op. cit., ii. 92.

^329:3 Cf. li. 2.

^329:4 Copt. Tobi--corr. roughly to January.

^330:1 Cf. "bound ass" above, xxx. 3.

^330:2 Cf. x. 6.

^330:3 Il., viii. 22; xvii. 339.

^330:4 Cf. 1. 2. Compare the Eagle of Zeus.

^330:5 More of the "Physiologus."

^330:6 "In the crocodile's gullet," comments King, "and so prevents him gulping down the bird." We are, however, inclined to think that Plutarch is a bit of a humourist, and that there is no necessity for commenting seriously on his on dits.

^331:1 Cf. xli. 1; also  section 9 below.

^331:2 That is the Sun's Rays.

^331:3 Copt. Epep--corr. roughly with July.

^331:4 Copt. Paopi--corr. roughly with October.

^332:1 Cf. lxxix., lxxx.

^332:2 That is o seirios = osiris--an absurd contention, of course, though flattering to Greek vanity.

^332:3 Cf. vi., x., xxx., lxii., lxiv.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

THE PROPER REASON ACCORDING TO PLUTARCH

LIII. 1. For Isis is the feminine [principle] of Nature and that which is capable of receiving the whole of genesis; in virtue of which she has been called "Nurse" and "All-receiving" by Plato, [*1] and, by the multitude, "She of ten-thousand names," through her being transformed by Reason (Logos) and receiving all forms and ideas [or shapes]. 

2. And she hath an innate love of the First and Most Holy of all things (which is identical with the Good), and longs after and pursues it. But she flees from and repels the domain of the Bad, and though she is the field and matter of them both, yet doth she ever incline to the Better of herself, and offers [herself] for him to beget and sow into herself emanations and likenesses, with which she joys and delights that she is pregnant and big with their generations. 

3. For Generation is image of Essence in Matter and Becoming copy of Being. 

LIV. 1. Hence not unreasonably do they say in the myth that [while] the Soul of Osiris is eternal and indestructible, Typhon often tears his Body in pieces and makes it disappear, and that Isis seeks it wandering and puts it together again. 

2. For the Real and Conceivable-by-the-mind-alone and Good is superior to destruction and change; but the images which the sensible and corporeal imitates 

[p. 334]

from it, and the reasons (logoi) and forms and likenesses which it receives, just as seal-impressions in wax, do not last for ever, but are seized upon by the disorderly and turbulent [elements], expelled hither from the field above, and fighting against the Horus whom Isis brings forth as the sensible image of that cosmos which mind alone can conceive. 

3. Wherefore also [Horus] is said to have a charge of bastardy brought against him by Typhon--of not being pure and unalloyed like his sire, Reason (Logos), itself by itself, unmixed and impassible, but bastardized with matter on account of the corporeal [element]. [*1] 

4. Nevertheless, Horus gets the best of it and wins, through Hermes--that is, the Reason (Logos) [*2]--bearing witness and showing that Nature reflects the [true] Cosmos by changing her forms according to That-which-mind-alone-can-conceive. [*3] 

5. For the genesis of Apollo [*4] from Isis and Osiris [*5] that took place while the Gods were still in the womb of Rhea, is an enigmatical way of stating that before this [sensible] cosmos became manifest, and Matter was perfected by Reason (Logos), Nature, proving herself imperfect, of herself brought forth her first birth. 

6. Wherefore also they say that that God was lame [*6] in the dark, and call him Elder Horus; for he was not cosmos, but a sort of image and phantasm of the world which was to be. [*7] 

[p. 335]

LV. 1. But this Horus [of ours] is their Son, [*1] horizoned [*2] and perfect, who has not destroyed Typhon utterly, but has brought over to his side his efficacy and strength; hence they say it is that the statue of Horus at Coptos grasps in one hand Typhon's virilia. 

2. Moreover, they have a myth that Hermes cut out the sinews of Typhon and used them for lyre strings,--[thus] teaching [us] how Reason (Logos) brought the universe into harmony, and made it concordant out of discordant elements. He did not destroy the destructive power but lamed it. 

3. Hence while weak and ineffective up there, down here, by being blinded and interwoven with the passible and changeable elements, it is cause of shakings and tremors in earth, of droughts and tempests in air, and again of lightnings and thunderings. 

4. Moreover, it infects waters and winds with pestilences, and shoots up and rears itself as far as the moon, frequently blurring and blackening its light, as Egyptians think. 

[p. 336]

5. And they say that Typhon at one time strikes the Eye of Horus, and at another takes it out and swallows it. By "striking" they refer enigmatically to the monthly diminution of the moon, and by "blinding" to its eclipse, which the sun remedies by immediately shining on it after it has passed out of the shadow of the earth. [*1] 

LVI. 1. Now the better and diviner Nature is from these:--[to wit] the Intelligible and Matter, and that from them which Greeks call Cosmos. 

2. Plato, [*2] indeed, was wont to call the Intelligible Idea and Model and Father; and Matter Mother and Nurse--both place and ground of Genesis; and the offspring of both Genesis. 

3. And one might conjecture that Egyptians [also revered [*3]] the fairest of the triangles, likening the nature of the universe especially to this; for Plato also, in his Republic, [*4] seems to have made additional use of this in drawing up his marriage scheme. [*5] 

4. And this triangle has its perpendicular [side] of "three," its base of "four," and its hypotenuse of "five"; its square being equal to the [sum of the] squares on the containing sides. [*6] 

5. We must, accordingly, compare its perpendicular to male, its base to female, and its hypotenuse to the offspring of both; and [conjecture] Osiris as source, Isis as receptacle, and Horus as result. 

[p. 337]

6. For the "three" is the first "odd" [*1] and perfect; [*2] while the "four" [is] square from side "even" two; [*3] and the "five" resembles partly its father and partly its mother, being composed of "three" and "two." 

7. And panta [all] is only a slight variant of pente [five]; and they call counting pempasasthai [reckoning by fives]. 

8. And five makes a square equal to the number of letters among Egyptians, [*4] and a period of as many years as the Apis lives. 

9. Thus they usually call Horus also Min [*5]--that is, "being seen"; for cosmos is a sensible and see-able thing. 

10. And Isis is sometimes called Muth, [*6] and again Athyri [*7] and Methyer. And by the first of the names they mean "Mother"; by the second, "Cosmic House" of Horus,--as also Plato [calls her] "Ground of Genesis" and "She who receives"; and the third is compounded from "Full" and "Cause,"--for Matter is full of 

[p. 338]

[paragraph continues] Cosmos, and consorts with the Good and Pure and Ordered. 

LVII. 1. And Hesiod [*1] also, when he makes all the first [elements to be] Chaos and Earth and Tartarus and Love, might be thought to assume no other principles than these,--if at anyrate in substituting the names we assign to Isis that of Earth, to Osiris that of Love, and to Typhon that of Tartarus; for his Chaos seems to be subsumed as ground and place of the universe. 

2. Our data also in a way invite as witness Plato's myth which Socrates details in the Symposium [*2] about the Birth of Love,--telling [us how] that Poverty wanting children lay down by the side of sleeping Means, and conceiving by him brought forth Love of a mixed nature and capable of assuming every shape, in as much, indeed, as he is the offspring of a good and wise father and one sufficient for all, but of an incapable mother and one without means, [*3] who on account of her need is ever clinging to some one else and importuning some one else. [*4] 

3. For his Means is no other than the First Beloved and Desirable and Perfect and Sufficient; and he calls Matter Poverty,--who is herself of herself deficient of the Good, but is ever being filled by Him and longing for and sharing in [Him]. 

4. And the Cosmos, that is Horus, is born from these; and Horus, though neither eternal nor impassible nor indestructible, but ever-generable, continues by means of the changes and periods of his passions to remain ever young and ever to escape destruction. 

LVIII. 1. Now, we should make use of the myths not 

[p. 339]

as though they were altogether sacred sermons (logoi), but taking the serviceable [element] of each according to its similitude [to reason]. 

2. When, then, we say Matter, we should not be swept into the opinions of some philosophers, and suppose some body or other of itself soul-less and quality-less, and inert and inefficient; for we call oil the "matter" of a perfume, [and] gold that of a statue, though they are not destitute of every quality. 

3. [Nay,] we submit the soul itself and [even] the thought of man as the "matter" of knowledge and virtue to the reason (logos) to order and bring into rhythm. 

4. Moreover, some have declared the mind [to be] "region of ideas," and, as it were, the "impressionable substance [*1] of the intelligibles." 

5. And some think that the substance of the woman [*2] is neither power nor source, but matter and nutriment of birth. 

6. If, then, we attach ourselves to these, we ought thus also to think of this Goddess as having eternally her share in the First God, and consorting [with Him] for love of the goodness and beauty that surround Him, never opposed to Him, but, just as we say that a lawful and righteous husband loves [his wife] righteously, and a good wife though she has her husband and consorts with him, still desires [him], so [should we] think of Her as clinging to Him, and importuning Him, [*3] though [ever] filled full with His supremest and purest parts. 

LIX. 1. But where Typhon steals in, laying hold of the last [parts, we should think of Her as] then seeming to wear a melancholy countenance, and being said to 

[p. 340]

mourn, and to be seeking after certain relics and fragments of Osiris, and enfolding them in her robes, receiving them when destroyed into herself, and hiding them away, just as She also produces them again when they are born, and sends them forth from herself. 

2. For while the reasons (logoi) and ideas and emanations of the God in heaven and stars remain [for ever], those that are disseminated into things passible--in earth and sea and plants and animals--being dissolved and destroyed and buried, come to light over and over again and reappear in their births. 

3. For which cause the myth says that Typhon lived with Nephthys, but that Osiris had knowledge of her secretly. 

4. For the last parts of Matter, which they call Nephthys and End, are mainly in possession of the destructive power; nevertheless the Generative and Saving One distributes into them weak and faint seed which is destroyed by Typhon, except so much as Isis by adoption saves and nourishes and compacts together. 

LX. 1. But He is on the whole the Better one, as both Plato and Aristotle suppose; and the generative and moving [power] of Nature moves to Him and towards being, while the annihilating and destructive [moves] from Him and towards non-being. 

2. Wherefore they derive the name Isis from hastening (iesthai) and coursing with knowledge, since she is ensouled and prudent motion. 

3. For her name is not foreign; [*1] but just as all the Gods have a common name from two elements--"that which can be seen" and "that which runs" [*2]--so we 

[p. 341]

call this Goddess "Isis" from "knowledge," [*1] and Egyptians [also] call her Isis. [*2] 

4. And thus Plato also says the ancients signified the "Holy [*3] [Lady]" by calling her "Isia,"--and so also "Mental Perception" and "Prudence," in as much as she is [the very] course and motion of Mind hastening [*4] and coursing, and that they placed Understanding--in short, the Good and Virtue--in things that flow [*5] and run. 

5. Just as [he says] again, the Bad is railed at with corresponding names, when they call that which hinders nature and binds it up and holds it and prevents it from hastening and going, "badness," [*6] "difficulty," [*7] "cowardice" [*8] [and] "distress." 

LXI. 1. And Osiris has had his name from a combination of osios (holy) and ieros (sacred); for there is a common Reason (Logos) of things in Heaven and of things in Hades,--the former of which the ancients were accustomed to call sacred, and the latter holy. 

2. And the Reason that [both] brings [down] to light the heavenly things and is [also] of things that are 

[p. 342]

mounting upwards, [*1] is called Anubis, and sometimes also Hermanubis, [*2] belonging in his former capacity to things above and in his latter to things below [them]. 

3. Wherefore also they offer him in his former capacity a white cock, [*3] and in his latter a saffron-coloured one,--thinking that the former things are pure and the latter mixed and manifold. 

4. Nor ought we to be surprised at the manipulation of the names back into Greek. [*4] For tens of thousands of others that disappeared with those who emigrated from Greece, continue unto this day and sojourn with foreigners; for recalling some of which they blame the poets' art as "barbarising,"--I mean those who call such words "glosses." [*5] 

5. Further, they relate that in what are called the "Books of Hermes," it is written that they call the Power that rules the ordained revolution of the Sun, Horus, while the Greeks [call it] Apollo; and the Power that rules the Breath [or Spirit], some [call] Osiris, others Sarapis, and others Sothis in Egyptian. 

6. The last means "conception" (kuesin) or "conceiving" (to kuein). [*6] Wherefore also, by inversion of the name, the star [Sothis] which they consider the special one of Isis, is called Dog (kuun) in Greek. 

7. We should, however, least of all be jealous about the names; still if we were, I would sooner give up 

[p. 343]

[paragraph continues] "Sarapis" than "Osiris"; for though I think the former is a foreign one and the latter Greek, yet are they both [names] of One God and One Power. 

LXIL 1. The Egyptian [names] also resemble these [Greek ones]. For they often call Isis by the name of Athena, which expresses some such meaning as "I have come from myself"--which is [again] indicative of self-motive course. 

2. While "Typhon," as has been said, [*1] is called Seth and Bebon and Smu,--the names being intended to signify a certain forcible and preventative checking, opposition or reversing. 

3. Moreover, they call the loadstone "Bone of Horus," [*2] and iron "[Bone] of Typhon," as Manethos relates; for just as iron often resembles that which is attracted to and follows after the loadstone, and often is turned away from it, and repelled to an opposite direction, so the saving and good and reason-possessing motion of the Cosmos both turns towards itself and makes more gentle by persuasion that harsh and typhonean [motion]; and then again after raising it into itself, it reverses it and plunges it into the infinitude. 

4. Moreover, Eudoxus [*3] says that the Egyptians tell a myth about Zeus that, as in consequence of his having his legs grown together, [*4] he could not walk, for shame he lived in solitude; and so Isis, by cutting in two and separating these limbs of his body, made his going even-footed. [*5] 

5. By those things, moreover, the myth enigmatically 

[p. 344]

hints that the Mind and Reason (Logos) of God after it had progressed [*1] in itself in the invisible and unmanifest, came forth into genesis by means of motion. 

Footnotes

^333:1 Timaeus, 51 A.

^334:1 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 10; Lact., iv. 6 (Frag. v.).

^334:2 This shows that in one tradition Hermes and Osiris were identified.

^334:3 Cf. xix. 4.

^334:4 Sc. Horus.

^334:5 The sequel I think shows that "and Osiris" is a gloss; but see xii. 8.

^334:6 Cf. lxii.

^334:7 These two paragraphs are, in my opinion, of the utmost value for the critical investigation of the sources of the famous Sophia mythus of Gnosticism. The imperfect birth (Abortion) of the Sophia (Wisdom, Nature, Isis), as the result of her effort to bring forth of herself, without her consort, or syzygy, while still in the Pleroma (Womb of Rhea), paves the way for the whole scheme of one of the main forms of Gnostic cosmology and subsequent soteriology, the Creator Logos and Saviour having to perfect the imperfect product of Nature. This is, I believe, the first time that the above passage of Plutarch has been brought into connection with the Sophia-mythus, and all previous translations with which I am acquainted accordingly make havoc of the meaning. See F. F. F., pp. 339 ff.; and for the Pauline use of the technical term "Abortion," D. J. L., pp. 355 ff.; for "Balaam the Lame Man" (? a by-name for Jeschu-Horus), see ibid., p. 201. Reitzenstein (pp. 39, 40) quotes these two chapters, and adds some parallels from the Trismegistic literature.

^335:1 Adopting the suggestion of Bernardakis--o yios for aytos.

^335:2 Or "defined," urismenos--a play on uros.

^336:1 All this according to the Mathematici, presumably; the "eye" of Horus would rather signify "mentality."

^336:2 Timaeus, 50 C.

^336:3 There is a lacuna in the text.

^336:4 Rep., 545 D ff. See also Adam (J.), The Nuptial Number of Plato: its Solution and Significance (London, 1891).

^336:5 That is to say, that in Plutarch's opinion Plato derived the idea originally from Egypt.

^336:6 That is, 9 + 16 = 25.

^337:1 "One" being reckoned neither odd nor even.

^337:2 That is, divisible by itself and "one" only.

^337:3 tetragunos ano pleyras artioy teis dyados.

^337:4 That is, the Egyptian alphabet consisted of 25 letters.

^337:5 In the Ritual (chap. xvii. 30), the deceased is made to say: "I am the God Amsu (or Min) in his coming forth; may his two plumes be set upon my head for me." And in answer to the question: "Who, then, is this?"--the text goes on to say: "Amsu is Horus, the avenger of his father, and his coming forth is his birth. The plumes upon his head are Isis and Nephthys when they go forth to set themselves there, even as his protectors, and they provide that which his head lacketh; or (as others say), they are the two exceeding great uraei which are upon the head of their father Tem, or (as others say), his two eyes are the two plumes which are upon his head." (Budge, op. cit., ii. 258.)

^337:6 Eg. Mut, the syzygy of Amen. Mut means "Mother"; she was the World-mother. See Budge, op. cit., ii. 28 ff.

^337:7 Cf. lxix. 4, "Athyr" probably meaning Hathor.

^338:1 Theog., 116-122.

^338:2 Symp., 203 B; Jowett, i. 573 ff.

^338:3 aporon--a play on poros.

^338:4 Cf. lviii. 6, last clause.

^339:1 ekmageion. Cf. Plat., Tim., 50 C; Thaeet., 191 C, 196 A.

^339:2 to sperma teis gynaikos--lit., "the seed of the woman."

^339:3 Cf. lvii. 2.

^340:1 That is, non-Greek--barbarikon. Cf. ii. 2.

^340:2 The word-play being theos--theatos--theon.

^341:1 Cf. ii. 3 for the word-play, and also for osia in the next paragraph.

^341:2 They, however, probably called her something resembling Ast.

^341:3 ten osian--but Plutarch is mistaken, for in Cratylus, 401 C it is a question of oysian and esian and not of osian and isian.

^341:4 iemenoy, picking up the iesthai above in paragraph 2.

^341:5 Cf. Crat., 415 D, where the word-play is arete and aei-reite (ever-flowing).

^341:6 Cf. Crat., 415 C--where the play is kak-ia = kakus ion (ienai)--badly going.

^341:7 apor-ia--the word-play being a (not) and por-euesthai (going)--ibid., C, D.

^341:8 "deilia signifies that the soul is bound with a strong chain (desmos), for lian means strength, and therefore deilia expresses the greatest and strongest bond of the soul" (ibid.). See Jowett, i. 359 f.

^342:1 That is, things in Hades (the Invisible)--not Tartarus.

^342:2 Horus was endowed with many characteristics of other gods. Thus with Anpu or Anubis he becomes Heru-em-Anpu, i.e. Horus as Anubis, and is said to dwell in the "divine hall." This is the Hermanubis of Plutarch. Cf. Budge, op. cit., i. 493.

^342:3 "A cock to Aesculapius."

^342:4 Cf. xxix. 8.

^342:5 glw'ttas--a technical term for obsolete or foreign words that need explanation.

^342:6 Cf. xxi. 2.

^343:1 Cf. xli., xlix. (end).

^343:2 Cf. the "bone of the sea-hawk" in Hipp., Philo., v. 9 and 17; and note to J., in "Myth of Man in the Mysteries," p. 189.

^343:3 Cf. xxx., lxix., et al.

^343:4 The invisible serpent-form of the God.

^343:5 Cf. Plat., Tim., 44 D and 45 A; and liv. 5 above concerning the birth of the Elder Horus.

^344:1 Or "walked," suggesting some idea of single motion in itself--the motion of "sameness," symbolised by a serpent with its tail in its mouth. The serpent was one of the most favourite symbols of the Logos, and this perhaps accounts for the "legs grown together."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

THE SYMBOLISM OF THE SISTRUM

LXIII. 1. The sistrum (seistron) also shows that existent things must be shaken up (seiesthai) and never have cessation from impulse, but as it were be wakened up and agitated when they fall asleep and die away. 

2. For they say they turn aside and beat off Typhon with sistra,--signifying that when corruption binds nature fast and brings her to a stand, [then] generation frees her and raises her from death by means of motion. 

3. Now the sistrum has a curved top, and its arch contains the four [things] that are shaken. For the part of the cosmos which is subject to generation and corruption, is circumscribed by the sphere of the moon, and all [things] in it are moved and changed by the four elements--fire and earth and water and air. 

4. And on the arch of the sistrum, at the top, they put the metal figure of a cat with a human face, and at the bottom, below the shaken things, the face sometimes of Isis and sometimes of Nephthys,--symbolising by the faces generation and consummation (for these are the changes and motions of the elements), and by the cat the moon, on account of the variable nature, [*2] night habits, and fecundity of the beast. 

[p. 345]

5. For it is fabled to bring forth one, then two, and [then] three, and four, and five [at a birth], and then adds one by one until seven; [*1] so that in all she brings forth eight-and-twenty, the number of lights of the moon. 

6. This, however, is probably somewhat too mythical; anyway, the pupils of its eyes seem to become full and dilate at the full-moon, and to contract and shut out the light during the wanings of that luminary. 

7. And by the human face of the cat is signified the intellectual and reasonable nature of the changes that take place in connection with the moon. 

Footnotes

^344:2 to poikilon. King translates this "pied colour," and deduces that "the original colour of the cat was tabby"; but, as the school-boy says, I don't see it.

^345:1 More "Physiologus"; or rather, there was a mystical theory about other things which was adapted to a popular natural history of the cat, and then the fable was cited as "proof" of the original theory.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

THE TRUE "LOGOS," AGAIN, ACCORDING TO PLUTARCH 

LXIV. 1. But, to speak concisely, it is not correct to consider either water or sun or earth or heaven as Osiris or Isis, or, again, fire or drought or sea as Typhon; but if we were to assign simply that [nature] to the latter which is not subject to measure or rule owing to excesses or insufficiencies, and should reverence and honour that which has been subjected to order and is good and beneficent, as the work of Isis, and the image and copy and reason of Osiris, we should not miss the mark. 

2. Moreover, we shall make Eudoxus [*2] cease to disbelieve and be perplexed, how it is neither Demeter who has charge of love-affairs but Isis, nor Dionysus who has the power either to make the Nile increase or to rule over the dead [but Osiris]. 

[p. 346]

3. For we think that by one Common Reason (Logos) [*1] these Gods have been ordained over every domain of good; and every fair and good thing possible for nature owes its origin to their means,--[Osiris] giving [them] their origins and [Isis] receiving and distributing [them]. 

Footnotes

^345:2 Cf. lxii. et al.

^346:1 Parallel to "Common Sense."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

AGAINST THE WEATHER AND VEGETATION GOD THEORIES 

LXV. 1. And we shall also get our hands on the dull crowd who take pleasure in associating the [mystic recitals] about these Gods either with changes of the atmosphere according to the seasons, or with the generation of the corn and sowings and ploughings, and in saying that Osiris is buried when the sown corn is hidden by the earth, and comes to life and shows himself again when it begins to sprout. 

2. For which cause also [they declare] that Isis, on feeling she is pregnant, ties an amulet round her [neck] on the sixth day of the first half of the month Phaophi; [*2] and that Harpocrates is brought forth about the winter solstice imperfect and infant in the things that sprout too early. [*3] 

3. For which cause they offer him first-fruits of growing lentils, and they keep the days of thanks for safe delivery after the spring equinox. 

4. For they love to hear these things and believe them, drawing conviction from things immediately at hand and customary. 

LXVI. 1. Still there is nothing to complain of if 

[p. 347]

[only], in the first place, they cherish the Gods in common with ourselves, and do not make them peculiar to Egyptians, either by characterising Nile and only the land that Nile waters by these names, or, by saying that marshes and lotuses and god-making [are their monopoly], deprive the rest of mankind who have no Nile or Buto or Memphis, of [the] Great Gods. 

2. Indeed, all [men] have Isis and know her and the Gods of her company; for though they learned not long ago to call some of them by names known among the Egyptians, still they knew and honoured the power of each [of them] from the beginning. 

3. In the second place, and what is more important--they should take very good heed and be apprehensive lest unwittingly they write-off the sacred mysteries and dissolve them into winds and streams, and sowing and ploughings, and passions of earth and changes of seasons. 

4. As those who [say] that Dionysus is wine and Hephaestus flame, and Persephone, as Cleanthes says somewhere, the wind that drives through the crops and is killed; and [as] some poet says of the reapers: 

Then when they, lusty, cut Demeter's limbs. [*1]

5. For these in nothing differ from those who regard a pilot as sails and ropes and anchor, and a weaver as yarns and threads, and a physician as potions and honey-brew and barley-water; nay, they put into men's minds dangerous and atheistic notions, by transferring names of Gods to natures and to things that have no sense or soul, and which are necessarily destroyed by men according to their need and use. For it is not possible to consider such things in themselves as Gods. 

LXVII. 1. For a God is not a thing without a mind or soul, or one made subject to the hand of man; but it 

[p. 348]

is from these things that we deduce that those who bestow them on us for our use and offer them [to us] in perpetual abundance, are Gods. 

2. Not different [Gods] for different peoples, not non-Greek and Greek, not southern and northern [Gods]; but just as sun and moon and earth and sea [are] common to all [men], though they are called by different names by different peoples, so of the Reason (Logos) that orders all things, and of one Providence that also directs powers ordained to serve under her for all [purposes], have different honours and titles been made according to their laws by different [nations]. 

3. And there are consecrated symbols, some obscure ones and others more plain, guiding the intelligence towards the mysteries of the Gods, [though] not without risk. 

4. For some going entirely astray have stepped into superstitions, while others, shunning superstition as a quagmire, have unwittingly fallen into atheism [*1] as down a precipice. 

LXVIII. 1. Wherefore especially with regard to such things, should we, taking with us Reason (Logos) as our mystic guide out of philosophy, reverently meditate upon each of the things said and done; in order that, [we may avoid what] Theodorus said, [namely] that when he offered his words with his right hand some of his hearers took them with their left,--and so not miss the mark by taking in another sense what laws on offerings and feasts have well ordained. 

2. For that all [these things] must be referred to the Reason (Logos), we may learn from themselves also. 

For on the nineteenth of the first month, [*2] when they 

[p. 349]

keep a feast to Hermes, they eat honey and figs, saying when so doing, "Truth is sweet." And the amulet of Isis which the myth says she put round her [neck] [*1] is, when interpreted, "True Voice." 

3. And we should not consider Harpocrates either as an imperfect or infant god, or a [god] of pulse, [*2] but as protector and chastener of the babyish and imperfect and inarticulate reason that men have about Gods. For which cause he has his finger laid upon his lips as a symbol of reticence and silence. 

4. And in the month of Mesore [*3] when they make offerings of pulse, they say: "Tongue [is] fortune; tongue is daimon." 

5. And they say that of the trees in Egypt the persea especially has been made sacred to the Goddess, because its fruit resembles a heart and its leaf a tongue. 

6. For of all man's natural possessions nothing is more godlike than logos [word or reason], and especially that concerning the Gods, nor is there anything that decides more weightily for happiness. 

7. Wherefore we commend him who goes down to consult the Oracle here [*4] to think religiously and speak reverently. But the many act ridiculously when, after they have in the processions and feasts made proclamation to speak reverently, they subsequently speak and think the most irreverent things about the Gods themselves. 

LXIX. 1. What use, then, must one make of those melancholy and laughterless and mournful sacrifices, if it is not right either to omit the rites of custom, or to confound our views about Gods and throw them into confusion with absurd suspicions? 

[p. 350]

2. Yea, among Greeks, too, many things are done, just about the same time also, similar to those which Egyptians perform in the sacred [rites]. 

3. For instance, at Athens, the women fast at the Thesmophoria, sitting on the ground. While Boeotians move the palace of Achaea, [*1] giving that festival the name of Epachthe [the Grief-bringing], as though Demeter were in grief (axthei) on account of the Descent [*2] of Kore. 

4. And this month is the one for sowing when the Pleiades rise, which Egyptians call Athyr, [*3] Greeks Pyanepsion, and Boeotians Damatrios. [*4] 

5. Moreover, Theopompus [*5] tells us that the Western peoples [*6] consider and name the winter Kronos, the summer Aphrodite, and the spring Persephone; and [say] that all things are born from Kronos and Aphrodite. 

6. While the Phrygians, thinking that the God sleeps in winter, and wakes in summer, celebrate in his honour the Orgies of his "Going to sleep" at one time, and at another of his "Waking up"; while the Paphlagonians pretend that he is bound hand and foot and imprisoned in winter, and in spring is set in motion and freed from his bonds. 

LXX. 1. And the season of the year suggests that the appearance of mourning is assumed at the hiding away of grains [in the earth],--which the ancients did not 

[p. 351]

consider gods, but gifts of the Gods, indispensable [indeed] if we are to live otherwise then savagely and like the brutes. 

2. And at the season when, you know, these [ancients] saw the [fruits] entirely disappearing from the trees and ceasing, and those they had sown themselves still scanty and poor,--in scraping away the earth with their hands, and pressing it together again, and depositing [the seed] in uncertainty as to whether it would come up again and have its proper consummation, they used to do many things similar to those who bury and mourn. 

3. Then, just as we say that one who buys Plato's books "buys Plato," and that one who presents the creations of Menander "acts Menander," so did they not hesitate to call the gifts and creations of the Gods by the names of the Gods--honouring them and reverencing them by use. 

4. But those [who came] after, receiving [these names] like boors and ignorantly misapplying what happens [*1] to the fruits to the Gods [themselves], and not merely calling but believing the advent and hiding away of the necessaries [of life] generations and destructions of gods, filled their heads with absurd, indecent, and confused opinions, although they had the absurdity of their unreason before their eyes. 

5. Excellent, however, was the view of Xenophanes [*2] of Colophon that Egyptians don't mourn if they believe in Gods and don't believe in Gods if they mourn; nay, that it would be ridiculous for them in the same breath to mourn and pray for the seed to appear again, in order that it might again be consumed and mourned for. 

[p. 352]

LXXI. 1. But such is not really the case; but, while mourning for the grain, they pray the Gods, the authors and givers [of it], to renew it again and make other grow up in the place of that which is consumed. 

2. Whence there is an excellent saying among the philosophers, that those who do not learn how to hear names rightly, use things wrongly. Just as those of the Greeks who have not learned or accustomed themselves to call bronzes and pictures and marbles images in honour of the Gods, but [call them] Gods, [and] then make bold to say that Lachares stripped Athena, and Dionysius cut off Apollo's golden curls, and that Capitoline Zeus was burnt and perished in the Civil Wars,--these without knowing it find themselves drawn into adopting mischievous opinions following [directly] on the [abuse of] names. 

3. And this is especially the case of Egyptians with regard to the honours they pay to animals. For in this respect, at any rate, Greeks speak rightly when they consider the dove as the sacred creature of Aphrodite, and the dragon of Athena, and the raven of Apollo, and the dog of Artemis, as Euripides [sings]: 

Thou shalt be dog, pet of torch-bearing Hecate. [*1] 

4. Whereas most of the Egyptians, by the service and cult they pay to the animals themselves as though they were Gods, have not only covered their sacred rites entirely with laughter and ridicule--which is the least evil of their fatuity; but a dangerous way of thinking grows up which perverts the weak and simple to pure superstition, and, in the case of the shrewder and bolder, degenerates into an atheistic and brutal rationalism. 

[p. 353]

5. Wherefore, also, it is not unfitting to run through the conjectures about these things. [*1] 

Footnotes

^346:2 Copt. Paopi--corr. roughly with October.

^346:3 Cf. lxviii. 2, 3. Heru-p-Khart, Horus the Younger, or the "Child,'' so called to distinguish him from Heru-ur, or Horus the Elder. Cf. Budge, op. cit., i. 468 f.

^347:1 Cf. Ps. Plut., De Vita Homeri,  section 23.

^348:1 King again, erroneously in my opinion, refers this to the Christians.

^348:2 Copt. Thoth--corr. roughly with September.

^349:1 Cf. lxv. 2.

^349:2 Cf. ibid., 3.

^349:3 Copt. Mesore--corr. roughly with August.

^349:4 Sc. at Delphi.

^350:1 A surname of Demeter, by which she was worshipped at Athens by the Gephyraeans who had emigrated thither from Boeotia (Herod., v. 61).

^350:2 Sc. into Hades.

^350:3 Copt. Hathor--corr. roughly to November, or rather last half of October and first of November. Cf. also lvi. 10.

^350:4 That is, the month of Demeter.

^350:5 Muller, i. 328. T. flourished 2nd half of 4th century B.C.

^350:6 That is, presumably, the Celts.

^351:1 ta pathe--lit., "the passions."

^351:2 X. flourished about end of 6th and beginning of 5th century B.C.

^352:1 Nauck, p. 525.

^353:1 Dr Budge (op. cit., i. 29) writes: "Such monuments and texts as we have . . . seem to show that the Egyptians first worshipped animals as animals, and nothing more, and later as the habitations of divine spirits and gods; but there is no reason for thinking that the animal worship of the Egyptians was descended from a system of totems and fetishes as Mr J. F. M'Lennan (Fortnightly Review, 1869-1870) believed." I believe myself that the Egyptian animal-cult depended chiefly on the fact that life flowed differently in different animal forms, corresponding with the life-currents in the invisible forms or aspects of the Animal-Soul of the Cosmos.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

CONCERNING THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS, AND TOTEMISM 

LXXII. 1. As for the [theory] that the Gods out of fear of Typhon changed themselves into these animals--as it were hiding themselves in the bodies of ibises and dogs and hawks--it beats any juggling or story-telling. 

2. Also the [theory] that all the souls of the dead that persist, have their rebirth [*2] into these [animals] only, is equally incredible. 

3. And of those who would assign some reason connected with the art of government, some say that Osiris upon his great campaign, [*3] divided his force into many divisions--(they call them companies and squadrons in Greek)--and gave them all ensigns of animal figures, and that each of these became sacred and venerated by the clan of those banded together under it. 

4. Others [say] that the kings after [Osiris], in order 

[p. 354]

to strike terror into their foes, used to appear dressed in wild beasts' heads of gold and silver. 

5. While others tell us that one of the clever and crafty kings, on learning that, though the Egyptians were fickle by nature and quick for change and innovation, they nevertheless possessed an invincible and unrestrainable might owing to their numbers when in agreement and co-operation, showed them and implanted into their minds an enduring superstition,--an occasion of unceasing disagreement. 

6. For in as much as the beasts--some of which he enacted some [clans] should honour and venerate and others others--are hostile and inimical to one another, and as each one of them by nature likes different food from the others, each [clan] in protecting its own special [beasts] and growing angry at their being injured, was for ever unconsciously being drawn into the enmities of the beasts, and [so] brought into a state of warfare with the others. 

7. For even unto this day the people of Wolf-town are the only Egyptians who eat sheep, because the wolf, whom they regard as god, [does so]. 

8. And the people of Oxyrhynchus-town, in our own day, when the folk of Dog-town ate the oxyrhynchus [*1] fish, caught a dog and sacrificing it as a sacred victim, ate it; and going to war because of this, they handled one another roughly, and subsequently were roughly handled by the Romans in punishment. [*2] 

LXXIII. 1. Again, as many say that the soul of Typhon himself was parted among these animals, the myths would seem enigmatically to hint that every irrational and brutal nature is born from a part of the 

[p. 355]

[paragraph continues] Evil Daimon, and that to appease and soothe him they pay cult and service to them. 

2. But if he fall upon them mighty and dire, bringing on them excessive droughts, or pestilent diseases, or other unlooked-for strange mischances, then the priests lead away at dark in silence quietly some of the venerated [beasts], and threaten and try to scare away the first [one] of them; if, however, it stops, they consecrate and sacrifice it, as though, I suppose, this were some kind of chastisement of the Daimon, or some specially great means of purification in the greater [emergencies]. 

3. For in the Goddess-of-child-bed-town [*1] they used to burn living men to ashes, as Manethos has told us, calling them Typhoneian; and the ashes they winnowed away and scattered. [*2] 

4. This, however, was done publicly, and at one special time, in the Dog-days; whereas the consecratings of the venerated beasts, which are never spoken of and take place at irregular times, according to the emergencies, are unknown to the multitude, except when they have burials, and [the priests] bringing out some of the others, cast them in [to the grave with them] in the presence of all,--in the belief that they annoy Typhon in return and curtail what gives him pleasure. For only the Apis and a few other [animals] seem to be sacred to Osiris; while they assign the majority to him [Typhon]. 

5. And if he [Osiris] is really Reason (Logos), I think that the object of our enquiry is found in the case of these [animals] that are admitted to have common honours with him,--as, for instance, the ibis, and hawk, and dog-headed ape; [while] Apis himself [is his 

[p. 356]

soul . . .], [*1] for thus, you know, they call the goat at Mendes. 

LXXIV. 1. There remain of course the utilitarian and symbolical [reasons], of which some have to do with one of the two [Gods], but most [of them] with both. 

2. As for the ox and sheep and ichneumon, [*2] it is clear they paid them honours on account of their usefulness and utility,--just as Lemnians crested larks which seek out and break the eggs of locusts, and Thessalians storks, because when their land produced multitudes of snakes, they came and destroyed them all--(wherefore they made a law that whoever killed a stork should be banished [*3])--so with the asp and weasel and scarab, because they discerned in them certain faint likenesses of the power of the Gods, as it were [that] of the sun in water-drops. 

3. For as to the weasel, many still think and say that as it is impregnated through the ear and brings forth by the mouth, it is a likeness of the birth of reason (logos). [*4] 

4. Again [they say] the species of scarab has no female, but all, as males, discharge their seed into the stuff they have made into balls, [*5] which they roll along by pushing, moving [themselves] in the opposite direction, just as the sun seems to turn the heaven round in the opposite direction, while it is [the heaven] itself that moves from west to east. [*6] 

[p. 357]

5. And the asp, because it does not age, and moves without limbs with ease and pliancy, they likened to a star. 

LXXV. 1. Nay, not even has the crocodile had honour paid it without some show of credible cause, for it alone is tongue-less. [*1] 

For the Divine Reason (Logos) stands not in need of voice, and: 

"Moving on a soundless path with justice guides [all] mortal things." [*2] 

2. And they say that it alone, when it is in the water, has its eyes covered by a smooth and transparent membrane that comes down from the upper lid, [*3] so that they see without being seen,--an attribute of the First God. [*4] 

3. And whenever the female lays her eggs on the land, it is known that this will be the limit of the Nile's 

[p. 358]

increase. For as they cannot lay in the water, and fear to do so far from it, they so accurately fore-feel what will be, that they make use of the rise of the river for laying their eggs and hatching them, and yet keep them dry and beyond the danger of being wetted. 

4. And they lay sixty [eggs] and hatch them out in as many days, and the longest-lived of them live as many years,--which is the first of the measures for those who treat systematically of celestial [phenomena]. [*1] 

5. Moreover, of those that have honours paid them for both [reasons] [*2]--of the dog, we have already treated above. [*3] 

6. As for the ibis, while killing the death-dealing of the reptiles, [*4] it was the first to teach them the use of medicinal evacuation, when they observed it being thus rinsed out and purged by itself. [*5] 

7. While those of the priests who are most punctilious in their observances, in purifying themselves, take the water for cleansing from a place where the ibis has drunk; for it neither drinks unwholesome or poisoned [*6] water, nor [even] goes near it. 

8. Again, by the relative position of its legs to one another, and [of these] to its beak, it forms an equilateral triangle; and yet again, the variegation and admixture of its black with its white feathers suggest the gibbous moon. [*7]

9. Nor ought we to be surprised at Egyptians being so fond of meagre likenesses; for Greeks too in both their 

[p. 359]

pictured and plastic resemblances of Gods use many such [vague indications]. 

10. For instance, in Crete there was a statue of Zeus which had no ears,--for it behoves the Ruler and Lord of all to listen to no one. 

11. And Pheidias used the serpent in the [statue] of Athena, and the tortoise in that of Aphrodite at Elis,--because on the one hand virgins need protecting, and on the other because keeping-at-home and silence are becoming to married women. 

12. Again, the trident of Poseidon is a symbol of the third region, which the sea occupies, assigned [to him] after the heaven and air. For which cause also they invented the names Amphi-trite and Trit-ons. [*1] 

13. And the Pythagoreans have embellished both numbers and figures with appellations of Gods. 

For they used to call the equilateral triangle Athena--Head-born and Third-born [*2]--because it is divided by three plumb-lines [*3] drawn from the three angles. 

14. And [they called] "one" Apollo, from privation of multitude, [*4] and owing to the singleness [*5] of the monad; and "two" Strife and Daring, and "three" Justice [or Rightness],--for as wronging and being wronged were according to deficiency and excess, rightness [or justice] was born to equality between them. [*6] 

[p. 360]

15. And what is called the Tetraktys, the six-and-thirty, was [their] greatest oath (as has been said over and over again), and is called Cosmos,--which is produced by adding together the first four even and [the first] four odd [numbers]. [*1] 

LXXVI. 1. If, then, the most approved of the philosophers, when they perceived in soulless and bodiless things a riddle of the Divine, did not think it right to neglect anything or treat it with disrespect, still more liking, I think, we should then have for the peculiarities in natures that are endowed with sense and possess soul and passion and character,--not paying honour to these, but through them to the Divine; so that since they are made by Nature into mirrors clearer [than any man can make], we should consider this as the instrument and art of God who ever orders all things. 

2. And, generally, we should deem that nothing soulless is superior to a thing with soul, nor one without sense to one possessing it; not even if one should bring together into one spot all the gold and emeralds in the world. 

3. For that which is Divine does not reside in colours or shapes or smoothnesses; nay, all things that either have no share or are not of a nature to share in life, have a lot of less value than that of dead bodies. [*2] 

4. Whereas the Nature that lives and sees, and has its source of motion from itself, and knowledge of things that are its and those that are not, has 

[p. 361]

appropriated both an "efflux of the Good," [*1] and a share of the Thinker "by whom the universe is steered," as Heracleitus says. [*2] 

5. For which cause the Divine is not less well pourtrayed in these [sc. animals] than by means of works of art in bronze and stone, which while equally susceptible of decay and mutilations, [*3] are in their nature destitute of all feeling and understanding. 

6. With regard to the honours paid to animals, then, I approve this view more highly than any other that has been mentioned. 

Footnotes

^353:2 paliggenesian.

^353:3 Sc. for civilising the world.

^354:1 Lit., "sharp-snout."

^354:2 And such things occur "even to this day" in India under the British Raj.

^355:1 en eileithyias polei.

^355:2 Over the fields?

^356:1 A lacuna occurs here which I have partially filled up, conjecturally, as above.

^356:2 An Egyptian animal of the weasel kind which was said to hunt out crocodiles' eggs; also called "Pharaoh's rat."

^356:3 Cf. Arist., Mirab., xxiii.

^356:4 Cf. xxii. 1--"Physiologus" again. For a criticism of this legend, see R. 43.

^356:5 Cf. x. 9.

^356:6 Budge (op. cit., ii. 379 f.) writes: "The beetle or scarabaeus . . . belongs to the family called Scarabacidae (Coprophagi), of which the Scarabaeus sacer is the type. . . . A remarkable peculiarity exists in the structure and situation of the hind legs, which are placed so near the extremity of the body, and so far from each other as to give the insect a most extraordinary appearance when walking. This peculiar formation is, nevertheless, particularly serviceable to its possessors in rolling the balls of excrementitious matter in which they enclose their eggs. . . . These balls are at first irregular and soft, but, by degrees, and during the process of rolling along, become rounder and harder; they are propelled by means of the hind legs. Sometimes these balls are an inch and a half, or two inches in diameter, and in rolling this along the beetles stand almost upon their heads, with the heads turned from the balls." The scarabaeus was called kheprera in Egyptian, and was the symbol of Khepera the Great God of creation and resurrection; he was the "father of the gods," and the creator of all things in heaven and earth, self-begotten and self-born; he was usually identified with the rising sun and new-birth generally.

^357:1 "Physiologus" again, doubtless; it might, however, be said that its tongue is rudimentary.

^357:2 Euripides, Tro., 887.

^357:3 Lit., "brow."

^357:4 That is, the First-born Reason.

^358:1 That is, presumably, either the 60 of the Chaldaeans, or the 3 * 4 * 5 of the "most perfect" triangle of the Mathematici.

^358:2 Namely, the utilitarian and symbolical; cf. lxxiv. 1.

^358:3 Cf. xiv. 6.

^358:4 Cf. Rawlinson's Herodotus, ii. 124, 125.

^358:5 There is a similar legend in India, I am told.

^358:6 May also mean "bewitched."

^358:7 That is, the moon in its third quarter.

^359:1 From tritos, "third."

^359:2 koryfagennei kai tritogeneian,--that is, Koryphagennes and Tritogeneia.

^359:3 trisi kathetois,--a kathetos (sc. gramme') is generally a perpendicular; but here the reference must be to this appended figure:

^359:4 That is, presumably, a-pollun, from a (priv.) and polloi (many).

^359:5 di' aploteta,--the play being apparently a-pol (plo)-tes.

^359:6 Lit., in the midst.

^360:1 The Tetraktys was ordinarily considered to be the sum of the first four numbers simply, that is 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 = 10; but here we have it given as 1 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 16, and 2 + 4 + 6 + 8 = 20, and 16 + 20 = 36. The oath is said to have been: "Yea, by Him who did bestow upon our soul Tetraktys, Ever-flowing Nature, Source possessing roots"--the "roots" being the four elements.

^360:2 Sc. which have at least been the vehicle of life.

^361:1 Plat., Phaedr., 251 B.

^361:2 Mullach, i. 328.

^361:3 Reading perw'seis.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

CONCERNING THE SACRED ROBES 

LXXVII. 1. Now as to robes: those of Isis [are] variegated in their dyes, for her power [is] connected with matters producing all things and receiving [all]--light darkness, day night, fire water, life death, beginning end; while the [robe] of Osiris has neither shade nor variegation, but one single [property]--the light-like, [*4] for the Source is pure and the First and Intelligible unmixed. 

2. Wherefore when they have once and once only received this [robe], [*5] they treasure it away and keep it from all eyes and hands; whereas they use those of Isis on many occasions. 

3. For it is by use that the things which are sensible and ready to hand, present many unfoldings and views of themselves as they change now one way now another; 

[p. 362]

whereas the intelligence of the Intelligible and Pure and Single, shining through the soul, like lightning-flash, once and once only perchance allows [us] to contact and behold [It]. 

4. For which cause both Plato [*1] and Aristotle call this part of philosophy "epoptic," [*2] from the fact that they who transcend by the reason (logos) these mixed and multiform things of opinion, are raised unto that Primal [One], Simple and Matter-less, and [so] contacting in its singleness the pure truth concerning It, they think philosophy has as it were [its] perfect end. 

LXXVIII. 1. The fact, moreover, which the present priests cautiously hint at by expiatory sacrifices and covering their faces--[namely] that this God is ruler and king of the dead, being no other than him who is called Hades and Pluto among Greeks--in that they do not know how it is true, confuses the multitude, who suppose that the truly sacred and holy Osiris lives on earth and under earth, where the bodies of those who seem to have [reached their] end are hidden [away]. 

2. But He Himself is far, far from the earth, unspotted and unstained, and pure of every essence that is susceptible of death and of decay. Nor can the souls of men here [on the earth], swathed as they are with bodies and enwrapped in passions, commune with God, except so far as they can reach some dim sort of a dream [of Him], with the perception of a mind trained in philosophy. 

3. But when [their souls] freed [from these bonds] pass to the Formless and Invisible and Passionless and Pure, this God becomes their guide and king, as though they hung on Him, and gazed insatiate upon His Beauty, 

[p. 363]

and longed after it--[Beauty] that no man can declare or speak about. 

4. It is with this the ancient tale (logos) makes Isis e'er in love, and, by pursuit [of it], and consort [with it], makes [her] full-fill all things down here with all things fair and good, whatever things have part in genesis. 

5. Thus, then, these things contain the reason (logos) that's more suitable to God. 

Footnotes

^361:4 to futoeides Cf. the better-known term to aygoeides, "the ray-like".

^361:5 Presumably in the initiation symbolising the investiture with the Robe of Glory.

^362:1 Symp., 210 A.

^362:2 In its highest sense--that is, intelligible or spiritual "seership," not the symbolic "sight" in the formal Greater Mysteries.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

CONCERNING INCENSE

LXXIX. 1. And must I also speak of the daily incense-offerings, as I promised, [*1] the reader should first of all have in mind the fact, that not only have men [in general] always paid most serious attention to things that conduce to health, but that especially in sacred ceremonies and purifications and prescribed modes of life "healthy" is not less important than "holy"; for they did not think it right to render service to the Pure and perfectly Harmless and Unpolluted with either bodies or with souls festering and diseased. 

2. Since, then, the air--of which we make most use, and with which we have most to do--does not always keep the same disposition and blend, but at night is condensed, and weighs down the body, and brings the soul into a desponding and anxious state, as though it had become mist-like and heavy; [therefore] as soon as they get up they incense with pine resin, sanifying and purifying the air by its [*2] disintegration, and fanning up again the [fire of the] spirit connate with body [*3] 

[p. 364]

which had died down,--since its perfume possesses a vehement and penetrating [force]. 

3. And, again, at mid-day, perceiving that the sun draws from the earth by force an exceedingly large and heavy exhalation, and commingles it with the air, they incense with myrrh. [*1] For its heat dissolves and disperses the turbid and mud-like combination in the atmosphere. 

4. And, indeed, physicians seem to relieve sufferers from plague by making a great blaze, as though it cleared the air. But it clears it better if they burn fragrant woods, such as [those] of cypress, juniper, and pine. 

5. At any rate, they say that at Athens, at the time of the Great Plague, Akron the physician became famous through ordering them to keep fires burning by the side of the sick, for he [thus] benefitted not a few. 

6. And Aristotle says that the sweet-smelling odours, given off by perfumes and flowers and meadows, conduce no less to health than to enjoyment; because by their warmth and softness they diffuse themselves gently through the brain, which is naturally cold and as though congested. 

7. And if, moreover, they call myrrh bal among Egyptians--and in translation this comes pretty near to meaning the dispersion of silly talk--this also affords some evidence for the reason why [they use it]. 

LXXX. 1. And [finally] kuphi [*2] is a mixture composed of sixteen ingredients:--of honey, and wine, and raisins, and cyperus; [*3] of pine-resin, and myrrh, 

[p. 365]

and aspalathus, [*1] and seseli; [*2] and further of mastich, [*3] and bitumen, [*4] and nightshade, [*5] and sorrel; and in addition to these of both junipers [*6] (of which they call the one the larger and the other the smaller), and cardamum, and sweet-flag. [*7] 

2. And these are not compounded in a haphazard way, but with the sacred writings being read aloud [*8] to the perfume-makers when they mix them. 

3. And as to their number,--even though it has all the appearance of square from square, and [that too] the only one of equally equal numbers that has the power of making the perimeter equal to the area, [*9] it must be said that its serviceableness for this purpose at least is of the slightest. 

4. But the majority of the ingredients, as they possess aromatic properties, liberate a sweet breath and healthy exhalation, by which both the air is changed, and the body being gently and softly moved by the vapour, falls asleep [*10] and loosens the distressing strain of the day's anxieties, as though they were knots, [and yet] without any intoxication. 

[p. 366]

5. Moreover, they polish up the image-making and receptive organ of dreams like a mirror, and make it clearer, no less than the playing on the lyre which the Pythagoreans used to use before sleep, thus charming away and sanifying the passionate and reason-less nature of the soul. 

6. For things smelt call back the failing sense, and often, on the other hand, dull and quiet it by [their] soothing [effect], when their exhalations are diffused through the body; just as some of the physicians say that sleep is induced when the vaporisation of the food, as it were creeping gently round the inward parts and groping about, produces a kind of tickling. 

7. And they use kuphi both as draught and mixture; for when it is drunk it is thought to purge the intestines, [but when applied externally [*1]] to be an emollient. 

8. And apart from these [considerations], resin is a work of the sun; and myrrh [comes from] the exudation of the trees under the sun-heat; while of the ingredients of kuphi, some flourish more at night, like all things whose nature it is to be nourished by cool breezes and shade and dew and damp. 

9. Seeing that the light of day is one and single, and Pindar tells us that the sun is seen "through empty aether"; [*2] while air is a blend and mixture of many lights and properties, as it were of seeds dropped from every star into one [field]. 

10. Naturally, then, they use the former as incenses by day, as being single and having their birth from the sun; and the latter when night sets in, as being mixed and manifold in its qualities. 

Footnotes

^363:1 Cf. lii. 5.

^363:2 Sc. the resin's.

^363:3 That is, presumably, what was called the "bodily or animal spirits"--the ethers or prana's.

^364:1 The resinous gum of an Arabian tree; probably a kind of acacia.

^364:2 This was also used as a medicine.

^364:3 kypeiroy,--Cyperus comosus, an aromatic plant used in embalming, a sweet-smelling marsh plant. Cf. F. cypere and E. cypres.

^365:1 aspalathoy,--a prickly shrub yielding a fragrant oil; mentioned in the Apocrypha and in some old herbalists. Cf. "I gave a sweet smell like cinnamon and aspalathus"--Ecclus. xxiv. 15. It was not the Genista acanthoclada.

^365:2 seseleus,--the Tordylium officinale; formerly called in English also "cicely."

^365:3 sxinoy,--or may be "squill."

^365:4 asfaltoy.

^365:5 thruon,--or may be "rush."

^365:6 Lit., juniper-berries.

^365:7 kalamoy,--probably Acorus calamus (cf. Ex. xxx. 23 et al.). It is to be noticed that the ingredients are arranged in four sets of four each.

^365:8 That is to the sound of mantrah, as a Hindu would say.

^365:9 Cf. xlii. 2 and figure in note.

^365:10 The kuphi being used at sundown.

^366:1 A lacuna of 8 or 9 letters occurs here in E.

^366:2 Olymp., i. 6.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 367]

AFTERWORD 

So ends this exceedingly instructive treatise of Plutarch, which, in spite of the mass of texts and monuments concerning Asar and Ast which have already been deciphered by the industry of Egyptologists, remains the most complete account of the root mystery-myth of ancient Egypt. The myth of Osiris and Isis goes back to the earliest times of which we have record, and is always found in the same form. Indeed the "Ritual," the "Book of the Dead," which should rather be called the "Book of the Living," might very well be styled "The Gospel of Osiris." 

It would be out of place here to seek for the historical origin of this Great Mystery; certainly Osiris was originally something greater than a "water sprite," as Budge supposes. Osiris and Isis were and are originally, as I believe, cosmic or super-cosmic beings; for the Elder and Younger Horus, regarded macrocosmically, were the Intelligible and Sensible Worlds, and, regarded microcosmically, pertained to the mystery of the Christ-stage of manhood. 

It may, of course, be denied that the ancient Egyptians were capable of entertaining any such notions; we, however, prefer the tradition of our Trismegistic tractates to the "primitive-culture" theories of anthropological speculation. That, however, such views were entertained in the first centuries is incontrovertible, as may be seen from a careful study of Philo of Alexandria alone. Thus to quote one passage out of many with regard to the two Horoi: 

"For that this cosmos is the Younger Son of God, in that it is perceptible to sense. The Son who's older than this one, He hath declared to be no one [perceptible by sense], for that he is conceivable by mind alone. 

[p. 368]

[paragraph continues] But having judged him worthy of the Elder's rights, He hath determined that he should remain with Him alone." [*1] 

When, moreover, we speak of the Christ-stage of manhood, we mean all that mystery that lies beyond the normal stage of man, including both the super-man stage and that of the Christ. 

In any case, Plutarch is of the greatest service for understanding the atmosphere and environment in which the students of the Trismegistic tradition moved, and we have therefore bestowed more care upon him than perhaps the general reader may think necessary. 

Footnotes

^368:1 Quod Deus Im.,  section 6; M. 1, 277, P. 298 (Ri. ii. 72, 73).

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 369]

X

"HERMAS" AND "HERMES" 

AN ANTICIPATION 

WHEN, in a recent book, [*1] I was treating of the Early Church document The Shepherd of Hermas, in connection with the ancient and mysterious Book of Elxai, which, according to Epiphanius, circulated among the Essenes, Nazorenes, Ebionites, and Sampsaeans, I wrote as follows: 

"It is also of very great interest to notice the many intimate points of contact between the contents of the Apocalyptic Hermas and the teaching of the Early 'Shepherd of Men' tractate of the mystic school who looked to Hermes the Thrice-Greatest as their inspirer, that is to say, the earliest deposit of the Trismegistic literature. But that is another story which has not yet been told." 

At the same time, all unknown to me, Reitzenstein must have written, or have been writing, his learned pages on "Hermas and Poimandres," coming to practically the same conclusion as I had in cruder form expressed several years earlier, when commenting on Hilgers' theory [*2] that the "Shepherd of Men" was 

[p. 370]

written in opposition to the "Shepherd of Hermas," and suggesting that if there were any dependence of one on the other, it was in exactly the reverse sense to that of Hilger's assumption. [*1] 

THE HIGHER CRITICISM OF "THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS" 

Like all the other extant extra-canonical documents of the Early Church, and especially the Antilegomena, as Eusebius calls them, that is to say books disputed in his day but earlier admitted by wide circles into the canon, The Shepherd of Hermas has been submitted to the most searching analysis by modern criticism. Though its unity is still strenuously defended by some scholars, the majority are convinced of its composite nature; and I follow Hilgenfeld, [*2] who detects in the present form of this document three elements, or, so to say, three deposits: (i.) The Apocalyptic--Viss. i.-iv.; (ii.) The Pastoral--Vis. v.-Sim. vii.; (iii.) The Secondary, or appendix of the latest redactor--Simm. viii.-x. "Hermas i." and "Hermas ii." cite nothing from any of the canonical books of the New Testament, and this should be, for most scholars, a striking indication of their early date. 

THE INTRODUCTION OF THE "PASTORAL HERMAS" 

"Hermas ii.," the "Pastoral Hermas," begins as follows: [*3] 

1. "Now when I had prayed in my house, and sat me 

[p. 371]

down upon my couch, there entered a man of glorious appearance, in the guise of a Shepherd, clad in a white skin, [*1] with a wallet on his shoulders, and a staff in his hand. And he embraced me, and I embraced him. [*2] 

2. "And straightway he sat down by my side. He saith to me: I am sent by the most Sovereign Angel, that I may dwell with thee for the rest of the days of thy life. 

3. "I thought that he had come to tempt me; [*3] and I say unto him: Who art thou? For I do know (say I) into whose charge I have been given. He saith to me: Dost thou not know? Nay--answer I. I am (saith he) the Shepherd [*4] into whose charge thou hast been given. 

4. "E'en as he spoke, his aspect changed, and I knew him, that it was he to whom I had been given in charge." 

COMPARISON WITH OUR "POeMANDRES" 

If we now compare the Greek text of this interesting passage with that of the introductory paragraphs of the "Poemandres," it will be found impossible to refer their striking similarities merely to a common type of expression; the verbal agreements are too precise, and 

[p. 372]

stand out convincingly at the first glance, without needing the assistance of the large type in which Reitzenstein (pp. 11, 12) has had them printed in his reproduction of the texts. 

Most remarkable of all, however, is the similarity of ideas; for "Hermas" as for "Hermes" the Shepherd is not only a shepherd but a "shepherd of men," even as in a different connection but in the same circle of ideas Peter and others were to become "fishers of men." [*1] 

Now, not only on general grounds is it difficult for any one who has carefully studied the two documents, to believe that the writer of the philosophic-mystical treatise not only had the Christian apocalyptic writing before him but took it as his point of departure; but, even if we are still strongly dominated by what has hitherto been the traditional view in all such questions, and cling to the theory that when there is similarity the Christian scripture must necessarily have been first in the field, it is very difficult to believe that a copier of "Hermas" should have left no traces of an acquaintance with the very distinctive feature of the robe and staff and wallet of the shepherd, and of the conversation which follows in what, on this theory, would be the presupposed original. 

THE POPULAR SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATION OF THE SHEPHERD 

The mystical representation and thought-atmosphere of the writer or redactor of our present "Poemandres" are far removed from any direct traces of contact with the folk-consciousness, in which the appurtenances mentioned by "Hermas" were the typical literary description 

[p. 373]

of a shepherd since the time of Theocritus; [*1] not only so, but this was the symbolic representation of the "Shepherd of Men" in the general Hellenistic religious consciousness. Indeed, we find unquestionable proofs that Hermes was pre-eminently regarded as the "Good Shepherd," and a figure of him with staff and wallet and single robe was a great favourite in the popular cult. [*2] 

In one passage [*3] in which mention is made of this wallet and staff, further details are given showing that these simple symbols were well understood. The right hand is raised, and the left holds staff and wallet. Moreover, the staff has a serpent entwined round it, and Hermes is clad in a single robe. Like Isis, he stands upon the world-sphere, which has also a serpent twined round it. Hermes here represents the Mind or Logos, the father-mother (staff and wallet) force of nature; with the "left" he brings into generation, with the "right" he leads souls out of genesis, either to death, or regeneration. In this prayer, Hermes (as the sun) is called "the Shepherd who hath his fold in the West." [*4] 

It is to be further remarked that Hermes is in the dress of the "Poor," [*5] and of the "Naked." [*6] 

[p. 374]

THE NAME "HERMAS"

But to return to Hermas. Why "Hermas" of all names in the world in this connection? We have a large literature in which "Hermes" plays the part of seer, and prophet, and revealer, and writer of sacred scriptures; in it, moreover, he figures as the beloved disciple of the Heavenly Mind, the Shepherd of Men. But what have we in Christian tradition to explain the name "Hermas"? Nothing, absolutely nothing, but contradictory hypotheses which try to discover a historic Hermas so as to authenticate the provenance of what is manifestly, like nearly every similar document of the time, pseudepigraphic. In my opinion, indeed, the very name Hermas betrays more clearly than anything else the "Hermes" source of the Christian writer's setting of part of his most interesting apocalyptic. "Hermas" is because of "Hermes," rather than "Hermes" in answer to "Hermas," as Hilgers would have it. 

AN EARLY FORM OF THE "POeMANDRES" 

This, however, does not mean to say that "Hermas" took the setting of the introduction of his Pastoral apocalypses from precisely the same text of the "Poemandres" which now lies before us, for our present text is manifestly the redaction of an earlier form; so that if we could recover the other form we should in all probability find some additional verbal agreement of "Hermas" with "Hermes." 

[p. 375]

That the ideas of the "Poemandres" treatise were the mystical and philosophical side of much that appears in the popular cult of the time, may be seen by an inspection of the prayers from the Magic Papyri which we have translated. [*1] In them the Mind, as the Shepherd of Men, and the Revealer of the Light, is clearly set forth. Reitzenstein's view (p. 32), accordingly, is that the Christian writer must have taken his description of the Shepherd from what originally was a fuller text of the "Poemandres" than the one preserved to us, and that this will account for several features which would otherwise be peculiar to "Hermas." This text was in closer verbal agreement with the general language of the popular Hermes religion as preserved to us in the Hermes-Prayers. [*2] 

THE HOLY MOUNT 

But the direct points of contact between "Hermas" and the Trismegistic literature are not confined to the "Poemandres" document. As the original writer of "Hermas" was dependent on "Hermes" for the setting of the introduction to his Pastoral apocalypses, so also it is highly probable that the redactor was influenced by a lost treatise referred to in the introduction of "The Sacred Sermon on the Mountain," C. H., xiii. (xiv.). 

In this treatise reference is made to one of the now lost "General Sermons," [*3] the scene of which also took 

[p. 376]

place on a mountain. For in connection with it mention is made by Tat of his passing over a mountain, or ascending a mountain, at the beginning of his noviciate, when he became a "suppliant"; [*1] while it is further stated by Tat that at that stage the doctrine was not clearly explained, but rather hidden in riddles; for that as yet he was not sufficiently purified, and made "a stranger to the world-illusion." 

Now, it is remarkable that "Hermas," in the appendix to the book (Sim. ix.), tells us that after these revelations the Shepherd came to him again, and told him that much had not been explained because of his "weakness in the flesh"; but now that he has been strengthened by the Spirit, the Shepherd will explain all "with greater clearness." He then takes him away into Arcadia (a very unexpected locality for a Christian writer in Rome to choose), to a "breast-like mountain," where he has the further teaching revealed to him. 

But, strangely enough, it was precisely in Arcadia that the chief Hellenic cult of Hermes existed, as stated by Lactantius, basing himself on the common belief at Rome; [*2] and from Arcadia it was that Hermes, according to a tendency-legend that even at Rome went back at least to the second century B.C., set forth to teach the Egyptians. 

"GNOSTIC" ELEMENTS 

Moreover, "Hermas" is throughout strongly tinged with "Gnostic" elements. As I wrote in my last book, [*3] it is practically one of the very numerous 

[p. 377]

permutations and combinations of the Sophia-mythus--one of the many settings-forth of the mystic lore and love of the Christ and the Sophia, or Wisdom, of the Son of God and His spouse or sister, the Holy Spirit, of the King and Queen, of the Lord and the Virgin Church. In its most instructive series of visions are depicted the mystic scenes of the allegorical drama of man's inner nature--the mystery-play of all time. 

But when we say "Gnostic" we mean much that is also Hellenistic mysticism, and therefore much that is also "Hermetic," for in the Trismegistic literature there is set forth a Gnosis of a far simpler type than in any of the Christian systems technically called "Gnostic." 

THE VICES AND VIRTUES 

A striking example of the similarity of ideas of this nature is found in comparing the list of twelve vices and ten (seven and three) virtues, given in C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 7-10, [*1] with "Hermas," Sim. ix. 15, 1-3, where twelve "virgins," each bearing the name of a virtue, are set over against twelve "women clothed in black," each bearing the name of a vice; and with "Hermas," Vis. iii. 8, 7, where seven women, each in turn the mother of the other, are called by the names of seven virtues. 

We need not, of course, necessarily suppose any direct contact in this case, though it is curious that the list of virtues occurs precisely in the sermon "On the Mountain"; but both writers clearly move in, or are influenced by, the same circle of ideas, and that, too, ideas of a very special nature. 

The above points are sufficient for our purpose, and throw a most interesting light on one element in the 

[p. 378]

composition of the very ancient Christian document whose exclusion from the canon, after enjoying for so many years practically canonical authority, is to be regretted. 

THE EARLY DATE OF THE ORIGINAL "HERMAS" 

Now, "Apocalyptic Hermas" is distinctly "anti-Pauline," and perhaps this more than anything else accounts for the final exclusion of the book from the canon; it is therefore in vain to seek in it quotations from any of the Pauline Letters. But what is still more remarkable, neither it nor the "Pastoral Hermas" quote from any of the Canonical Gospels. This argues a very early date. 

If, then, we are inclined to accept the statement of the writer of the Muratorian Fragment (c. 170 A.D.) that "Hermas" was written at Rome during the bishopric of Pius (140-c. 155 A.D.), this must refer to the completed work of the last redactor who is held responsible for "Hermas iii.," and who was acquainted with several books of the canon. The "Pastoral Hermas" may thus be fairly pushed back to the beginning of the first century. 

We have also to remember--a point which Reitzenstein does not seem to have taken into consideration--not only that the Greek original of our form of "Hermas" is lost, but that the Old Latin version has also disappeared, and that we possess only a Greek retranslation from the Latin. [*1] Under these circumstances, it is still more surprising that such strong traces of direct literary dependence on the original form of the "Poemandres" introduction should still remain in our "Hermas." 

[p. 379]

THE DEPENDENCE THEORY TO BE USED WITH CAUTION 

It would, however, in my opinion be a grave mistake to push the theory of literary dependence too far, and to seek to account for the main content of "Hermas" on any theory of direct borrowing from allied sources, or even solely of direct external conditioning by the mystical and theological ideas of the time. There is no a priori reason against the high probability that the original writer was recording some genuine inner experiences, however much, as was the fashion of the time, and of other times and climes, they may have been expanded, interpolated, and polished by literary art. 

It is true that all such inner experiences would be strongly conditioned by the prior conceptions, thought-tone, and theological beliefs of the writer, and by the current and traditional types of such experiences known in his day. Indeed, it is very difficult anywhere to meet with the record of visions or apocalyptic utterances which are not so conditioned. The Buddhist seer, sees in the mode of traditional Buddhist conceptions of the unseen; the Hellenic mantis and sibyl find themselves in an invisible world of the familiar nature known to them from the mythologists, and poets, and mystery-traditions; the Egyptian prophet moves amid the familiar topography and schematology of the Amenti of his nation; even an Ezekiel sees in the symbols of the Babylonian cultus; while the Christian mystic invariably finds himself in the conventional heaven of the saints and the hell of the sinners. 

It is not, therefore, necessary to follow Reitzenstein (pp. 8-11) in detail, when he seeks to show the strong influence of heathen mystical literature on the early 

[p. 380]

[paragraph continues] Christian document we are discussing, and to point to striking parallels between the setting of the first four visions of "Hermas," and the visions of Zosimus, as preserved in the fragments of his "Acts," [*1] or the "Visit to Hades" of Setme and Si-Osiri, and their passing through the Seven Halls, [*2] as partially preserved in the Demotic "Tales of Khamuas." [*3] 

It is true that Zosimus, who nourished towards the end of the third century, was a member of the Poemandres community, and, therefore, what he has to say is of great interest to us, for doubtless his visions were strongly conditioned by the Trismegistic tradition and especially by the Isis-type of its literature, and the cognate Egyptian "Books of Hermes"; but the points on which Reitzenstein lays stress seem somewhat too general to allow of our drawing any direct conclusion with regard to "Hermas" and "Hermes." 

There is a certain similarity; but our information is too scanty to permit of any precise drawing of general conclusions. There is, however, a valuable piece of information which prevents us from attributing all the similarities which may be noticed purely to the general thought-atmosphere of the times. In one particular at least, we can be more definite. 

THE VISIONS OF CRATES 

Zosimus is not the only follower of Thrice-greatest Hermes whose visions are still on record. Crates also 

[p. 381]

has left an account of his mystic experiences, though unfortunately transmitted to us only in Arabic translation from the original Greek. [*1] 

Crates leaves his body and enters the unseen world. "While I was praying," he writes, "I felt myself suddenly carried into the airs [of heaven], following the same path as the sun and moon." Here he meets with Thrice-greatest Hermes in the guise of "an old man, the most beautiful of men, seated on a chair; he was clad in white raiment, and held a book in his hand resting on the arm of the chair." 

Compare this with "Hermas" (Vis. ii. 2, 2): "I see opposite me a chair, and on it a covering of wool white as hail; [*2] then came there an old woman, in shining white raiment, having a book in her hand, and sat down alone." 

After this revelation, and when the "old woman" had ceased reading from the book, four young men came and carried off the chair, and departed with it to the East (ibid., 4, 1). 

Here again it is of interest to compare this with the introduction to a magical "light-ritual," where the seer has a vision of four men with crowns on their heads who bring in the "throne of the god." [*3] 

Crates is taught from the book and bidden to write what he is told. "Make thy book according to the instructions which I have given; and know that I am with thee and will never leave thee till thou hast accomplished all." 

So also "Hermas"; compare also the last sentence 

[p. 382]

with the phrase in the Introduction to the "Pastoral Hermas": "I am sent . . . that I may dwell with thee for the rest of the days of thy life." 

In another vision, Crates is instructed in a dialogue which strongly reflects the style and substance of our Trismegistic sermons. And in yet another he moves in the psychic reflection of the setting of the now for the most part lost Isis-type of the literature, which has a more strongly Egyptian colouring. He is transported to yet another heaven and firmament, and there sees the temple of Ptah (Hephaestus), and the statue of Venus (Isis), which holds converse with him. 

He was then evidently saturated with the Trismegistic tradition, and had access to treatises which are now, unfortunately, lost to us, for it is just this type of the literature which shows signs of the more direct influence of Egyptian ideas, and the mention of the temple of Ptah is a striking confirmation that Reitzenstein is on the right track in his analysis of the oldest deposit of the "Poemandres," which he connects with the Ptah-tradition. 

THE GENERAL CHRISTIAN "MANY" AND THE GNOSTIC "FEW"

That the end and aim of the later Egyptian religion, and of all Hellenistic religious circles in general, was a Gnosis, or definite mystical experience in the form of visions and apocalypses, is manifest on all sides; and that this also was the chief interest of very numerous circles in the Early Church is a fundamental fact in the study of Christian origins which should not be impatiently brushed on one side, or minimised almost to extinction as of no real importance, but which should be restored to the first rank in seeking 

[p. 383]

an explanation of the many obscure problems of these early days which no purely objective considerations will solve. 

That the General Christian of these days, as of all subsequent centuries, had naturally much to learn in these matters from the trained Mystic, whether of his own faith or of another, is saying nothing to his discredit, for he naturally belonged to the "many" who were striving to become the "few." General Christianity, however, spread so rapidly that the definite cultivation of the spiritual faculties practised by the early contemplatives of the faith soon gave place to a fanatical enthusiasm for a misunderstood monkdom, which swamped the monasteries with a flood of the "many," who were often without any true vocation for the holy life, and not unfrequently quite ignorant of the elements of contemplation. 

We need not speak of the wild fanaticism of warrior monkdom let loose with pick and hatchet and fire-brand to destroy the treasures of religious art throughout the beautiful Hellenic world, but even among the quiet and peaceable brethren there was much ignorance. How unknowing some of these good folk were, we may learn from a naive story, the very simplicity of which convinces the reader of its genuineness. 

Perhaps some one may here interject: But this has nothing to do with "Hermas"! Perhaps not; but it has a great deal to do with a proper understanding of the history of the development of General Christianity and its relationship to the deeper religious consciousness of the first centuries. When, then, I read the Greek text of this simple story, as reproduced by Reitzenstein, [*1] I thought that some who could not read 

[p. 384]

[paragraph continues] Greek, but who take a very deep interest in such matters, might like to hear it, and so I have set it down in English. 

THE STORY OF ABBOT OLYMPIUS 

The story runs as follows: 

"Abbot Olympius [*1] said that one day a priest of the [Heathen] Greeks came down to Scetis; [*2] he came to my cell and passed the night there. 

"Seeing the manner of life of the monks, he saith to me: 'Living in this way, do ye not enjoy visions from your God?' 'Nay!' I answer. 

"Then saith the priest to me: 'So long as we duly serve our God with holy deeds, he hideth nought from us, but revealeth unto us his mysteries. And ye, in spite of all your great labours--watchings, keeping silence, disciplines--sayest thou, ye see nought? Assuredly, then, if ye see nought, ye have let evil reasonings come into your hearts which shut you from your God; and 'tis for this cause his mysteries are not revealed to you.' 

"And I went and told the elder [brethren] the words of the priest; and they were astonished and agreed that so it was. For impure reasonings do shut off God from man." 

I do not exactly understand what is the precise meaning of logismous, which usually means

[p. 385]

"reasonings," and seems on the face of it to suggest that the monks' intellectual grasp of the matter was at fault. It may, however, mean simply that their "thoughts" were impure. But this is not any more satisfactory, for the monks must have known already that impure thoughts were to be driven out. 

What is clear is that the "priest of the Greeks" had personal experience of these pious exercises, and came from a circle where such things were normally practised; he, moreover, knew what was the reason for the monks' non-success in contemplation. He knew that it all depended on thought, and that, too, on "good thought," so that the "Good" might descend on the "good," as the Hermes-Prayer (i. 9, 13) says. But he knew more than this; he knew that there was also need of "right thought," of Gnosis as well as of faith, of the proper use of the intelligence and the driving out of erroneous ideas with regard to the nature of God. 

A FINAL WORD 

But for a final word on "Hermas." This early document was written at Rome; so all are agreed. It would, then, seem necessary to allow of sufficient time for a wide circulation of the older form of the "Poemandres," before it could reach Rome from Egypt. This time could not have been short, for it must be reckoned not by geographical considerations, which are hardly of any consequence in this connection, but by the fact that the "Poemandres" was the gospel of a school that laid the greatest possible stress on secrecy. How, then, could a Christian writer have got possession of a copy? Had the pledge of secrecy already by this time been removed? This is not credible, for later Trismegistic documents still lay the greatest stress upon it. 

[p. 386]

Were, then, the early Christian mystical writers in intimate relationship with such circles as the Poemandres-community? Some Gnostics undoubtedly were; was the writer of "Hermas"? Was there once friendship where subsequently was bitter strife? 

Such and many other most interesting questions arise, but there is little hope that any satisfactory answer will be given them until the work on the mystical religious environment of the time has been pushed forward to such a point, that men may gradually become accustomed to the view that much of the secret of the Origins lies concealed in that very environment. 

In any case, the way is cleared for pushing back the earlier "Poemandres" document well into the first century, and for ranking it, therefore, as at least contemporary with the earliest of the New Testament writings. 

Footnotes

^369:1 Did Jesus Live 100 B.C.?--An Enquiry into the Talmud Jesus Stories, the Toldoth Jeschu, and Some Curious Statements of Epiphanius (London, 1903), pp. 365 ff.

^369:2 See Hilgers (J.), De Hermetis Trismegisti Poimandro Commentatio (Bonn, 1855).

^370:1 See The Theosophical Review, xxiv. 302, 303 (June 1899).

^370:2 Hilgenfeld (A.), Hermae Pastor (2nd ed.: Leipzig, 1881).

^370:3 Apokalypsis e, the fifth revelation or vision of our composite document, which for all we know may have stood first in some earlier "source."

^371:1 Presumably a sheep's skin of white wool.

^371:2 Compare the Story of the Spirit Double who came down unto Jesus when a boy, as told by Mary the Mother, in the Pistis Sophia, 121: "He embraced thee and kissed thee, and thou also didst kiss him; ye became one." Compare this with the common mystic belief of the time in the possibility of union with such a spiritual presence; and also the possession by a daimon (leipsis daimonos), which is treated of at length by Reitzenstein, and particularly referred to this pasage in Hermas (R. 230).

^371:3 Compare Pistis Sophia, 120: "I was in doubt and thought it was a phantom tempting me."

^371:4 On this Gebhardt and Harnack, in their edition (Leipzig, 1877), can only comment: "In visionibus angelicus pastor nusquam memoratur."

^372:1 Compare the interesting inscription from Sakkara quoted from Erman (note, below).

^373:1 R. 11, n. 3.

^373:2 Compare Wessely, Denkschr. d. K. K. Akad. (1888), 103, 2359 ff.

^373:3 Ibid., 104, 2373.

^373:4 Erman (Agypten, 515) refers to an inscription from Sakkara, in which a mystical shepherd says to his flock: "Your Shepherd is in the West with the fishes,"--an interesting conjunction of ideas for students of archaic Christian symbolism. The idea is also Babylonian, the Star-flocks of the Gods being fed beyond the Ocean in the West.

^373:5 Compare the dress of the Essenes, and the account of the sending forth of the disciples, Matt. x. 9 = Mark vi. 8 = Luke ix. 3. The direct contradiction of the account in Mark to the statements in Matthew and Luke, makes it exceedingly probable that not only the one robe, and staff, but also the wallet, were the typical signs of those who went forth to "raise the dead."

^373:6 He is clad in the perizuma, the working dress (or apron), in which men were said to work "naked" (nudus, gymnos)--that is, clad in one robe. See also note on the sentence: "And naked I sought the Naked," in treating of the Gymnosophists (or Naked Philosophers), in my Apollonius of Tyana (London, 1901), p. 100.

^375:1 See "The Popular Theurgic Hermes Cult in the Greek Magic Papyri."

^375:2 Compare Hermas, Vis. v. 2: "I am sent . . . that I may dwell with thee for the rest of the days of thy life," with Prayer i. 10: "for all the length of my life's days"; and v. 3: "I know into whose charge I have been given," with Prayer ii. 7: "I know thee, Hermes."

^375:3 en tois genekois.

^376:1 A term used by Philo as a synonym of Therapeut.

^376:2 Div. Institt., i. 6--as cited among Evidences from the Fathers, where see my note on Pheneus.

^376:3 Op. sup. cit., p. 365.

^377:1 The very treatise to which we have previously referred in connection with the "mountain."

^378:1 See Gebhardt and Harnack, op. cit., Prolegg. xi. n. 2.

^380:1 The texts are given by Berthelot (M. P. S.), Les Alchimistes grecs.

^380:2 See The Book of the Dead, cxliv., cxlvii.

^380:3 Griffith (F. Ll.), Stories of the High Priests of Memphis (Oxford, 1900), pp. 45 ff.

^381:1 Berthelot (M. P. S.), La Chimie au Moyen Age, iii. 44 ff., 268, n. 1; R. 361.

^381:2 According to the Ethiopic translation. See The Apostolic Fathers, p. 325, n. 4, in the "Ante-Nicene Christian Library," vol. i. (Edinburgh, 1867).

^381:3 Kenyon (F. G.), Greek Pap. Cat., p. 65; R. 280, n. 3.

^383:1 R. 34--from Apophthegmata Patrum, in Cotelerius' Ecclesiae Graecae Monumenta, i. 582.

^384:1 I do not know who this Olympius was, unless, perchance, he may have been the monk referred to by Nilus (ii. 77), the famous ascetic of Sinai, who flourished in the first quarter of the fifth century.

^384:2 Again, I can find no information about this place; it was, however, presumably in the Nitriote nome south of the Delta--for the priest " came down.''

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 387]

XI

CONCERNING THE AeON-DOCTRINE 

"HEAR then, my son, how standeth God and All. God; Aeon; Cosmos; Time; Becoming."--C. H., xi. (xii.) 1. 

THE SCOPE OF OUR ESSAY 

While rigidly excluding any consideration of the amazing elaboration of Christo-Gnostic aeonology, it may not be unserviceable to offer a "few notes in connection with the simpler idea of the Aeon. The subject really requires a treatise in itself, but that would, of course, be too lengthy an undertaking for these Prolegomena. [*1] 

Let us, then, first turn to a striking passage which purports to give us the Orphic tradition of the Genesis of the World-Egg, and of the relation of its Glorious Progeny to the Aeon. 

The passage is of great interest for us in our present enquiry, for if it is not a direct quotation from Apion, the Alexandrian savant, and bitter opponent of the Jews and of Philo, during the first half of the first 

[p. 388]

century A.D., it at anyrate represents the view of the Hellenistic theology of that period. 

The passage is found in one of the sources of the composite and overworked document known as the Clementine Homilies, [*1] and runs as follows: 

THE ORPHIC TRADITION OF THE GENESIS OF THE WORLD-EGG 

III. "There was when naught was but Chaos and an indistinguishable mixture of unordered elements still jumbled all together; both Nature herself being witness to it, and great men having thought it must be so. 

"And as witness, I will bring forward for you the greatest of the great in wisdom, Homer himself, speaking about the original con-fusion: 

"But may you all become water and earth [*2]--

--meaning that thence all things have had their genesis, and that after the dissolution of their moist and earthy essence they are all restored again to their first nature--which is Chaos. 

"And Hesiod, in his Theogony, says: 

"In truth Chaos came into being the very first. [*3] 

"And by 'came into being' he evidently means that 

[p. 389]

it was generated as are things generable, and not that it for ever was as are things ingenerable. 

"Orpheus also likens Chaos to an Egg in which was the con-fusion of the primordial elements. [*1] 

"This is what Hesiod supposes by Chaos, what Orpheus calls an Egg--a thing generable, projected from the infinity of Matter (Hyle), and brought into being as follows: 

IV. "Both fourfold Matter [*2] being ensouled and the whole Infinitude being as though it were a Depth (Bythos), flowing perpetually and indistinguishably moving, and over and over again pouring forth countless imperfect mixtures, now of one kind and now of another, and thereby dissolving them again owing to its lack of order, and engulphing so that it could not be bound [together] to serve for the generation of a living creature--it happened that the infinite Sea itself, being driven round [*3] by its own peculiar nature, flowed with a natural motion in an orderly fashion from out of itself into itself, as it were a vortex, [*4] and blended its essences, and thus involuntarily the most developed part of all of them, [*5] that which was most serviceable for the generation of a living creature, flowed, as it were in a funnel, down the middle of the universe, and was carried to the bottom 

[p. 390]

by means of the vortex that swept up everything, and drew after it the surrounding Spirit, [*1] and so gathering itself together as it were into the most productive [form of all], it constituted a discrete state [of things]. 

"For just as a bubble is made in water, so a sphere-like hollow form gathered itself together from all sides. 

"Thereupon, itself being impregnated in itself, carried up [*2] by the Divine Spirit that had taken it to itself as consort, it thrust forth its head (proekypsen [*3]) into the Light--this, the greatest thing perchance that's ever been conceived, as though it were out of the Infinite Deep's universe a work of art had been conceived and brought to birth, an ensouled work [in form] like unto the circumference of eggs, [in speed] like to the swiftness of a wing. [*4] 

V. "I would therefore have you think of Cronus (Kronos) as Time (Khronon [*5]), and of Rhea (hRea) as the flowing (to reon) of the Moist Essence; for the whole of Matter being moved in Time brought forth, as it were, an Egg, the whole surrounding sphere-like Heaven (Oyranos), which in the beginning was full of the productive marrow, [*6] so that it might be able to bring forth elements and colours of all kinds; and yet the 

[p. 391]

manifold appearances which it was ever presenting, all came from One Essence and One Colour. 

"For just as in the product of the peacock, although the colour of the egg seems to be one, it has nevertheless potentially in it the countless colours of the bird that is to be brought to perfection, so also the Ensouled Egg conceived from Infinite Matter, when it is set in motion from the perpetually flowing Matter below it, [*1] exhibits changes of all kinds. 

"For from within the circumference a certain male-female Living Creature is imaged out by the Foreknowledge of the Divine Spirit that indwells in it, whom [*2] Orpheus doth call Manifestor (Fanes--Phanes), because when he is manifest (faneis) the universe shines forth from him, through the lustre of Fire, most glorious of elements, perfected in the Moist [Element]. 

"Nor is this incredible, for in the case of glow-worms, for example, Nature allows us to see a 'moist light.' 

VI. "Accordingly the First Egg that was ever produced being gradually warmed by the Living Creature within it, breaks open, and then there takes shape and comes forth some such thing as Orpheus says: 

"When the skull-like [*3] wide-yawning Egg did break [etc.]. [*4] 

"So by the mighty power of Him who came forth and who made Himself manifest, 'the shell' [*5] receives its articulation [*6] and obtains its orderly arrangement; 

[p. 392]

while He Himself presides as though it were upon a throne on Heaven's height, and in the [realms] ineffable sends forth His light all round upon the Boundless Aeon." 

COMMENTARY 

This is evidently the Logos--the God from the Egg, and the God from the Rock; for the Primal Firmament was symbolised as Rock, as Adamant; just as in physical nature, the life-spark appears from the mineral kingdom. 

The Logos presides in highest heaven, in the ineffable spaces, whence He sends out His rays upon the Aeon, that Bound of Bounds which is itself Boundless. For the Egg may be thought of as the Boundary of some special universe or system; whereas the Aeon is the Boundary of all universes. 

The information given in this quotation purports to be the Orphic tradition of cosmogony; with this cosmogony all Hellenistic theologians would be familiar, and therefore we are not surprised to find many points of contact between it and the general ideas in our "Poemandres" cosmogenesis, which, though doubtless having an original nucleus of Egyptian tradition in it, is nevertheless strongly overworked by minds that were also saturated with the mingled traditions of Plato, Pythagoras, and Orpheus. 

Indeed, both "Plato" and "Pythagoras," on their mystical side, are strongly tinged with "Orpheus." Now, Orphicism was the revival of pre-Hesiodic Orphism initiated by Onomacritus under the Peisistratidae. Original Orphism was, in my opinion, a blend of Hellenic Bardic lore with "Chaldaean" elements. It is not surprising, therefore, that when the "Books of the Chaldaeans," collected for the Alexandrian Library, were 

[p. 393]

turned into Greek, great interest should have been taken in them by Hellenistic scholars, who found therein a confirmation of the Greek Wisdom of Orpheus, little suspecting that that Wisdom was in origin partially from the same source. 

THE SETHIAN GNOSIS

In illustration of this Chaldaeo-Orphic symbolical cosmogony as "philosophised" in a Hellenistic Gnostic environment, we will quote from a system ascribed by Hippolytus to the Sethians (a name indicating an Egyptian environment), and brought by him into the closest connection with those whom he calls the Naassenes--that is to say, with what he considers to be one of the earliest forms of the Christian Gnosis, but which, as we have shown, is a form of the pre-Christian Gnosis overworked in Christian terms about the middle of the second century. Of these Sethians, Hippolytus [*1] tells us as follows: 

"They think that there are Three Principles [*2] of the universals having certain definite boundaries, and yet that each of these Principles possesses boundless potentialities. 

"Now, the Essences of these Principles (he says) are Light and Darkness; and in the midst of these is pure Spirit. 

"The Spirit, however, that is set in the midst of the Darkness that is below and of the Light that is above, is not a spirit [or breath] like a blast of wind or some light breeze that can be felt; but is as it were the delicate scent of unguent or of incense compounded and 

[p. 394]

prepared,--a force of fragrance that travels with a motion so rapid as to be quite inconceivable and far beyond the power of words to express. 

"Now, since Light is above and Darkness below, and Spirit in some such way as I have said between them,--the Nature of the Light is that it shines forth from above, like a ray of the sun, into the Darkness beneath, while that of the fragrance of the Spirit, which has the middle rank, is, contrary wise, that it extends itself and is carried in every direction; just as in the case of incense on a fire, we see its fragrance carried in every direction. 

"And such being the Power of the triply divided [Principles], the combined Power of the Spirit and Light descends into the Darkness which is set beneath them. 

"And the Darkness is an awesome Water into which the Light together with the Spirit is drawn down and transferred. 

"The Darkness, however, is not without understanding, but quite intelligent, and it knows that if Light were taken from Darkness, Darkness would remain isolated, unmanifest, [*1] splendourless, powerless, ineffectual, strengthless. 

"Wherefore is it constrained with all its intelligence and understanding to hold down to itself the lustre and spark of the Light together with the fragrance of the Spirit. 

"And one can see an image of the nature of the latter in a man's face--[namely] the pupil of the eye, [*2] which is dark because of the waters underlying it, yet illumined by Spirit. 

"As, therefore, the Darkness contends for the Splendour, in order that it may make a slave of the 

[p. 395]

[paragraph continues] Light-spark and see, so also the Light and the Spirit contend for their own Power; they strive to raise and bring back to themselves those powers which are mingled with the dark and awesome Water beneath. 

"Now all the powers of the three Principles, being infinitely infinite in number, are sagacious and intelligent each according to its own essence. And though they are countless in multitude, yet, being sagacious and intelligent, as long as they remain by themselves, they are all at peace. 

"If, however, one power is brought into contact with another power, the dissimilarity in their juxtaposition brings about a certain motion and energy that takes its shape from the concurrent motion of the juxtaposition of the contacting powers. [*1] 

"For the con-currence of the powers constitutes as it were the impression (tupos) of a seal struck off by concussion [*2] so as to resemble the [die] that stamps the substances brought into contact with it. 

"Since then the powers of the three Principles are infinite in number, and from the infinite powers are infinite concurrences, images of infinite seals are of necessity produced. 

"These images, then, are the forms (ideai) of the different kinds of living creatures. 

"Now from the first mighty concurrences of the three Principles there resulted a mighty type of seal--Heaven and Earth. 

"And Heaven and Earth have a configuration 

[p. 396]

resembling a Womb, with the embryo [*1] in the middle; and if (he says) one would bring this to the test of sight, let him scrutinise scientifically the gravid womb of whatsoever living creature he wishes, and he will find the model of Heaven and Earth and of all things between them lying before him without any alteration. 

"So the configuration of Heaven and Earth was such that it resembled a Womb as it were, according to the first concourse [of the three Principles]. 

"And again in the midst of Heaven and Earth infinite concourses of powers occurred, and every single concourse effected and expressed the image of nothing else but a seal of Heaven and Earth--a thing resembling a Womb. 

"And in the Earth itself there developed from the infinite seals of different kinds of living creatures, [living things] still more infinite. 

"And into all this infinity below the Heaven in the different kinds of living creatures, the fragrance of the Spirit from above together with the Light was sown and was distributed. [*2] . . . 

"Accordingly there arose out of the Water a first-born source--Wind vehement and boisterous--and cause of all genesis. 

"For by making a certain seething [*3] in the waters it [*4] raises up waves from the waters. 

"And the genesis of the waves, being as it were a 

[p. 397]

certain pregnant [*1] impulse, is the source of the production of man or mind, whenever [this motion] quickens under the impulse of the Spirit. 

"And whenever this wave, raised from the Water by the Wind, and rendering nature pregnant, receives in itself the power of production of the female, it keeps down the Light from above that has been sown into it together with the fragrance of the Spirit,--that is to say, mind that takes forms in the various types; that is a perfect god, brought down from the Ingenerable Light from above and Spirit into a human nature, as into a temple, by the course of Nature and motion of the Wind, generated from Water, commingled and blended with bodies, as though he were the salt of existing things and the light of the Darkness, struggling to be freed from bodies, and unable to find liberation and the way out of himself. 

"For as it were a very minute spark . . . like a ray [*2] . . . . 

"Every thought and care of the Light above, therefore, is how and in what way mind may be liberated from the Death of the evil and dark Body, [*3] from the Father below, who is the Wind that in ferment and turmoil raised up the waves and brought to birth perfect mind, son of himself, and yet not his own in essence. 

"For he was a ray from above, from that Perfect Light, overpowered in the sinuous [*4] and awesome and bitter [*5] 

[p. 398]

and blood-stained Water; and that Light is the Spirit of Light borne upon the water. [*1] . . . 

"But the Wind, being both boisterous and vehement in its rush, is in its whistling [*2] like unto a Serpent--a winged one. 

"From the Wind, that is from the Serpent, the source of generation arose in the way that has been said; all things receiving together the beginning of generation. 

"When then (he says) the Light and the Spirit have been received down into the impure and disorderly Womb of manifold suffering, the Serpent--the Wind of the Darkness, the First-born of the Waters--entering in generated man, and the impure Womb neither loves nor recognises any other form. [*3] 

"And so the Perfect Logos of the Light from above having made Himself like unto the Beast, the Serpent, entered into the impure Womb, having deceived it [*4] through His similitude to the Beast; in order that He may loose the bonds that are laid upon the perfect mind that is generated in the impurity of the Womb by the First-born of the Water--Snake, Wind, Beast. 

"This (he says) is the Servant's Form; [*5] and this is 

[p. 399]

the necessity of the Descent of the Logos of God into the Womb of the Virgin. 

"But it is not sufficient (he says) that the Perfect Man, the Logos, has entered into the Womb of the Virgin and loosed the pains that are in that Darkness; nay, but after entering into the foul mysteries in the Womb, He washed Himself and drank the Cup of Living Water bubbling-forth--a thing that everyone must do who is about to strip off the Servant-Form and put on the Celestial Garment." 

There can be little doubt but that the main ideas in the background of this system of the Gnosis are closely connected with general Orphic and Chaldaean ideas, and also with the main schematology of our "Poemandres" tractate. 

From the Orphic tradition handed on by Apion we have seen that the Aeon is the Circle of Infinitude and Eternity illumined by the Logos. 

THE "MITHRIAC AeON" 

The whole of this Orphic lore (in other words, the Chaldaean wisdom-teaching) seems to me to be summed up in one division of the symbolism of the Mithra-cult, as may be seen by an inspection of the monuments reproduced by Cumont, and especially those of the mysterious figure which he calls "la divinite leontocephale," and the birth of the God from the Rock; this seems to point, as we might very well suspect, to a strong Chaldaean element in the Mithriac tradition. 

Cumont [*1] tells us that although some scholars have rejected the name of "Mithriac Aeon," which was 

[p. 400]

given by Zoega to this awe-inspiring mystic figure, [*1] in his opinion (and he knows more of the subject than any other authority) it may very well have been actually called Aeon in the sacred books of the mysteries. 

If, however, this was the case, the mystic meaning, says Cumont, was of such a nature that it was concealed from the profane. 

Our classical authorities inform us that the Magi expressed the name of the Supreme God, which was in reality ineffable, by various substitutes. The general name for the Mystery Deity was Cronus, and Cronus in the sense of Time. 

"The Mithriac Cronus is a personification of Time, and this fact, which is now fairly established, permits us immediately to determine the identity of this pseudonymous God. 

"There is only one Persian divinity which he can possibly represent, and that is Zervan Akarana, Infinite Time, whom, from the time of the Achemenides, a sect of the Magi placed at the origin of things, and from whom they would have both Ormuzd and Ahriman to have been born. 

"It was this God that the adepts of the mysteries placed at the head of the celestial hierarchy, and considered as the first principle; or, to put it differently, it was the Zervanist system that the Mazdaeans of Asia Minor taught to the Western followers of the Iranian religion." 

This all seems to me to point not to a Persian origin 

[p. 401]

of the Aeon, as Cumont supposes, but to a Chaldaean element dominating the Mithriac form of the Magian tradition. [*1] 

PROBABLE DATE OF ORIGIN OF THE HELLENISTIC DOCTRINE 

Now the Chaldaean and Egyptian wisdom-cultures had many root-ideas in common (were they not regarded by the Greeks as the wisdom-traditions par excellence?); we are not therefore surprised to find that Egypt, with its ever-recurring grandiose mystery-phrases of enormous time-periods, such as "He of the millions of years," had on its own soil a highly developed idea of Eternity and of Eternities--that is, of the Aeon and of the Aeons; and indeed the strongly Egyptian forms of the Gnosis, which we have preserved to us under Christian overworking, are involved in the most complex aeonology. 

It seems, however, almost as though the evidence suggests that this Egyptian element had been revivified, and rescued from the oblivion in which it had been buried in a decadent age, in the symbolism of an almost forgotten past, by a stream of Chaldaean ideas that poured into Hellenistic circles in the early Alexandrian period. When precisely the Aeon-idea forced itself upon the philosophic mind of Alexandrian thinkers as an unavoidable mystic necessity, it is difficult to say with any certainty. It can, however, be said without fear of serious contradiction that it may have done so from early Ptolemaic times, and with certainty that it did so in the first century B.C. as truly as in the first century A.D. 

That the term Aeon was in frequent use in the 

[p. 402]

popular Hermes-cult may be seen in Hermes-Prayer v. 4, where Thoth is characterised as the "Aeon of the Aeons who changes himself into all forms in visions." So also in Prayer viii. 2, the Good Daimon, who has different names given him in the different hours, is called "Wealth-giving Aeon." So also with Isis, who is called Wisdom and Aeon in the Papyri. [*1] 

In conclusion, we may glance at what Reitzenstein (pp. 272 ff.) has to say concerning this "Aionenlehre." 

ABRAXAS 

The name Abraxas, which consisted of seven elements or letters, was a mystery-designation of the God who combined in himself the whole power of the Seven Planets, and also of the Year of 365 days, the sum of the number-values of the letters of Abraxas working out to 365. This mysterious Being was the "Year"; but the Year as the Eternity, also conceived of in a spatial aspect, as the Spirit or Name that extends from Heaven to Earth, the God who pervades and full-fills the Seven Spheres, and the Three Hundred and Sixty-five Zones, the Inner God, "He who has His seat within the Seven Poles--AEEIOYU," as the Papyri have it, and also without them, as we shall see. 

The mysterious formula "the Name of which the figure is 365" meets us in such connections, that it cannot be taken to mean simply the "Year-God," but is a synonym of the Highest God, a secret, mysterious Being. In brief it was, as we have seen, no other than the Lion-headed God, called in Greek Aeon. 

Indeed, we know from Philo of Byblos [*2] that, at least in his day, the second half of the first century A.D. (and, 

[p. 403]

for all we know, prior to it), there were in Phoenicia communities of the Aeon--of the Highest and Supercelestial One. 

THE FEAST OF THE AeON 

The first dated use of the word in a religious sense is found in Messala (who was Consul, 53 B.C.), as Johannes Lydus tells us. [*1] Moreover, Lydus informs us that the Ancients (oi palai) celebrated a Feast of the Aeon on January 5th. [*2] This can be no other than the Feast of which Epiphanius gives us such interesting details in treating of the Epiphany, when he writes, after describing the festival in the Koreion at Alexandria: [*3] 

"And if they are asked the meaning of this mystery, they answer and say: To-day at this hour the Maiden (Kore), that is the Virgin, has given birth to the Aeon." [*4] 

In the next paragraph Epiphanius designates this Aeon as the Alone-begotten. Here, then, we have striking evidence that in its Egyptian environment the cult of the Aeon was associated with mystery-rites reminding us strongly of the symbolism of the Christ-mystery. 

THE QUINTESSENCE AND THE MONAD 

Moreover, Messala [*5] tells us of this Aeon, that He "who made all things and governs all things, joined 

[p. 404]

together by means of the surrounding Heaven the power and nature of Water and Earth, heavy and downward, flowing down into the Depth, and that of Fire and Spirit, light and rushing upward to the measureless Height. It is this mightiest power of Heaven that hath bound together these two unequal powers." 

Lydus (ibid.) furthermore tells us that the idea of the Aeon was associated by the Pythagoreans with the idea of the Monad; indeed, they seem to have derived the word aion from ia, the Ionic form of mia (one). 

Any attempt to refer this Pythagorean identification to the earlier Pythagoreans would be at once rejected by the majority of scholars, but I believe myself that the original Pythagoreans were far too close to the Borderland between mythology and philosophy not to have personified or at least substantiated their "Numbers" and the Source of them. At anyrate it is highly instructive to find Plato himself writing in the Timaeus: 

THE AeON IN PLATO 

"And when the Father who begot it [the Cosmos] saw that by its motion and its life it had become a likeness of the Everlasting Gods, He marvelled, and in delight determined further to make it still more like its Original. [*1] And as the latter is an Everlasting Living Being, He sought to make this [Sensible] Universe as far as possible like it. 

"Now the nature of the Living Being was eternal (aiw'nios--aeonian); but to bestow this quality entirely on a generable creature was not possible. 

"Accordingly He determined to make a moving 

[p. 405]

image of Eternity (Aiunos); and so in setting the Heaven in order He makes it an everlasting (aiw'nion) image, moving according to number, of Eternity (Aiunos) that rests in One--an image which we have, you know, called Time." [*1] 

Here it is very plain that Aeon is not Time, but the Paradigm thereof--Eternity. It is the Consummation of the Eternal Gods--namely, the Pleroma, the Monad par excellence. We, therefore, find already in Plato the idea of the Aeon fully developed. Did Plato "invent" it? Or did he put an already existing idea into philosophical terms? He presumably found it already existing. Was it then Orphic (Pythagorean), or did he learn of it in Egypt? Who shall say precisely? 

CONCERNING THE HELLENISTIC ORIGIN OF AeONOLOGY

Seeing, however, that we find the idea of the Aeon fully developed in Plato, and seeing that Plato was, so to speak, scripture for our Hermetic writers, it is exceedingly puzzling that we should find it apparently introduced at a certain stage into the Trismegistic literature as a new doctrine. 

It may be, however, that those who had followed Plato on purely philosophical lines had hitherto paid little attention to the idea of the Aeon, except as an ultimate principle beyond the reach of speculation. When, however, the enthusiastic seership of mysticism dared to soar beyond heaven into the Heaven of heavens, and so to divide the Simplicity into an Infinitude of Multiplicity, the term Aeon came to be used no longer for a transcendent unity but as the connotation of a grade of Being. 

[p. 406]

It may then have been that our Hermetic writers reasserted the use of the term in its simpler philosophic meaning as a check to over-enthusiastic speculation. 

But even if it were a reaction against a too great luxury of speculation, it must have been contemporaneous with the development of aeonology; so that in any case C. H. xi. (xii.) must be dated from this point of view. 

When aeonology arose we cannot say precisely; but aeonology in the Gnostic sense of the term was, as we have seen, to some extent at least existing as early as the earliest Christian documents. 

THE AeON THE LOGOS

Now though the Trismegistic tractate C. H., xi. (xii.) is evidently in literary contact with the Timaeus, [*1] it nevertheless purports to give more "esoteric," or at any rate more precise, instruction than is to be found in Plato's famous cosmogonical treatise. It does not follow Plato, but hands on an instruction that has already been formulated in a precise and categorical fashion. The ladder of existence is God, Aeon, Cosmos, Time, Genesis;--each following one from the other. 

Aeon is the Power of God ( section 3), whereas Cosmos is God's creation and work ( section section 3, 4). The Aeon, standing between God and Cosmos, is the Paradigm, and so also the Son of God ( section 15), and the final end of man is that he should become Aeon ( section 20)--that is, Son of God. Aeon is thus evidently the Logos of God, or the Intelligible Cosmos, as distinguished from the Sensible Cosmos. This 

[p. 407]

[paragraph continues] Aeon is the Fullness in which all things move, and chiefly the Seven Cosmoi ( section 7). 

THE ROMAN SAeCULUM-CULT DERIVED FROM EGYPT 

Now, Reitzenstein (pp. 274 ff.) shows very clearly that the Cult of the Saeculum or Aeon was strongly developed in Roman theology in at least the first century B.C. This is too early a date for us to assign this development to the influence of the Mithras-cult. Can it then be that Rome was influenced by Egypt? Such at anyrate is Reitzenstein's opinion (p. 277), who points to the fact that Messala, who is fully imbued with the Aeon-idea, was a contemporary of Nigidius, the most learned of the Romans after Varro, and a Pythagorean philosopher of high attainments. Now it is remarkable that in his work, De Sphaera Barbarica, Nigidius treats of the Egyptian Sphere. 

THE AeONIC IMMENSITIES OF EGYPT 

Egypt, as we have already remarked, at a very early date arrived at the idea of eternal or at anyrate of enormously long periods of time, and had symbolised this conception in a primordial syzygy or pair of Gods. Indeed, the names of the primordial Time-pair, Hhw (Hehu) and Hht (Hehut), are immediately derived from "Hh," generally translated "Million," but by Brugsch and others as Aeon. [*1] All the Egyptian Gods were Lords of the Eternity or of the Eternities. But not only so, the 

[p. 408]

term "eternity" was used in connection with definite time-periods; for instance, "in a million (or eternity) of thirty year periods." And again: "Thy kingdom will have the lastingness of eternity and of infinitely many hundred-and-twenty-year periods; ten millions of thy years, millions of thy months, hundred-thousands of thy days, ten-thousands of thine hours." [*1] 

Here we must remark the numbers 120 (that is 12 * 10) and 30; all essential numbers of the Gnostic Pleroma of Aeons. 

It is also of interest in connection with the Time-pair, to note that Horapollo, the Alexandrian grammarian, tells us that the Egyptians when they desire to express the idea of Aeon write "sun and moon" [*2] (i. 1), and when they want to write "year" they draw "Isis," that is "woman" (i. 3). 

We thus see that in Egypt there were Aeons of Periods or Years, and Years of Aeons. Above all these ruled the God of the Aeons, the highest God of many a mystic community. 

A SONG OF PRAISE TO THE AeON 

And so we read the following song of praise to the Aeon, inscribed on a "secret tablet" by some unknown Brother of a forgotten Order: 

1. "Hail unto Thee, O thou All-Cosmos of aethereal Spirit! Hail unto Thee, O Spirit, who doth extend from Heaven to Earth, and from the Earth that's in the middle of the orb of Cosmos to the ends of the Abyss! 

2. "Hail unto Thee, O Spirit who doth enter into me, who clingeth unto me or who doth part thyself from 

[p. 409]

me, according to the Will of God in goodness of His heart! 

3. "Hail unto Thee, O thou Beginning and thou End of Nature naught can move! Hail unto thee thou vortex of the liturgy [*1] unweariable of [Nature's] elements! 

4. "Hail unto Thee, O thou Illumination of the solar beam that shines to serve the world. Hail unto Thee, thou Disk of the night-shining moon, that shines unequally! Hail, ye Spirits all of the aethereal statues [of the Gods]! 

5. "Hail to you [all], whom holy Brethren and holy Sisters ought to hail in giving of their praise! 

6. "O Spirit, mighty one, most mighty circling and incomprehensible Configuration of the Cosmos, celestial, aethereal, inter-aethereal, water-like, earth-like, fire-like, air-like, like unto light, to darkness like, shining as do the stars,--moist, hot, cold Spirit! 

7. "I praise Thee, God of gods, who ever doth restore the Cosmos, and who doth store the Depth away [*2] upon its throne of settlement no eye can see, who fixest Heaven and Earth apart, and coverest the Heaven with thy golden everlasting (aiuniais) wings, and makest firm the Earth on everlasting thrones! 

8. "Thou who hangest up the Aether in the lofty Height, and scatterest the Air with thy self-moving blasts, who mak'st the Water eddy round in circles! 

9. "O Thou who raisest up the fiery whirlwinds, and makest thunder, lightning, rain, and shakings of the earth, O God of Aeons! Mighty art thou, Lord God, O Master of the All!" [*3] 

[p. 410]

Here there is no separation of God as intra-cosmic and extra-cosmic; He is both the one and the other. He is both the Fullness of the Godhead and also the Fullness of Cosmos. He is both the Cosmos, and He who is above the Cosmos and below the Cosmos. [*1] 

THE DEMIURGIC AeON

Reitzenstein (p. 278), referring to our Trismegistic tractate, C. H., xi. (xii.), points to the distinction made between Aeon and God on one side and Aeon and Cosmos on the other. This, he thinks, shows signs of the influence of a fundamental trait of Hellenistic theology which makes the Demiurge the Second God. 

However this may be, there certainly was a distinction drawn between the Creative, or rather Formative, God and the Supreme Deity, in many a Christian Gnostic System, and not unfrequently of a very disparaging nature to the former. Already in Jewish mystic and philosophic (Gnostic) circles a distinction had had to be drawn between the idea of God as the Creator God, and the idea of God as the Ineffable Mystery of Mysteries. This had been necessitated by the contact of the Jewish Gnostics with the old wisdom-ideas and with the fundamental postulates of Greek philosophy. 

THE AeON IN THEURGIC LITERATURE 

Many examples could be given, [*2] but we prefer to follow Reitzenstein (p. 279) in his references to the Magic Papyri, or Apocryphal literature of the same class, 

[p. 411]

and append the translation of two striking quotations, as opening up an entirely novel side of the subject. 

Thus in the eighth Book of Moses, we find the following passage in which the Jewish Creator God is placed in the second rank as compared with the Egyptian Supreme Principle. 

"And God, looking down unto the earth, said: IAO! And all stood still, and then came into being from His Voice a Great God, most mighty, who is Lord of all things, who caused to stand the things that shall be; and no longer was there any thing without order in the aethereal realms." [*1] 

So also in an invocation to an unknown God, most probably to the Spirit to whom the Brother of the unknown community addressed his praise-giving as given above--we meet with the same distinction. 

"Thee, the only and blest Father of the Aeons, I invoke with prayers like unto Cosmos! [*2] 

"Come unto me who fillest the whole Cosmos with thy Breath, and dost hang up on high the Fire out of the Water, [*3] and dost from out the Water separate the Earth. . . . The Lord bore witness to thy Wisdom, that is the Aeon, and bade thee to have strength as He Himself hath strength." [*4] 

And, later on, the Theurgist exclaims: 

"Receive my words as shafts of fire, for that I am God's Man, for whom was made the fairest plasm of spirit, dew [*5] and earth." 

He is a Man whose words are effective and bring all 

[p. 412]

things to pass; for his "words" are compelling "acts," or "theurgic." 

Other passages are brought forward by Reitzenstein (pp. 280-286) to show that the idea of the Logos or Aeon as Second God was a fundamental conception in Hellenistic theology. 

This may very well have been the case in general Hellenistic theology; but in philosophical circles, as we have pointed out in treating of the Logos-idea in Philo, the distinction was formal and not essential. So also in our Trismegistic treatises, which are saturated with transcendental pantheistic or monistic, or rather panmonistic, conceptions, if the Logos or Aeon is momentarily treated of as apart from Supreme Deity, it is not so in reality; for the Logos is the Season of God, God in His eternal Energy, and the Aeon is the Eternity of Deity, God in His energic Eternity, the Rest that is the Source of all Motion. 

For the fullest exposition of the Aeon-doctrine in our Trismegistic tractates, see The Perfect Sermon, xxx.-xxxii., and my commentary thereon. 

Footnotes

^387:1 From Prof. Montet's report (Asiatic Qr. Rev., Oct. 1904) of the "Proceedings of the Second International Congress of the History of Religions" (Bale), Aug. 20-Sept. 2, 1904, I see that Reitzenstein presented a monograph on the "Aion" to the Congress. I do not, however, know whether this has yet been published.

^388:1 Clement. Hom., VI. iii. ff.; ed. A. Schwegler (Stuttgart, 1847), pp. 168 ff.; ed. P. de Lagarde (Leipzig, 1865), pp. 74 ff. See also Lobeck, Aglaophamus, pp. 475, 478; and my Orpheus, pp. 156 and 162, 163. For the latest critical view on the Apion-speeches, see Waitz (H.), Die Pseudoklementinen Homilien und Rekognitionen (Texte und Untersuchungen, Neue Folge, Bd. X. Hft. IV.), pp. 251-256, "Der Dialog des Klemens mit Appion uber die heidnische Mythologie."

^388:2 Il., vii. 99. Cf. the Earth-and-Water of C. H., i. 5.

^388:3 Theog., 116.

^389:1 Orpheus apparently does nothing of the kind, but draws a distinction between Chaos and the Egg.

^389:2 Cf. the Pythagorean Tetraktys, in the famous oath--"The Fourfold Root of Ever-flowing Nature."

^389:3 Or impelled or pushed in every direction.

^389:4 Thus forming the Vortex Atom of the Cosmos.

^389:5 The text reads: kai oytus ex akoystou tun panpun to nostimw'taton. As ex akoystou has hitherto proved insoluble for all editors, I would suggest ex akoysioy. As to nostimw'taton, L. and S. are of little assistance unless it is taken in the sense of "ripest." Sophocles gives "essential, valuable, perfect, the best part of any thing."

^390:1 This probably means the Spirit that ensouled Matter; or to use a more familiar expression, the Spirit of God which "brooded over the Deep."

^390:2 Sc. out of the Depth of Matter or Darkness, on to the surface of it, where was the Light.

^390:3 Cf. C. H., i. 14: "bent his face downwards" (parekypsen), and note thereon.

^390:4 According to Basilides the "wings" of the Sonship are the Holy Spirit. This symbolism is presumably to be connected with the Egyptian "Winged Globe." See F. F. F., p. 26.

^390:5 A very ancient word-play.

^390:6 Sometimes used for brain. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 11, and the Jewish Commentator in the Naassene Document. This is the Spermatic Essence of the Logos.

^391:1 It is thought of as floating in this Matter.

^391:2 The Living One.

^391:3 kranaioy--an otherwise unknown word. Many emendations have been suggested; but it does not seem to be necessary to go beyond kranion, especially as we have seen (for instance, in the Naassene Document) that this was a favourite symbol of the Heaven.

^391:4 Unfortunately, the rest of the Orphic quotation is not given.

^391:5 Or body--the matter in the Egg.

^391:6 armonian--its fitting together, or harmony.

^393:1 Philos., v. 19; ed. C., p. 209 ff.; ed. D. and S., pp. 198 ff.; ed. M., 138 ff.

^393:2 arxas--sources or beginnings.

^394:1 afanes--the opposite of Phanes.

^394:2 Have we here any further clue to the title Kore Kosmoy?

^395:1 I may be mistaken, but the ideas involved in this exposition seem to be precisely the same as those involved in the most modern dynamic theories of atomicity, except that the atoms or rather monads of our Gnostics are intelligent.

^395:2 Lit., con-currence.

^396:1 Lit., navel; but the word stands metaphorically for anything like a navel--e.g. the boss of a shield, a knob of any kind; hence any centre, or nucleus.

^396:2 Hippolytus here seems to have omitted some important section of his source from his summary; in any case the text of that which follows is very corrupt, and in some important details demonstrably imperfect, as may be seen by comparing the Epitome, X. iv.

^396:3 Or ferment.

^396:4 Sc. Wind.

^397:1 egkumun--a play on kuma, which means embryo as well as wave.

^397:2 The text is here destroyed beyond hope of conjecture.

^397:3 Sc. Darkness.

^397:4 skoliui. Cf. the skolius of C. H., i. 4.

^397:5 Cf, the Naassene Hymn: "She seeks to flee the bitter Chaos"; and compare Jacob Bohme's "Bitterness," and also his "three Principles," with those of our system. The analogies are striking, and yet Jacob could not possibly have known this system physically.

^398:1 The following lines are destroyed beyond the power of reconstruction.

^398:2 In the case of a serpent this would be "hissing"; surigma, however, is properly the sound of a pipe, and puts us in mind of the Syriktes of the Naassene Document.

^398:3 Sc. than that of the Serpent.

^398:4 Sc. the Womb.

^398:5 Cf. Philipp., ii. 7: "But He emptied Himself, taking on the Servant's Form, being made in the likeness of men." The "emptying" or kenusis was the change from the ple'ruma or Fullness of Light to the kenuma or Emptiness of Darkness. Paul (or the writer of the Epistle, whoever he was) is here using the technical language of the Gnosis.

^399:1 Textes et Monuments Figures relatifs aux Mysteres de Mithra (Bruxelles, 1899), i. 76 ff., where all the references are given.

^400:1 A Being with lion's head, and eagle's wings, and brute's feet, and human body, enwrapped with a serpent, standing on a globe and holding the keys of life and death in its two hands. There are many variants, however, all of them highly instructive, as pourtraying the Autozoon, or Living Creature in itself, the summation of all forms of life, including man.

^401:1 Reitzenstein (p. 276) is also of this opinion.

^402:1 R. 270.

^402:2 Ap. Euseb., Praep. Evang., I. 10, 7; 34 B.

^403:1 De Mens., iv. (ed. Wunsch, p. 64, 6).

^403:2 Or rather 6th. Reitzenstein's (p. 274) gloss (pro eidun) to epi teis pemptes, is erroneous, for this would make the date January 11th.

^403:3 For a translation of the passage, see the Commentary on the K. K. Excerpts in treating of the term "Virgin of the World."

^403:4 Epiphanius, Haer., li. 22; ed. Dindorf, ii. 483. Cf. D. J. L., pp. 410 f., "The Crucifixion and Resurrection Mystery-Rite."

^403:5 Quoted by Macrobius, Saturnal., I. ix.

^404:1 That is, the Ideal Cosmos.

^405:1 Tim., 37 C, D.

^406:1 Cf.  section 1: "As many men say many things, and these diverse about the All and Good"; and Tim., 29 C: "If then, O Socrates, since many men say many things about the Gods and the genesis of the All."

^407:1 Budge (op. cit., i. 285) writes: "According to the late Dr Brugsch (Religion, p. 132), the name Heh is connected with the word which indicates an undefined and unlimited number, i.e. heh; when applied to time the idea suggested is 'millions of years,' and Heh is equivalent to the Greek aiw'n."

^408:1 Brugsch, Worterbuch, vi. 839.

^408:2 The usual symbols for "everlasting."

^409:1 Or service--leitoyrgia.

^409:2 thesayrisas--or treasure away.

^409:3 Wessely, Denkschr. d. K. K. Akad. (1888), p. 72, 11. 1115 ff.; R. 277, 278.

^410:1 Cf. R. 28; Hermes-Prayer, vii. 1.

^410:2 See my Fragments of a Faith Forgotten.

^411:1 Dieterich, Abraxas, 184-99.

^411:2 That is, presumably, "offerings of the reason," as our tractates have it; or prayers that put the mind in sympathy with the true order of things.

^411:3 The Heaven Ocean.

^411:4 Wessely, Denkschr. d. K. K. Akad. (1888), p. 73, 11. 1168 ff.

^411:5 Or pure water.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 413]

XII

THE SEVEN ZONES AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS 

"TO the first zone he gives the energy of Growth and Waning; unto the second zone, Device of Evils now de-energized; unto the third, the Guile of the Desires de-energized; unto the fourth, his Domineering Arrogance also de-energized; unto the fifth, unholy Daring and the Rashness of Audacity de-energized; unto the sixth, Striving for Wealth by evil means deprived of its aggrandisement; and to the seventh zone, Ensnaring Falsehood de-energized."--C. H., i. 25. 

MACROBIUS ON "THE DESCENT OF THE SOUL FROM THE HEIGHT OF COSMOS TO THE DEPTHS OF EARTH" 

Let us first turn to the commentary of Macrobius on the famous "Dream of Scipio," which Cicero introduces into his Republic (Bk. VI.), just as Plato appends the Vision of Er to his. Macrobius devotes the twelfth chapter of his First Book to a consideration of "The Descent of the Soul from the Height of Cosmos to the Depths of Earth," and professes to base himself on Pythagorean and Platonic traditions. His dissertation covers more ground than the precise subject of the zones with which we are more immediately concerned; but as the whole scheme is of interest to our present 

[p. 414]

studies, we will append a translation of practically the whole chapter. 

"[According to Pythagoras] when the Soul descends from the Boundary where the Zodiac and Galaxy [or Milky Way] meet, from a spherical form, which is the only divine one, it is elongated into a conical one [*1] by its downward tendency. 

"Just as the line is born from the point and proceeds into length out of the indivisible, so the soul from its point, that is 'monad,' comes into 'dyad'--its first production [or lengthening]. 

"And this is the essence which Plato in the Timaeus, speaking about the construction of the World-Soul, describes as indivisible yet at the same time divisible. 

"For just as the Soul of the World so also the soul of an individual man will be found in one respect incapable of division--if it is regarded from the standpoint of the simplicity of its divine nature--and in another capable [of division]--since the former is diffused through the members of the world, and the latter through those of a man. 

"When then the soul is drawn towards body--in this first production of it--it begins to experience a material agitation, matter flowing into it. [*2] 

"And this is remarked by Plato in the Phaedo [when he says] that the soul is drawn to body staggering with recent intoxication,--meaning us to understand by this a new draught of matter's superfluity, by which it becomes defiled and gravid and so is brought down. 

"A symbol of this mystic secret is that Starry Cup (Crater) of Father Bacchus placed in the space between 

[p. 415]

[paragraph continues] Cancer and Leo [*1]--meaning that intoxication is there first experienced by souls in their descent by the influx of matter into them. From which cause also forgetfulness, the companion of intoxication, then begins secretly to creep into souls. 

"For if souls brought down to body memory of the divine things of which they were conscious in heaven, there would be no difference of opinion among men concerning the divine state. But all, indeed, in their descent drink of forgetfulness--some more, some less. 

"And for this cause on earth, though the truth is not clear to all, they nevertheless have all some opinion about it; for opinion arises when memory sinks. Those, however, are greater discoverers of truth who have drunk less of forgetfulness, because they remember more easily what they have known before in that state. 

"Hence it is that what the Latins call a 'lecture' (lectio) the Greeks call a 're-knowing' (repetita cognitio [*2]), because when we give utterance to true things, we re-cognize the things which we knew by nature before the influence of matter intoxicated our souls in their descent into body. 

"Now it is this Matter (Hyle) which, after being impressed by the [divine] ideas, fashioned every body in the cosmos which we see. Its highest and purest nature, by means of which the divinities are either sustained or consist, [*3] is called Nectar, and is believed to be the drink of the gods; while its lower and more 

[p. 416]

turbid nature is the drink of souls. The latter is what the Ancients called the River of Lethe [or Forgetfulness]. 

"The Orphic [initiates], however, suppose that Dionysus himself is to be understood as 'Hylic Nous' [*1]--[that Mind] which after its birth from the Indivisible [Mind] is itself divided into individual [minds]. 

"And it is for this reason that in their Mystery-tradition Dionysus is represented as being torn limb from limb by the fury of the Titans, and, after the pieces have been buried, as coming together again whole and one; for Nous--which, as we have said, is their term for Mind--by offering itself for division from its undivided state, and by returning to the undivided from the divided, both fulfils the duties of the cosmos and also performs the mysteries of its own nature. 

"The soul, therefore, having by means of this first weight [of matter] fallen down from the Zodiac and Galaxy into the series of spheres that lie below them, in continuing its descent through them, is not only enwrapped in the envelope of a luminous body, [*2] but also develops the separate motions which it is to exercise. 

"In the sphere of Saturn [it develops] the powers of reasoning and theorizing [*3]--which [the Greeks] call to logistikon and to theuretikon; in that of Jupiter, the power of putting into practice--which they call to praktikon; in that of Mars, the power of ardent vehemence--which they call to thymikon; in that of the Sun, the nature of sensing and imagining--which they call to aisthetikon and to fantastikon; in that of Venus, the motion of desire--which they call to 

[p. 417]

epithymetikon, in the sphere of Mercury, the power of giving expression to and interpretation of feelings--which they call to erme neytikon; on its entrance into the sphere of the Moon it brings into activity to fytikon--that is, the nature of making bodies grow and of moving them. 

"And this [soul], though the last thing in the divine series, is nevertheless the first thing in us and in all terrestrial beings; just as this body [of ours], though the dregs of things divine, is still the first substance of the animal world. 

"And this is the difference between terrene bodies and supernal--I mean those of the heaven and stars and of the other elements [*1]--that the latter are summoned upwards to the abode of the soul, and are worthy of immunity from death from the very nature of the space in which they are and their imitation of sublimity. 

"The soul, however, is drawn down to these terrene bodies, and so it is thought to die when it is imprisoned in the region of things fallen and in the abode of death. Nor should it cause distress that we have so often spoken of death in connection with the soul, which we have declared to be superior to death. For the soul is not annihilated by [what is called] its death, but is [only] buried for a time; nor is the blessing of its perpetuity taken from it by its submersion for a time, since when it shall have made it worthy to be cleansed clean utterly of all contagion of its vice, it shall once more return from body to the light of Everlasting Life restored and whole." [*2] 

The characteristics of the spheres given by Macrobius are according to their simple energies; there is no 

[p. 418]

question of good or bad; it is the "thinking" of the soul that conditions the use of these energies for beneficent or maleficent ends. 

THE TRADITION OF SERVIUS

Servius, however, in his Commentary on Virgil's Aeneid, vi. 714, hands on another tradition, in which the Spheres were regarded as inimical to the good of the soul, its evil propensities being ascribed to their energies. Some scholars are of opinion that Virgil in his famous Sixth Book is largely dependent on the ideas of popular Egyptian theology; [*1] however that may be, Servius writes as follows: 

"The philosophers tell us what the soul loses in its descent through the separate spheres. For which cause also the Mathematici imagine that our body and soul are knit together by the powers of the separate divinities, on the supposition that when souls descend, they bring with them the sluggishness of Saturn, the passionateness of Mars, the lustfulness of Venus, the cupidity of Mercury, and the desire for rule of Jupiter. And these things perturb souls, so that they are unable to use their own energy and proper powers." 

It is to be noticed that the characteristics of the Sun and Moon are omitted, and this points to a doctrine in which Sun and Moon were treated as distinct from "the five." So also in the "Books of the Saviour" appended to the Pistis Sophia document we find (pp. 360, 366 ff.) mention of only five planets. The 

[p. 419]

tradition of this doctrine is exceedingly obscure, [*1] and does not immediately concern us, as our text works on a "seven" basis. 

CRITICISM OF THE EVIDENCE

I have done my best to discover some consistent scheme by which the contradictory data in Macrobius, Servius, and Hermes might be reconciled, but the tabularising of their indications only makes confusion worse confounded. 

It is evident, however, that the main thing that Macrobius hands on, and which he attributes to Orphic-Pythagorean-Platonic tradition, contains in itself no suggestion that these philosophers attributed any evil tendencies to the characteristics of the spheres in themselves. The tradition of Macrobius is as follows: 

 Saturn

 {

 to theuretikon
to logistikon

  

 intelligentia.
ratiocinatio.

 Jupiter

  

 to praktikon

  

 vis agendi.

 Mars

  

 to thymikon

  

 ardor animositatis.

 Sun

 {

 to aisthetikon
to fantastikon

  

 natura sentiendi.
natura opinandi.

 Venus

  

 to epithymetikon

  

 motus desiderii.

 Mercury

  

 to ermeneytikon

 {

 vis pronuntiandi
et interpretandi
quae sentiantur.

 Moon

  

 to fytikon

 {

 natura plantandi
et agendi corpora.

The confusion between the "vis agendi" of Jupiter and that of the Moon may be resolved by supposing that the former was the application of the reasoning 

[p. 420]

faculty to the practical things of life, while the latter was the power of moving one's own physical body, if indeed the "et agendi" is not a gloss of Macrobius. 

Servius, on the contrary, is following a tradition in which the spheres were regarded as the sources of evil tendencies; ethical considerations dominate the whole conception. Seeing, however, that it is a fivefold distribution, we are unable to equate it with the doctrine of Hermes, which is sevenfold. Nevertheless, there are some parallels. 

The lustfulness (libido) of Servius is to be paralleled with the "guile of the desires" or "lustful error" (e epithymetike apate) of Hermes. This is ascribed to the third zone by Hermes, and to Venus by Servius, Venus further coming third in Macrobius. 

The "desire of rule" (desiderium regni) of Servius is clearly the "domineering arrogance" (e arxontike profania) of Hermes. In Hermes this belongs to the middle zone (fourth); in Servius it is ascribed to Jupiter, presumably as the ruler of the age--the ruler of the previous age being Saturn, who has been deprived of his energy and so rendered "torpid." 

The "passion" or "wrathfulness" (iracundia) of Servius is also to be paralleled to some extent with the "unholy daring" of Hermes. It is ascribed to the fifth zone by Hermes and to Jupiter by Servius, Mars also coming fifth in Macrobius. 

Finally, the "love of gain" (lucri cupiditas) of Servius may be paralleled by the "striving for wealth by evil means" (ai aformai ai kakai tou ploutoy) of Hermes. Hermes attributes this to the sixth zone, and Servius to Mercury. 

The remaining quality mentioned by Servius, "torpor," which he ascribes to Saturn, equates with nothing in Hermes, unless we can persuade ourselves that the 

[p. 421]

"ensnaring falsehood" or "falsehood that lies in wait" (to enedreuon pseudos) of Hermes has some connection with it. 

The scheme of Hermes is septenary, and connected with the ideas of the ascent of the soul through seven zones, which we must locate as seven superimposed atmospheres extending from the surface of the earth to the moon's orbit. There is no question here of the Celestial Spheres proper of the Philosophers, the characteristics of the energies of which are neither good nor evil in themselves; nor is there apparently any question of the "animal soul" proper, for the "passions and desires" are said to withdraw into the "nature which is void of reason." Though nothing more is said about this nature in this connection, in the general belief of the time its dominion was thought of as located below the earth-surface--as a Tartarus of seven zones, corresponding to those above, in which the "animal soul" or "vehicle of desire" was thought of as being gradually disintegrated, its energies finally going back to their source in the Depths of the Darkness, while the process of such disintegration or metamorphosis produced a parallel consciousness of chastisements and horrors. The seven zones of our text, however, are apparently the region of purification of the lower energies of the human soul; the mental energies led into error by the animal passions. 

THE "OPHITE" HEBDOMAD 

Now if we turn to Salmon's article on the "Hebdomad," [*1] and to his discussion of the tradition of the "Ophites"--a mysterious medley of chaotic elements, which have not yet been analysed in any satisfactory 

[p. 422]

fashion, but which have their roots in pre-Christian traditions of a very varied nature within the general characteristic of a syncretic Gnosticism--we find that after treating of the Celestial Hebdomad, he continues as follows: 

"Besides the higher hebdomad of the seven angels, the Ophite system told of a lower hebdomad. After the serpent in punishment for having taught our first parents to transgress the commands of Ialdabaoth was cast down into this lower world, he begat himself six sons, [*1] who with himself form a hebdomad, the counterpart of that of which his father Ialdabaoth is chief. These are the seven demons, the scene of whose activity is this lower earth, not the heavens; and who delight in injuring the human race on whose account their father had been cast down. Origen (Adv. Cels., vi. 30) gives their names and forms from an Ophite Diagram; Michael in form as a lion, Suriel as an ox, Raphael as a dragon, Gabriel as an eagle, Thautabaoth as a bear, Erataoth as a dog, Onoel as an ass." 

Here, I think, we are on the track of one aspect of a general mystery-tradition that Hermes has "philosophized." I say one aspect, for the "Ophite" tradition is not a single form of tradition, but a medley of traditions containing a number of forms; it is a complex or syncretism of Chaldaean, Persian, and Egyptian elements, patched together, or "centonized," if we may use the term, with Jewish industry. 

[p. 423]

THE SIMPLER FORM OF THE TRISMEGISTIC GNOSIS

The wealth of symbolism and profusion of mysterious personifications with which these systems of subjective imagery were smothered, could exercise only a partial fascination on the clear-thinking, philosophical mind which had been trained in the method of Plato. If such a mind was combined with the mystic temperament, as was indubitably the case with the writer of our "Poemandres" treatise, his main effort would be to simplify and categorize in the terms of philosophy at the expense of apocalyptic detail; nevertheless, when a man lived in the midst of such ideas, and was presumably in intimate relations with mystics and seers of all sorts, he could not but be strongly affected by the main presuppositions of all such apocalyptic, and the general notions of the schematology of the Unseen World, which all students of such matters at that period seem to have accepted in common. 

We thus find that our Trismegistic literature, though dealing throughout with the Gnosis, treats it in a far more simple way than any other known system of the time. Nevertheless, even the complex imagery of the Ophite schools is occasionally summed up in a few graphic general symbols, and these, too, representing probably the oldest elements in them. 

CONCERNING LEVIATHAN AND BEHEMOTH

From the confused description by Origen [*1] of the famous but exceedingly puzzling Ophite Diagram that both Celsus and Origen had before them, though in different forms, we can make out with certainty only 

[p. 424]

that this chart of the Unseen Spaces was divided into three main divisions--Upper, Middle, and Lower. The Middle Space contained a geometrical diagram of a group of ten circles surrounded by one great circle. This Great Circle was called Leviathan, and the grouping of circles within it was apparently divided into a three and a seven. The Lower Space had in it a grouping of seven circles, the circles of the seven ruling daimones (xxx.)--elsewhere called Archontics--and the whole group was apparently called Behemoth (xxv.). 

Celsus, quoted by Origen (xxvii.), tells us that the doctrine was that on the death of the body two groups of angels range themselves on either side of the soul, [*1] the one set being called "Angels of Light" and the other "Archontics"--evidently intended for "Angels of Darkness." Thus the evil soul was thought to be led away by the Daimones to Behemoth, and the pure soul to Leviathan. 

We cannot enter into the endless discussions concerning these two Great Beasts, mentioned together in Job xl. 15-24, and separately in Isaiah and Psalms; the most recent research comes to the conclusion that "it would seem that Leviathan was regarded as lord of the ocean and Behemoth of dry land." [*2] 

But in our diagram Leviathan is Lord of the Heaven-Ocean or Great Green or Cosmic Air, and Behemoth Lord of the Cosmic Earth. 

Indeed, in the Book of Enoch, [*3] the apocalyptic writer associates these two monsters with precisely the same eschatological considerations which Origen tells us were the purpose of the Diagram, only "Enoch" speaks of 

[p. 425]

the Last Day, while the Ophite writer has in view the ascent of the soul of an initiate after death. 

At the final separation of Righteous and Unrighteous, "Enoch" tells us, these Great Creatures, which before were united, will be parted. That is to say, at death there is a metamorphosis of the soul. 

From what is said in "Enoch," moreover, I deduce that the Upper Space of the Ophite Diagram was intended to represent the Celestial Paradise, that is the state of the Pure Mind or of the Righteous. 

Leviathan and Behemoth are figured in IV. Esdras vi. 49-52, as Devourers of the Unrighteous; while general Jewish apocalyptic in both Apocrypha and Talmud believed that these monsters would in their turn become the food of the Righteous in Messianic times. [*1] 

From all these indications we deduce that Behemoth was the Great Beast and Leviathan the Great Fish. The animal soul, intensified by contact with the human mind, then goes back to its source the Great Beast, and is devoured by it, and reabsorbed by it, its energies returning to the sum total of energies of the Great Animal Group-Soul, the whole energy and experience of which shall eventually become the "food" of the perfected man; that is to say, presumably, he will in his turn devour and so transmute these energies; the perfected man will thrive by transmuting the Body of the Great Beast into the Body of the Great Man. 

The Great Fish, however, would seem to symbolize the higher energies of the soul, which also require transmutation. In being born into the stature of the Great Man, the Son of Man must needs pass "three days" in the Belly of the Whale. This Great Fish is of the nature of knowledge; for does not Oannes come

[p. 426]

out of the Ocean in fish-form to teach, [*1] in the Assyrian Mystery-tradition, and does not the Ophite tradition in another of its phases [*2] derive the inspiration of the great prophets of Israel, in their several degrees, from this same Group of Angels which the Diagram calls Leviathan? 

It is also of interest to notice that Leviathan and Behemoth were believed to have once formed one monster, which was subsequently divided into male and female, Behemoth being male and Leviathan female. This reminds one of the primaeval Water-Earth of Hermes, which was subsequently divided into Water and Earth, just as the animals were first of all male-female, and subsequently were separated. Moreover, in the Vision of Er the arcs of the journeyings of the ascending and descending souls end in two orifices above in the sky and two below in the earth, as though they were the ends of a once great hollow ring or circle that had been divided, or as it were two serpents arched above and below, with mouths and tails as orifices; and, curiously enough, in the Pistis Sophia the souls of the unrighteous enter by the mouth of the Lower Dragon and depart by the tail. 

Now, Leviathan being female and Behemoth male, and both forming together as it were the circumference of the Great Wheel of Necessity, the Wheel of Genesis, the attribution of the gestation, so to speak, of the 

[p. 427]

virtues of the soul to the one and the digesting of its vices to the other, is not so surprising. Further, they could be regarded as the right-hand or left-hand arcs or hemispheres of the Wheel, or Sphere, or Egg, according to celestial topography; whereas in Egyptian terrestrial parallelism the right hand was to the north and the left hand the south, upper and lower Egypt. Curiously enough, in Isa. xxx. 6, Behemoth is called the monster "of the south land." [*1] 

Whether or no the writer of the "Poemandres" was directly influenced by the precise forms of tradition to which we have referred, is impossible to determine; but that he was influenced by the general ideas as symbolized is indubitable, and that he understood the esoteric meaning of the "hippopotamus" and "crocodile" symbols in Egyptian mysticism is highly probable. 

THE "FENCE OF FIRE" 

Origen (xxxi.), moreover, tells us that, according to the Ophites, the consciousness of the soul after passing through the domain of the animal-formed Rulers, broke through what was called the "Fence of Iniquity," and so turned towards the higher spheres, through which it also had to pass. In the seventh and highest of them, over which ruled the Virtue which was called Horaeus, [*2] it addresses the Ruler thereof with an apology or defence of its own innocence, beginning with the words: "O thou who hast transcended the 'Fence of Fire' without fear!" 

This Fence of Fire was symbolised in the form of the Diagram which Origen (xxxiii.) had before him, as a 

[p. 428]

circle of fire with a flaming sword lying across its diameter. This must then have been intended to represent the Sphere of Fire, or Angel or Guardian of the Gate, which had to be passed before the Celestial Paradise could be entered, for the flashing, circling blade is said to have guarded the "Tree of Gnosis and of Life." 

The same idea of a typical Boundary or Fence meets us in the "Poemandres." It is Man who breaks through the seven spheres and also their enclosing Sphere, the Might or Power that circumscribed the Fire. The root idea is the same. The point of view of Hermes, however, like that of the Ophite Gnostics, is not the passage round the Circle of Necessity of the souls of the unregenerate, as in the Vision of Er, but of the Straight Ascent of the soul of the initiate, his breaking through the spheres. It is the ascent of a soul who has reached the Hermes-stage, or Thrice-greatest grade, the final stage of winning its freedom, the Ascent after the last compulsory birth--the Ascent "as now it is for me" ( section 25). 

Footnotes

^414:1 Not into a mathematical cone, but into an egg-shaped or elliptical form resembling that of a pine-cone.

^414:2 This shows that the soul was thought of as being without or outside body of every kind, and body was taken into it.

^415:1 Cf. Pistis Sophia, pp. 371 and 367.

^415:2 That is, presumably, anagnusma--a philosophical discourse, or sacred sermon.

^415:3 As distinguished from "exist." Latin, however, is but a poor medium for the expression of philosophical distinctions.

^416:1 nous ylikos.

^416:2 The augoeides.

^416:3 Or of contemplative reason, synthesis as opposed to analysis.

^417:1 That is, the elements other than those of earth.

^417:2 Ed. Eyssenhardt (F.), pp. 531 ff. (Leipzig, 1893).

^418:1 Cf., for instance, Maass (E.), Die Tagesgotter in Rom und den Provinzen, p. 33. See R. 53, n. 1.

^419:1 For references, see R. 53, n. 2.

^421:1 Smith and Wace's D. of Christ. Biog., ii. 849-851.

^422:1 In Irenaeus (C. Haer., I. xxx. 5; ed. Stieren, i. 266) this sevenfold serpent is the son of Ialdabaoth (the Creative Mind), and is said to be "mind," also "crooked mind," coiled up like a serpent.

^423:1 C. Cels., VI. xxv. ff.

^424:1 Plainly a conflation of Persian and Chaldaean ideas.

^424:2 Cheyne's article, "Behemoth and Leviathan," in the Encyclopaedia Biblica.

^424:3 Charles' Trans., lx. 7 ff. (Ethiop. V., p. 155).

^425:1 See Charles, op. cit., p. 155, n. 7.

^426:1 Oannes also comes to teach from the Waters of the Euphrates; the Jewish overwriter of the Naassene Document (see "Myth of Man in the Mysteries") equates Euphrates with Great Jordan, and this with the Stream of Ocean; and, curiously enough, Origen (xxviii.) ascribes the Ophite teaching to a certain Euphrates, of whom no one else has ever heard. It is, however, a common error of the Church Fathers to mistake a principle of the Gnosis for the founder of a heresy.

^426:2 See Salmon, loc. sup. cit.

^427:1 According to Cheyne's rendering in the above-quoted article.

^427:2 That is, presumably, the Horus-like; thus showing traces of an Egyptian element.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 429]

XIII

PLATO: CONCERNING METEMPSYCHOSIS 

"AND the soul's vice is ignorance. For that the soul who hath no knowledge of the things that are, or knowledge of their nature, or of Good, is blinded by the body's passions and tossed about. 

"This wretched soul, not knowing what she is, becomes the slave of bodies of strange form in sorry plight, bearing the body as a load; not as the ruler, but the ruled."--C. H., x. (xi.) 8. [*1] 

For the better understanding of this passage, we may appropriately refresh the memory of our readers with the Platonic doctrine of the transmigration of souls, as given in the Phaedrus, 248 ff., using for this purpose the best translation we have in English, namely, that of Stewart, [*2] as a basis, but often departing from it for greater clearness. 

THE SOUL AND HER MYSTERIES IN THE "PHAeDRUS" 

"This is the life of the Gods. Of the other Souls, whosoever followeth God best, and is being made most like unto Him, keepeth the Head [*3] of her Charioteer 

[p. 430]

lifted up into the Space without the firmament; so she is carried round with the circuit thereof, yet being [still] troubled with the Horses, [*1] and hardly beholding the Things-which-are; so she is now lifted up, now sinketh down, and because of the compulsion of the Horses, seeth some of the Things-which-are, and some she seeth not. 

"And the rest of the Souls, you must know, follow all striving after that which is above, but unable [to reach it], and so are carried round together and sink below it, [*2] trampling upon one another, and running against one another, and pressing on for to outstrip one another, with mighty great sound of tumult and sweat. 

"And here by reason of the unskilfulness [*3] of the Charioteers, many Souls are maimed, and many have many feathers [of their wings] broken; and all, greatly travailing, depart without initiation in the Sight of That-which-is, and departing betake them to the food of Opinion. 

"Now this is why there is so great anxiety to see the Space where is the Plain of Truth,--both because the pasture suited to the Best Part of the Soul groweth in the Meadow there, and the power of wing, whereby the Soul is lightly carried up, is nourished by it, and that the law of Adrasteia is that whatsoever Soul by following after God hath seen somewhat of the true things, shall be without affliction till its next journey round; and if she can always do this, [*4] she shall be without hurt alway. 

[p. 431]

"But when through incapacity to follow [God] she doth not see, and, overtaken by some evil chance, filled with forgetfulness and wickedness, she is weighed down, and, being weighed down, she sheds the feathers of her wings and falls on to the Earth,--then is the law not to plant her [*1] in her first birth in a beast's nature; but to implant the Soul that hath seen most into the seed of one who shall become a Wisdom-lover, or a lover of the Beautiful, or a man who truly loves the Muses; the Soul that hath seen second best, into the seed of one who shall become a king that loveth law, and is a warrior and a true ruler; the Soul that hath seen third, unto the seed of one who shall become busied in civic duties, or in some stewardship, or in affairs; the one that hath seen fourth, into the seed of one who shall be a hardship-loving master of the body's discipline or skilled in healing of the body; the Soul that hath seen fifth, into that which shall have a life connected with the oracles or mystic rites some way; [*2] unto the sixth a life poetic shall be joined, or that of some one or of another of the tribe of copiers; unto the seventh, the life of workman or of husbandman; unto the eighth, that of a sophist or a demagogue; unto the ninth, that of a tyrant. 

"In all these lives, whoever lives them righteously obtains a better fate; he who unrighteously, a worse. 

"Now to the selfsame state from which each Soul hath come, she cometh not again for some ten thousand years. For sooner than this period no Soul [re-]gains 

[p. 432]

its wings, except the Soul of him who has loved wisdom naturally or contrary to nature. [*1] 

"Such Souls in the third period of a thousand years, if they have chosen thrice this life successively, thus getting themselves wings, depart in the three thousandth year. [*2] 

"But the other Souls, when they have ended their first life, are brought to judgment; and being judged, some go to places of correction below the Earth and pay the penalty, while others are rewarded by being raised unto a certain space in Heaven where they live on in a condition appropriate unto the life they lived in a man's form. 

"But in the thousandth year both classes come to the lottery of lives, and each doth make choice of its second life, whatever it may choose. [*3] 

"And now is it that a Soul that once had had a man's life doth pass into a brute's life, [*4] and from a 

[p. 433]

brute, he who was once a man, passes again into a man; for that indeed the Soul that never hath seen truth, will never come into this configuration. [*1] 

"For we must understand 'man,' in the sense of form, as one proceeding from many sensations and collected into a unit by means of ratiocination. [*2] But this [*3] is recollection (anamnesis) of those things which our Soul once did see when she journeyed with God, [*4] and looked beyond the things we now call things that are, by raising her face [*5] to That-which-really-is. 

"Wherefore of right, alone the understanding of the Wisdom-lover hath got wings; for he is ever engaged upon those things in memory as far as he can be, on being engaged at which, as being a God, he is divine. 

[p. 434]

"The man then who doth make a right use of memories such as these, ever being made perfect in perfect perfectionings, alone becometh really Perfect. [*1] 

"But in as much as he eschews the things that men strive after, and is engaged in the Divine [alone], he is admonished by the many as though he were beside himself, [*2] for they cannot perceive he is inspired by God." 

PLOTINUS ON METEMPSYCHOSIS 

Let us now turn to the genuine disciples of the master for further light on this tenet, and first of all to Plotinus. 

The most sympathetic notice of this tenet in Plotinus is to be found in Jules Simon's Histoire de l'Ecole d'Alexandrie (Paris, 1845), i. 588 ff., based for the most part on En., I. i. 12; II. ix. 6; IV. iii. 9; V. ii. 2; and on Ficinus' Commentary (p. 508 of Creuzer's edition). 

After citing some "ironical" passages from Plotinus (in which the philosopher disguised the real doctrine which in his day still pertained to the teachings of a higher initiation), Jules Simon goes on to say: 

"Even though admitting that this doctrine of metempsychosis is taken literally by Plotinus, we should still have to ask for him as for Plato, whether the human soul really inhabits the body of an animal, and whether it is not reborn only into a human body which reflects the nature of a certain animal by the character of its passions. 

"The commentators of the Alexandrian school sometimes interpreted Plato in this sense. Thus, according 

[p. 435]

to Proclus, Plato in the Phaedrus condemns the wicked to live as brutes and not to become them, katienai eis bion the'reion, kai oyk eis suma the'reion (Proc., Comm. Tim., p. 329). Chalcidius gives the same interpretation, for he distinguishes between the doctrines of Plato and those of Pythagoras and Empedocles, qui non naturam modo feram, sed etiam formas. [*1] Hermes (Comm. of Chalcidius on Timaeus; ed. Fabric., p. 350) declares in unmistakable terms that a human soul can never return to the body of an animal, and that the will of the Gods for ever preserves it from such disgrace." [*2] 

PROCLUS ON THE DESCENT OF SOULS INTO IRRATIONAL NATURES 

Again, Proclus in his Commentaries on the Timaeus, writes very definitely with reference to the following passage of Plato: 

"And if he still in these conditions did not cease from vice, he would keep on changing into some brutish nature according as he acted in a way resembling the expression in genesis of such a mode of vicious living." [*3] 

For he says: 

"With reference to this descent of souls into irrational animals, it is usual for men to enquire how it is meant. 

"And some think that what are called brute-like lives are certain resemblances of men to brutes, for that it is not possible for the rational essence to become the soul of a brute. 

"Others allow that even this [human soul] may be 

[p. 436]

immediately degraded to reason-less creatures, for that all souls are of one and the same species, so that they may become wolves and panthers and ichneumons. 

"But the true reason (logos) asserts that though the human soul may be degraded to brutes, it is [only] to brutes which possess the life suited to such a purpose, while the degraded soul is as it were vehicled on this [life], and bound to it sympathetically. 

"And this has been demonstrated by us at great length in our lectures on the Phaedrus, and that this is the only way in which such de-gradation can take place. If, however, it is necessary to remind you that this meaning (logos) is that of Plato, it must be added that in the Republic [*1] he says that the soul of Thersites assumed an ape [life], but not an ape's body, and in the Phaedrus [*2] that [the soul] descends into a brutish life, and not into a brutish body, for the mode of life goes with its appropriate soul. And in the passage [from the Timaeus] he says that it changes into a brute-like nature; for the brutish nature is not the body but the life [principle] of the brute." [*3] 

Footnotes

^429:1 See commentary thereon.

^429:2 Stewart (J. A.), The Myths of Plato (London, 1905), pp. 313 ff.; cf. also Jowett (Oxford, 1892), i. 454 ff.; and Taylor (London, 1804), iii. 325 ff.

^429:3 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 11: "Since Cosmos is a sphere--that is to say, a head."

^430:1 Cf. 246 B: "For 'tis a Yoke of Horses that the Charioteer of Man's Soul driveth, and, moreover, of his Horses the one is well favoured and good and of good stock, the other of the contrary and contrary."

^430:2 Lit., under water.

^430:3 Lit., evil--that is, ignorance.

^430:4 Viz., behold the truth.

^431:1 Sc. as a germ or seed.

^431:2 It is low down in the scale, indeed, that Plato places the soothsayers and hierophants; he is, however, "ironical," for he places poets even lower down, and still lower sophists and tyrants, all in keeping with his well-known views about these people as known in his own time.

^432:1 e paideraste'santos meta filosofias--Stewart, "Of loved his comrade in the bonds of wisdom"; Jowett, "or a lover who is not devoid of philosophy"; Taylor, "or together with philosophy has loved beautiful forms." I fancy that Plato has used this graphic expression simply to designate a man who has not true union with wisdom, but is seeking for union though ignorantly.

^432:2 "The numbers three and ten are called perfect; because the former is the first complete number, and the latter in a certain respect the whole of number; the consequent series of numbers being only a repetition of the numbers which this contains. Hence, as 10 multiplied into itself produces 100, a plane number, and this again multiplied by 10 produces 1000, a solid number; and as 1000 multiplied by 3 forms 3000, and 1000 by 10, 10,000; on this account Plato employs these numbers as symbols of the purgation of the soul, and her restitution to her proper perfection and felicity. I say, as symbols; for we must not suppose that this is accomplished in just so many years, but that the soul's restitution takes place in a perfect manner."--Taylor, op. cit., iii. 325.

^432:3 Cf. the "Vision of Er."

^432:4 "We must not understand by this that the soul of a man becomes the soul of a brute; but that by way of punishment it is bound to the soul of a brute, or carried in it, just as daemons used to reside in our souls. Hence all the energies of the rational soul are perfectly impeded, and its intellectual eye beholds naught but the dark and tumultuous phantasms of a brutal life."--Taylor, loc. cit.

^433:1 Viz., the form of a man; it is, however, also an astrological term.

^433:2 There seems to be no agreement among translators as to the meaning of this sentence: dei gar anthrupon xynienai kai eidos legomenon, ek pollun ion aisthe'seun eis en logismui xynairoumenon. Stewart translates: "Man must needs understand the Specific Form which proceedeth from the perceiving of many things, and is made one by Thought;" Jowett: "For a man must have intelligence of universals, and be able to proceed from the many particulars of sense to one conception of reason;" Taylor: "Indeed it is necessary to understand man, denominated according to species, as a being proceeding from the information of many senses, to a perception contracted into one reasoning power."

^433:3 Sc. collecting into one.

^433:4 That is to say, revolved in the Cosmos Order.

^433:5 Cf. C. H., i. 14: "So [Man] . . . bent his face downwards through the Harmony."

^434:1 All these are technical terms of the Mysteries.

^434:2 Cf. C. H., ix. (x.) 4: "For this cause they who Gnostic are please not the many nor the many them. They are thought mad and laughed at."

^435:1 Who not only made the soul go into an animal nature but into animal forms.

^435:2 The last sentence of C. H., x. (xi.) being quoted textually by Chalcidius.

^435:3 Tim., 42 C.

^436:1 Lib. X. 620 C.

^436:2 Phaedr., 249 B.

^436:3 Comment, in Plat. Tim., 329 D; ed. Schneider (Warsaw, 1847), pp. 800, 801. With all of this the views of Basilides (F. F. F., 275 ff.) may be most instructively compared.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 437]

XIV

THE VISION OF ER 

"BUT to the Mindless ones, the wicked and depraved, the envious and covetous, and those who murder do and love impiety, I am far off, yielding my place to the Avenging Daimon."--C. H., ff., i. 23. 

ER SON OF ARMENIUS 

To this Daimon it is that the "way of life" of the man is surrendered at death ( section 24). In this connection we may consider the Story or Vision of "Er Son of Armenius," which Plato tells at the end of the last book (X.) of his Republic (614 B ff.), for the symbolism is very similar to that of our tractate and the subject is more or less the same. 

This Er is said by Clement of Alexandria to have been Zoroaster, "but no trace of acquaintance with Zoroaster is found elsewhere in Plato's writings, and there is no reason for giving him the name of Er the Pamphylian. The philosophy of Heracleitus cannot be shown to be borrowed from Zoroaster, and still less the myths of Plato." [*1] 

What the source of the story is, scholarship has so far been unable to discover; the vast majority of scholars holding it to be an invention of Plato. 

[p. 438]

It is the story of a man "killed in battle," whose body was brought home on the tenth day still fresh and showing no sign of decomposition. On the twelfth day, when laid on the funeral pyre, Er awakes and tells a strange story of his experiences in the invisible world. 

This story should be taken in close connection with Plutarch's similar but fuller Vision of Aridaeus (Thespesius), upon which I have commented at length in my "Notes on the Eleusinian Mysteries." [*1] 

FROM THE MYSTERIES 

I there stated that the experiences of Aridaeus were either a literary subterfuge for describing part of the instruction in certain Mysteries, or the Vision, in popular story form, was considered so true a description of what was thought to be the nature of the invisible world and the after-death conditions of the soul, that it required little alteration to make it useful for that purpose. 

I would now suggest that the Story of Er is also used by Plato for a somewhat similar purpose. It is further interesting to notice that one of the characters in the Vision of Er is called Ardiaeus, while in Plutarch the main personage is called Aridaeus. The transposition of a single letter is so slight as to make the names practically identical, and the subject matter is so similar that we are inclined to think that there must be some connection between the Visions. Moreover, Aridaeus is said to have been a native of Soli in Cilicia, just as Er is said to have been a Pamphylian; the tradition of such stories would thus seem to have been derived from Asia Minor, and the origin of them may 

[p. 439]

thus be hidden in the syncretism of that land--where West and East were for ever meeting. It is, however, much safer to assume that, in the Story of Er, Plato is handing on the doctrines of Orphic eschatology; [*1] whether or not the story already existed in some form, and was worked up and elaborated by the greatest artist in words of all philosophers, will perhaps never be known. But to the story itself. 

THE CYLINDER 

614 C.--Er, in a certain daimonian or psychic plane (topos tis daimonios), is made a spectator of a turning-point or change of course in the ascent and descent of souls. He thus seems to have been in a space or state midway between Tartarus and Heaven--presumably the invisible side of the sublunary space. 

The world-engine of Fate, or Karmic World-whorl, is represented by seven spheres (surrounded by an eighth) whose harmonious spinning is adjusted by the three Fates, the Daughters of Necessity. 

Jowett (loc. cit.) says that the heaven-sphere is represented under the symbol of a "cylinder or box." Where the "box" comes in I do not know; the term "cylinder" does not occur in the text, and even the cylinder idea is exceedingly difficult to discover in any precise sense. Indeed, it may be doubted whether the "heaven-sphere" is to be so definitely interpreted; for then our discussion of the meaning of the term "cylinder," which occurs definitely in our K. K. Fragments, would be greatly simplified. 

The matter is hard to understand, and Jowett's 

[p. 440]

attempts at exposition are hazy and sketchy in the extreme. Either Plato is talking nonsense, or Jowett does not understand the elements of his idea. Stewart's attempt, which makes use of the latest Platonic research, is far more successful, but he also has to abandon many points in despair. [*1] How difficult the solution of the problem is may be seen from the text, which gives the symbolism of the vision of the spheres somewhat as follows: 

THE VISION 

616 B.--"Now when those in the meadow [*2] had tarried seven days, on the eighth they were obliged to proceed on their journey upwards, and, on the fourth day after, [*3] he [Er] said they came to a region where they saw light extended straight as a column from above throughout the whole extent of heaven and earth, in colour resembling the rainbow, only brighter and purer. 

"Another day's journey brought them to it, and there they saw the extremities of the boundaries of the heaven extended in the midst of the light; for this light was the final boundary of the heaven--somewhat like the under-girdings of ships--and thus confined its whole revolution. 

"From these extremities depended the spindle of Necessity, by means of which all its revolutions are made to revolve. The spindle's stalk [*4] and its hook are made of adamant, [*5] and the whorl of a mixture of adamant and other kinds [of elements]. 

[p. 441]

"And the nature of the whorl is as follows. In shape it was like that of the one down here; but in itself we must understand from his description that it was somewhat as though in one great hollow whorl clean scooped out there lay another similar but smaller one fitted into it, as though they were jars [*1] fitting into one another. And so he said there was a third and a fourth, and [also] four others. For in all there are eight whorls set in one another--looking like circles from above as to their rims, [*2] [but from below] finished off into the continuous belly [*3] of one whorl round the shaft, which is driven right through the eighth whorl. 

"The first and outermost whorl had the circle of its rim first in width; that of the sixth was second; that of the fourth, third; that of the eighth, fourth; that of the seventh, fifth; that of the fifth, sixth; that of the third, seventh; that of the second, eighth. 

617.--"And the circle of the largest was variegated; that of the seventh brightest; that of the eighth had its colour from the seventh shining on it; those of the second and of the fifth had [colours] somewhat like one another, but yellower than the preceding; the third had the whitest colour; the fourth was reddish; the sixth was second in whiteness. [*4] 

[p. 442]

"Now the spindle as a whole circled round at the same rate in its revolution; and within this revolution as a whole the seven circles revolved slowly in a contrary direction to the one as a whole; of these the eighth went the fastest of them; the seventh, sixth, and fifth came second [in speed, and at the same rate] with one another; the fourth, in a reversed orbit, as it appeared to them, was third in speed; the third was fourth and the second fifth. 

"The spindle revolved on the knees of Necessity; and on its circles above, on each of them, was a Siren whom they carried round with them, singing a single sound or tone; and from all eight of them a single harmony was produced. 

"And there were three others seated at equal distances round about, each upon a throne,--the Daughters of Necessity, the Fates, clothed in white robes, with garlands on their heads, Lachesis and Clotho and Atropos; and they sang to the tune of the Sirens' harmony,--Lachesis sang things that have been, Clotho things that are, and Atropos things that shall be. 

"And Clotho from time to time with her right hand gave an extra turn to the outer spin of the spindle; Atropos, with her left, in like fashion to the inner ones; while Lachesis in turn touched the one with one hand and the other with the other. 

"Now when they [Er and the souls] arrived, they had to go immediately to Lachesis. Accordingly a prophet [a proclaimer] first of all arranged them in their proper order, and taking from the lap of Lachesis both lots [*1] and samples of lives, he ascended a kind of raised place and said: 

"'The word (logos) of the Virgin Lachesis, Daughter of Necessity! Ye souls, ye things of a day, lo the

[p. 443]

beginning of another period of mortal birth that brings you death. It is not your daimon who will have you assigned to him by lot, but ye who will choose your daimon. He who obtains the first turn let him first choose a life to which he will of necessity have to hold. As for Virtue, Necessity has no control over her, but every one will possess her more or less just as he honours or dishonours her. The responsibility is the chooser's; God is blameless.' 

"Thus speaking he threw the lots to all of them, and each picked up the one that fell beside him, except Er, who was not permitted to do so. So every one who picked up a lot knew what turn he had got. 

618.--"After this he set on the ground before them the samples of the lives, in far greater number than those present. They were of every kind; not only lives of every kind of animal, but also lives of every kind of man. There were lives of autocratic power [lit., tyrannies] among them, some continuing to the end, some breaking off half-way and ending in poverty, exile, and beggary. There were also lives of famous men, some famed for their beauty of form and strength, and victory in the games, others for their birth and the virtues of their forebears; others the reverse of famous, and for similar reasons. So also with regard to the lives of women. 

"As to the rank of the soul, it was no longer in the power [of the chooser], for the decree of Necessity is that its choosing of another life conditions its change of soul-rank. As for other things, riches and poverty were mingled with each other, and these sometimes with disease and sometimes with health, and sometimes a mean between these." 

Thereupon Plato breaks into a noble disquisition on what is the best choice, and how a man should take 

[p. 444]

with him into the world an adamantine faith in truth and right; and then continues: 

619 B.--"And this is precisely what the messenger from that invisible world reported that the prophet said: 

"'Even for him who comes last in turn, if he but choose with his mind, and live consistently, there is in store a life desirable and far from evil. So let neither him who has the best choice be careless, nor him who comes last despair.' 

"And when he had thus spoken, the one who had the first choice, Er said, immediately went and chose the largest life of autocratic power, but through folly and greediness he did not choose with sufficient attention to all points, and failed to notice the fate wrapped up with it, of 'dishes of his own children' [*1] and other ills. But when he had examined it at leisure, he began to beat his breast, and bemoan his choice, not abiding by what the prophet had previously told him; for he did not lay the blame of these evils on himself, but on ill-luck and daimones, and everything rather than himself. And he was one of those who came from heaven, who in his former life had lived in a well-ordered state, and been virtuous from custom and not from a love of wisdom. [*2] 

"In brief, it was by no means the minority of those who involved themselves in such unfortunate choices who came from heaven, seeing that such souls were unexercised in the hardships of life. Many of those who came from earth, as they had suffered hardships themselves, and had seen others suffering them, did not make their choice off-hand. 

[p. 445]

"Consequently many of the souls, independently of the fortune of their turn, changed good for evil, and evil for good. For if a man should always, whenever he comes into life on earth, live a sound philosophic life, and the lot of his choice should not fall out to him among the last, the chances are, according to this news from the other world, that he will not only spend his life happily here, but also that the path which he will tread from here to there, and thence back again, will not be below the earth [*1] and difficult, but easy and of a celestial nature. 

620.--"Yes, the vision he had, Er said, was well worth the seeing, showing how each class of souls chose their lives. [*2] The vision was both a pitiful and laughable as well as a wonderful thing to see. For the most part they chose according to the experience of their former life. For Er said that he saw the soul that had once been that of Orpheus becoming the life of a swan for choice, [*3] through its hatred of womankind, because owing to the death of Orpheus at the hands of women, it did not wish to come into existence by conception in a woman. He further saw the soul of Thamyras [*4] choose the life of a nightingale. On the contrary, he saw also a swan change to the choice of a human life, and other musical animals in like fashion. 

"The soul that obtained the twentieth lot chose 

[p. 446]

the life of a lion; it was the soul of Ajax, son of Telamon, to avoid being a man, because it still remembered the [unjust] decision about the arms. The next soul was Agamemnon's; and it too, out of hatred to the human race on account of its sufferings, changed into the life of an eagle. [*1] The soul of Atalanta obtained its lot in the middle, and letting her eye fall on the great honours paid an 'athlete,' was unable to pass it by, and took it. The soul of Epeius, [*2] son of Panopeus, he saw pass into the nature of a woman skilful in the arts. And far away among the last he saw the soul of the buffoon Thersites putting on an 'ape.' 

"By a stroke of luck also he saw the soul of Odysseus, which had obtained the last lot of all, come to make its choice. From memory of its former labours it had given itself a rest from love of renown, and for a long time went about to find the life of a man in private life with nothing to do with public affairs, and with great difficulty found one lying in a corner and thus passed over by all the rest; on seeing it, it declared that it would have done the same even if it had had first turn, and been glad to do it. 

"And Er said that of the rest of the brutes also in like fashion some of them passed into men, and some into one another, the unrighteous ones changing into wild ones, and the righteous into tame; in fact, there were intermixings of every kind. 

"When, then, all the souls had chosen their lives according to the number of their turn, they went in order to Lachesis; and she sent along with them the daimon each had chosen, as watcher over his life and bringer to pass of the things he had chosen. And 

[p. 447]

the daimon first of all brought the soul to Clotho, set it beneath her hand and the whirling of the spindle, thus ratifying the fate each soul had chosen in its turn. And after he had attached it to her, he brought it to the spinning of Atropos, thus making its destinies [*1] irreversible. 

621.--"Thence [Er] went, without turning, [down] beneath the Throne [*2] of Necessity, and when he had passed down through it, and the others had also done so, they all passed on to the Plain of Forgetfulness (Lethe) in a frightful and stifling heat; for it was bare of trees and vegetation of every kind. 

"As it was now evening they camped by the River Heedlessness whose water no vessel can hold. [*3] They were all, however, compelled to drink a certain quantity of its water; those who are not safeguarded by prudence drink more than their quantity, while he who keeps on drinking it forgets everything. 

"When they had fallen asleep and midnight had come, there was thunder and earthquake, and thence suddenly they were carried up into birth [genesis] some one way some another, like shooting stars. 

"Er, however, was prevented from drinking the water; but in what manner and by what means he got back to his body he could not say, only, suddenly waking in the morning, he found himself lying on the pyre." 

[p. 448]

COMMENTARY 

The question that one naturally asks oneself is: Did Plato conclude his great treatise on the Ideal State with a popular legend in jest, or had he some deeper purpose? I cannot but think that he was jesting seriously. Is it too wild a supposition that he is hinting at things which he could not disclose because of his oath? Those who knew would understand; those who did not would think he was jesting simply, and so the mysteries would not be disclosed. 

In any case we have, I think, got a hint of the part played by the Daimon in our treatise. Whether or not Hermes "copied" the idea from Plato, or both derived it from the same tradition, must be left to the fancy and taste of individual scholars. The Daimon is the watcher over the "way of life" (Ethos); he is not necessarily a Kakodaimon, but so to speak the Karmic Agent of the soul, appointed to carry out the "choice" of that soul, both good and ill, according to the Law of Necessity. [*1] The choice is man's; Nature adjusts the balance. 

The Vision is of a typical nature, and the types are mythologized in the persons of well-known characters in Grecian story. The "way of life" the souls choose becomes the garment of "habit" they are to wear, their form of personality, or karmic limitation. Apparently some souls, instead of choosing a reincarnation in a human body, prefer to live the "lives" of certain animal natures. Are we then to believe that Plato seriously endorsed the popular ideas of metempsychosis? Or is it possible that he is referring to some state of existence of souls, which was symbolized by certain animal types 

[p. 449]

in the Mysteries; as was certainly the case with the "lion" and "eagle," though the "swan" and "nightingale" and "ape" are, as far as I am aware, never mentioned in this connection? Can it be that Plato here gives play to his imagination, basing his speculations on some general idea he may have learned in Egypt? 

We know from the so-called "Diagram of the Ophites," which is still traceable in a fragmentary form in the polemic of Origen against Celsus, that the "seven spheres" of the lower psychic nature were characterised by the names of animals: lion, bull, serpent, eagle, bear, dog, ass. We also know how the whole subject of animal correspondences preoccupied the attention of the Egyptian priesthood. But not only can we now make no reasonable scheme out of the fragmentary indications that have come down to us, but we also feel pretty well certain that if Plutarch's account of the beliefs of the later Egyptians on the subject is approximately reliable, the priests themselves of those days had no longer any consistent scheme. 

We may, therefore, conclude either that the whole matter was a vain superstition entirely devoid of any basis in reality; or that there was a psychic science of animal natures and their relationship to man which was once the possession of the priesthood of the ancient civilisation of Egypt, but that it was lost, owing to the departure from amongst men of those who had the power to understand it, and subsequently only fragments of misunderstood tradition remained among the lesser folk on earth. This at anyrate is the theory of our Trismegistic treatises. 

Footnotes

^437:1 Jowett, Dialogues, iii. clxvi.

^438:1 The Theosophical Review (April, May, June, 1898), xxii. 145 ff., 232 ff., 312 ff.

^439:1 And this I find to be the opinion of the last commentator on the subject; see Stewart (J. A.), The Myths of Plato (London, 1905), pp. 152 ff.

^440:1 So also Dreyer (J. L. E.), History of the Planetary Systems from Thales to Kepler (Cambridge, 1906), pp. 56 ff.

^440:2 The daimonian region.

^440:3 That is the eleventh day; Er, it will be remembered, was "unconscious" for twelve days.

^440:4 Or shaft.

^440:5 That which cannot be destroyed or changed.

^441:1 The shape would thus approximate to an oblate spheroid.

^441:2 To carry out the metaphor of the jars.

^441:3 Lit., "back."

^441:4 The names of the spheres may be deduced from Tim. 38, and are as follows: 1. Fixed Stars (all-coloured); 2. Saturn (yellow); 3. Jupiter (whitish); 4. Mars (reddish); 5. Mercury (yellowish); 6. Venus (white); 7. Sun (light-colour); 8. Moon (light-colour reflected). How the above statements as to "width of rim" and colours are to be made to work in with the scheme of rates of motions and numbers given in Tim. 36, I have not as yet been able to discover from any commentator. And seeing that Er is said to have seen this mystery from a region that transcended even the daimonian region, it is perhaps out of place to insist on a purely physical interpretation of the data.

^442:1 Or number-turns.

^444:1 A literary embellishment from the Tragic Muse of Greece, and the mythical recitals of Thyestian banquets.

^444:2 ethei aney filosofias.

^445:1 The Tartarean spheres of the invisible world, popularly believed to be below the earth; that is, philosophically, more material than earth-life.

^445:2 The vision (thea) was therefore typical.

^445:3 The birds are typical of souls living in the air--that is, in aery bodies and not in physical ones; or types of intelligence.

^445:4 Or Thamyris, an ancient Thracian bard; it is said that in his conceit he imagined he could surpass the Muses in song, in consequence of which he was deprived of his sight and the power of singing.

^446:1 Notice the "lion" and "eagle" are selected as types--they being typical sun-animals, as we have already seen.

^446:2 The fabled engineer of the Trojan Horse.

^447:1 ta epiklusthenta--a play on Kluthw'.

^447:2 This is probably a symbol of the heaven-plane.

^447:3 oy to ydur aggeion oyden stegein. So this is usually translated; but as the souls drink of it, the appropriateness of the rendering is not very apparent. On the other hand, stegein is used of things that are water-tight--e.g. houses and ships; hence "whose water no vessel can keep out." The "vessel" might thus stand for the ship of the soul; and if so, we are in contact with an Egyptian idea. The River is in the Desert--the reverse of the Nile and Egypt, of Osiris and Isis, their Typhonean counterparts.

^448:1 For the more intimate teaching on this point, see C. H., x. (xi.) 16 ff.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 450]

XV

CONCERNING THE CRATER OR CUP 

"HE filled a mighty Cup with it [Mind], and sent it down, joining a Herald [to it], to whom He gave command to make this proclamation to the hearts of men: Baptize thyself with this Cup's baptism," etc.--C. H., iv. (v.) 4. 

THE CRATER IN PLATO 

Whence came this idea of a Crater or Cup into our Trismegistic literature? Most scholars will answer unhesitatingly: From Plato. The Crater was the Cup in which the Creator mixed the Elements of the World-Soul; for we read in Timaeus (41 D), where Plato is treating of the formation of human souls: 

"Thus spake He, and once again into the Cup which He had used in blending and mingling the Soul of the Universe, He poured the remains of the Elements He had employed, and mingled them in much the same manner; they were not, however, pure as before, but in the second and third degree." 

I am, however, not inclined to attribute the origin of this symbolic expression simply to the imagery of Plato's poetic mind, but am far more inclined to believe that Plato was using a familiar figure of "Orphic" symbolism. The idea of not only an Ultimate Crater, 

[p. 451]

but of many subsidiary ones in the celestial and invisible realms, is closely connected with the "Orphic" idea of a Vortex. 

IN "ORPHEUS," MACROBIUS, AND PROCLUS

Orpheus is said to have called the Aether the Mighty Whirlpool. [*1] This forms the Egg or Womb of Cosmos; it is a modification of Chaos or Rhea, the Eternally-flowing, the Mother of the Gods, the Great Container. Thus Proclus, in speaking of Chaos, says: 

"The last Infinity, by which also Matter (yle) is circumscribed, is the Container, the field and plane of ideas. About her is 'neither limit, nor foundation, nor seat, but excessive Darkness.'" [*2] 

Plato, as we have seen, in his psychogony, speaks openly of this Cup or Crater (Mixing Space, or Vortex) in two aspects; in it the Deity mixes the All-Soul of universal nature from the purest Cosmic Elements, and from it He also "ladles out" the souls of men, composed of a less pure mixture of these Elements. 

Further, Macrobius tells us that Plato elsewhere indirectly refers to another aspect of this Cup. 

"Plato speaks of this in the Phaedo, and says that the soul is dragged back into body, hurried on by new intoxication, desiring to taste a fresh draught of the overflow of matter, [*3] whereby it is weighed down and brought back [to earth]. The sidereal [astral] Crater of Father Liber [Dionysus, Bacchus] is a symbol of this mystery; and this is what the Ancients called the 

[p. 452]

[paragraph continues] River of Lethe, the Orphics saying that Father Liber was Hylic Mind." [*1] 

We have here, therefore, a higher and lower Cup. Proclus, moreover, speaks of several of such Craters, when he writes: 

"Plato in the Philebus hands on the tradition of the Vulcanic Crater . . . and Orpheus is acquainted with the Cup of Dionysus, and ranges many such Cups round the Solar Table." [*2] 

Elsewhere, again, Proclus tells us that the Demiurge is said "to constitute the psychical essences in conjunction with the Crater"; this "Crater is the peculiar cause of souls, and is co-arranged with the Demiurgus and filled from Him, but fills souls"; thus it is called the Fountain of Souls. [*3] 

If with these indications before us we might venture to generalize, we might say that, according to Orpheo-Pythagorean, Platonic, and Hermetic ideas, the "matter" of every "plane" was thought of as proceeding from such a Crater or Cup, from within without, and the elements thereof as being refunded into such a Cup or Centre or Receptacle--that is, from a more subtle, simpler, and inner phase to a more gross, complex, and outer phase, and vice versa. In other words, the Crater is the "monadic" or "atomic" state of the matter of any given phase or state of existence. 

THE VISION OF ARIDAeUS

With the above data before us, it will also be instructive to turn to the Vision of Aridaeus (Thespesius) 

[p. 453]

as related by Plutarch, [*1] a vision that may be compared with profit with the Vision of Er as told by Plato. Thespesius is being conducted through Hades, or the Invisible World in contact with earth-life, by a kinsman who has "passed over," as Spiritists would say, and curiously enough he there comes across a Chasm and a Crater--for part of the story runs: 

"After these explanations he was conducted by his kinsman at great speed across an immense space, as it seemed, nevertheless easily and directly as though supported by wings of light-rays; until having arrived at a Vast Vortex (xasma) extending downwards, he was abandoned by the power that supported him. 

"He observed also that the same thing happened to the rest of the souls there, for checking their flight, like birds, and sinking down, they fluttered round the Vortex in a circle, not daring to go straight through it. 

"Inside it seemed to be decked like Bacchic caves [*2] with trees and verdure and every kind of foliage, while out of it came a soft and gentle air, laden with marvellous sweet scents, making a blend like wine for topers, so that the souls feasting on the fragrance were melted with delight in mutual embraces, while the whole place was wrapt in revelry and laughter and the spirit of sport and pleasure. [*3] 

"Thespesius' kinsman told him that this was the Way by which Dionysus ascended to the Gods and 

[p. 454]

afterwards took up Semele; [*1] it was called the Place of Lethe (Oblivion). [*2] 

"Wherefore he would not suffer Thespesius to stay there, though he wished to do so, but forcibly dragged him away, explaining how that the rational part of the soul was melted and moistened [*3] by pleasure, while the irrational part, and that which is of a corporeal nature, being then moistened and made fleshly, awakens the memory of the body, and from this memory come a yearning and a desire which drag down the soul into 

[p. 455]

generation . . . the soul being weighed down with moisture. 

"Next Thespesius, after travelling another great distance, seemed to be looking at a huge Cup, [*1] with streams flowing into it; one whiter than the foam of the sea or snow, another like the purple which the rainbow sends forth, while from a distance the others were tinged with other colours, each having its own shade. 

"But when he came closer, the Cup itself (into which they flowed)--the surroundings disappearing, and the colours growing fainter--lost its varied colouring and only retained a white brilliance." 

Compare also the Hellenist writer in the Naassene Document ( section 17 S.): "The Greek theologi generally call Him [the Logos] the "Heavenly Horn of Men," because he has mixed and mingled all things with all." 

On this the Jewish Gnostic writer comments: "This is the Drinking Vessel,--the Cup in which 'the King drinketh and divineth.'" 

It is, says the Hellenist commentator again, "the Cup (of Anacreon) speaking forth speechlessly the Ineffable Mystery." 

The Jewish commentator was a contemporary of Philo's, and the Hellenist was prior to him; thus we see that the Cup symbol was used in precisely the same significance as in our text in at least the first century B.C., and that the idea was referred to the Greek theologers--in other words, the Orphics--and not to Plato. 

[p. 456]

THE ORIGIN OF THE SYMBOL TO BE SOUGHT IN ORPHIC TRADITION 

With the above data before us, I think we may be persuaded without difficulty that the idea of the Cup, or Mixing-Bowl, did not owe its origin to any invention of Plato's, but that the greatest of philosophers, when he makes use of the symbol, does but employ a familiar image well known to his audience--as, indeed, is very apparent in the summary fashion in which he introduces the figure. In other words, the symbol or image was a commonplace of the Orphic tradition, and doubtless, therefore, familiar to every Pythagorean. 

Now, in our treatise it is noticeable that this Cup-symbol is equated with the Monad [*1] or Oneness--a technical Pythagorean term. 

Footnotes

^451:1 pelw'rion xasma (Simplicius, Ausc., iv. 123); magna vorago (Syrianus, Metaph., ii. 33a). Cf. Prolegg. ch. xi., "The Orphic Tradition of the Genesis of the World-Egg."

^451:2 Comment. in Tim., ii. 117. See my Orpheus, p. 154.

^451:3 Gnostice, "the superfluity of naughtiness."

^452:1 Comment, in Som. Scip., XI. ii. 66.

^452:2 Comment. in Tim., v. 316 (Taylor's trans.).

^452:3 Taylor (T.), Theology of Plato, V. xxxi.

^453:1 De Sera Numinis Vindicta, xxii. (ed. Bernardakis, iii. 454-466).

^453:2 Were the Bacchic Mysteries then celebrated in caves?

^453:3 This is clearly in correspondence with the "Astral Crater of Father Liber" of Macrobius.

^454:1 His "mother," from the under-world; referring to the mysteries of generation and the indestructibility of life. Semele in giving birth to Dionysus the Son of Zeus (the Creative Power), is said to have been killed by the Power of her Lord, but she was subsequently restored to life among the Gods by the Power of her Son. In reincarnating, it is said that part of the soul in giving birth to itself in this state "dies." The "child" then born may, in his turn, in the case of one perfect, become the saviour of his "mother," now become his spouse, and raise her, who is also himself, to a higher state.

^454:2 Compare Pistis Sophia (336, 337), which tells us how certain karmic agencies "give unto the old soul [prior to reincarnation] a Draught of Oblivion composed of the Seed of Iniquity, filled with all manner of desire and all forgetfulness. And the moment that that soul drinketh of that Draught, it forgetteth all the spaces [or regions] through which it hath travelled, and all the chastisements through which it hath passed; and that deadly Draught of Oblivion becometh a body external to the soul, like unto the soul in every way, and its perfect resemblance, and hence they call it the 'counterfeit spirit.'"

But in the case of the purified soul it is different; for a higher power "bringeth a Cup full of intuition and wisdom, and also prudence, and giveth it to the soul, and casteth the soul into a body which will not be able to fall asleep or forget, because of the Cup of Prudence which hath been given unto it, but will be ever pure in heart and seeking after the Mysteries of Light, until it hath found them, by order of the Virgin of Light, in order that [that soul] may inherit the Light for ever." (Ibid., 392, "Books of the Saviour.")

^454:3 Compare the "Moist Essence" of C. H., i. 4, and iii. (iv.) 1.

^455:1 krate'r--bowl or basin.

^456:1 It is of interest to notice that one of the apocryphal Books of Moses was called The Monad, and another The Key; this argues an early date and wide renown for our two treatises so entitled. See R. 182, n. 3.

    
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 457]

XVI

THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

PTAH, SEKHET AND I-EM-HETEP (ASCLEPIUS) 

BUDGE, in his Gods of the Egyptians (vol. i. ch. xvi.), tells us that the Great Triad of Memphis consisted of Ptah, Sekhet, and I-em-hetep. 

Ptah, as we have seen, was the "Sculptor or Engraver," the Demiurge par excellence. He is called the "Very Great God who came into being in the earliest time"; "Father of fathers, Power of powers"; "Father of beginnings and Creator of the Egg[s] of the Sun and Moon"; "Lord of Maat [Truth], King of the Two Lands, the God of the Beautiful Face . . . who created His own Image, who fashioned His own Body, who hath established Maat throughout the Two Lands"; "Ptah the Disk of Heaven, Illuminer of the Two Lands with the Fire of His Two Eyes." The "Workshop of Ptah" was the World Invisible. 

It was Ptah who carried out the commands concerning the creation of the universe issued by Thoth. 

The Syzygy or female counterpart of Ptah was Sekhet, "who was at once his sister and wife, and the mother of his son Nefer-Tem, and a sister-form of the Goddess Bast" (op. cit., i. 514). She is called: "Greatly Beloved One of Ptah, Lady of Heaven, Mistress of the Two Lands"; and one of her commonest names is "Nesert," that is "Flame." 

[p. 458]

It was Thoth (Tekh) who, with his Seven Wise Ones, planned the world (ib., 516). But if Ptah is the executive power of Thoth and his Seven Wise Ones, so is Thoth the personification of the Intelligence of Ptah. It is in this way that Sekhet becomes identified with Maat, the inseparable spouse of Thoth. 

NEFER-TEM 

The third member of the Memphite Triad is Nefer-Tem, or the "Young Tem." In the Ritual (Ch. lxxxi., version B) we read the "apology": "Hail, thou Lotus, thou type of the God Nefer-Tem! I am he who knoweth you, and I know your name among the Gods, the Lords of the Underworld, and I am one of you." Again, in Ch. clxxiv. 19, Nefer-Tem is compared with "the Lotus at the nostrils of Ra"; also, in Ch. clxxviii. 36, Nefer-Tem has the same title. 

In the later texts Nefer-Tem is identified with many Gods, all of them forms of Horus or Thoth (ib., 522). 

Here we are in contact with the Ptah-tradition of Memphis which, we have seen, played an important part in the heredity of the cosmogenesis of our "Poemandres" tractate. In it the simultaneous identification and distinction of Thoth and Ptah and of Maat and Sekhet are naturally explained, and the Son of these Powers is the Young Tem, identified with the Young Horus or Young Thoth who is to succeed his Father. Are we here on the track of the ancestry of our Tat? 

At Heliopolis (Annu) the Ancient God Tem was equated with Ra. Tem was the Father-God, Lord of Heaven, and Begetter of the Gods (op. cit., i. 92, 93). Usertsen I. rebuilt the sanctuary of Heliopolis about 

[p. 459]

[paragraph continues] 2433 B.C., and dedicated it to Ra in the two forms of Horus and Temu (ib., 330). 

"Tem was the first living Man-God known to the Egyptians, just as Osiris was the first dead Man-God, and as such was always represented in human form and with a human head. . . . 

"Tem was, in fact, to the Egyptians a manifestation of God in human form. . . . It is useless to attempt to assign a date to the period when the Egyptians began to worship God in human form, for we have no material for so doing; the worship of Tem must, however, be of very great antiquity, and the fact that the priests of Ra in the Fifth and Sixth Dynasties united him to their God under the name of Ra-Tem, proves that his worship was wide-spread, and that the God was thought to possess attributes similar to those of Ra" (ib., 349, 350). 

In the Trismegistic tradition in which Thoth holds the chief place, the Young Tem would thus represent the Young Thoth who succeeded to his Father when that Father ascended to the Gods. 

IMHOTEP-IMUTH-ASCLEPIUS 

Moreover the Egyptian texts prove that besides Nefer-Tem still another Son of Ptah was regarded as the third member of the Memphitic Triad. This Son was called I-em-hetep (or Imhotep), whom the Greeks called Imouthes or Imuth, and equated him with their Asclepius. 

The name I-em-hetep means "He who cometh in Peace," and is very appropriate to the God who brought the knowledge of Healing to mankind; but I-em-hetep, though specially the God of medicine, was also the God of study and learning in general. 

[p. 460]

"As a God of learning he partook of some of the attributes of Thoth, and he was supposed to take the place of this God in the performance of funeral ceremonies, and in superintending the embalming of the dead; in later times he absorbed the duties of Thoth as 'Scribe of the Gods,' and the authorship of the words of power which protected the dead from enemies of every kind in the Underworld was ascribed to him" (ib., 522, 523). 

In the "Ritual of Embalmment" [*1] it is said to the Deceased: "Thy soul uniteth itself to I-em-hetep whilst thou art in the funeral valley." 

The oldest shrine of the God was situated close to Memphis, and was called the "Temple of I-em-hetep, the Son of Ptah," which the Greeks called the Asclepieion. 

Under Ptolemy IV., Philopator (222-205 B.C.), a temple was built to I-em-hetep on the Island of Philae, and from the hieroglyphic inscriptions we learn that the God was called: "Great One, Son of Ptah, the Creative God, made by Thenen, begotten by him and beloved by him, the God of divine forms in the temples, who giveth life to all men, the Mighty One of wonders, the Maker of times [?], who cometh unto him that calleth upon him wheresoever he may be, who giveth sons to the childless, the wisest and most learned one, the image and likeness of Thoth the Wise." [*2] 

Imhotep-Asclepius was thus the "image and likeness of Thoth the Wise," even as Nefer-Tem was 

[p. 461]

[paragraph continues] Young Thoth. Here we have precisely the distinction drawn between Asclepius and Tat in our Trismegistic literature; Asclepius was trained in all philosophy, Tat was young and as yet untrained. 

"I-em-hetep," concludes Budge, "was the God who sent sleep to those who were suffering and in pain, and those who were afflicted with any kind of disease formed his special charge; he was the Good Physician both of Gods and men, and he healed the bodies of mortals during life, and superintended the arrangements for the preservation of the same after death. . . . He was certainly the God of physicians and of all those who were occupied with the mingled science of medicine and magic; and when we remember that several of the first Kings of the Early Empire are declared by Manetho, whose statements have been supported by the evidence of the papyri, to have written, i.e. caused to be edited, works on medicine, it is clear that the God of medicine was in Memphis as old as the archaic period" (ib., 524). 

So much for the more important information that Budge has to offer us on the subject of Asclepius-Imuth from the side of pure Egyptian tradition--if we can use such a phrase of that tradition as strained through the sieve of almost purely physical interpretation. [*1] 

THATH-TAT

And now let us turn to Reitzenstein and his instructive Dissertation, "Hermes u. Schuler" (pp. 117 ff.). 

[p. 462]

Unquestionably the most general form of sermon found in the remains of our Trismegistic literature is that of instruction to Tat the "Son" of Hermes, who is "Father" and Initiator. Of these instructions two Corpora existed, namely, "The General Sermons" and "The Expository Sermons." 

The name Tat is, of course, a variant of Thoth (Tehut); but whereas Hermes himself is always in such sermons characterised as Thrice-greatest, Tat has not yet reached to this grade of mastership; he is still "Young." 

The name "Tat" occurs in one of the prayers in the Magic Papyri, part of which is undecipherable, and can only be translated by following the conjecture of Reitzenstein (p. 117, n. 6). 

"Show thyself unto me in thy prophetic power O God of mighty mind, Thrice-great Hermes! Let him who rules the four regions of the Heavens and the four foundations of the Earth appear. Be present unto me O thou in Heaven, be present unto me thou from the Egg. . . . Speak, the Two Gods also are round thee,--the one God is called Thath and the other Haf." [*1]

Spiegelberg equates Haf with Hpj, the "Genius of the Dead" who appears coupled with Thoth in a Coptic Magic Papyrus of the second century A.D., [*2] where Isis speaks of "my father Ape-Thoth." This thus seems to identify Haf with Anubis--that is, Harmanup or Horus as Anubis. And Anubis, as Hermes-Tat, was considered in Egyptian tradition to be a composer of sacred scripture. [*3] 

[p. 463]

THE INCARNATIONS OF THOTH

The prayer just cited appears to put us into contact with the atmosphere of some inner mysteries of spiritual instruction. The God or Spiritual Master contains in himself his disciple, or a duad or triad of disciples; the relationship of Master and disciple is of the most intimate nature; not only is it of that of father to son, but of mother to child--for the disciple is born in the womb of the Master Presence. The disciple is as it were his ka. 

Thus for the Egyptians, as Sethe and others have pointed out, the wise priest, that is a priest truly initiated into the Wisdom, was regarded as an incarnation of Thoth, and such an one after the death of his body was worshipped as Thoth. 

And so we find at Medinet Habu the remains of a shrine, erected in the time of Ptolemy IX. (Euergetes II.)--146-117 BC.--to a certain High Priest of Memphis, Teos, who is called "Teos the Ibis," [*1] that is Thoth, and so identified with Thoth himself. 

What we learn from the general tradition of this belief in the "incarnation" of Thoth into the perfected disciple of Wisdom, and the ascription of sacred literature to similar though not identical God-names to that of Thoth himself, is that there was on the one 

[p. 464]

hand a firm belief in the unity of the Thoth-tradition, and on the other a necessary division of the sacred literature into older and later periods. The Thoth of the older period was regarded as a God, the Thoth of more recent times as a God-man. [*1] And so we find Plato in the famous passage of the Philebus, 18 B, uncertain whether to speak of Thoth as God or man. 

THE DISCIPLES OF LORD HERMES IN PETOSIRIS AND NECHEPSO 

In the known oldest references to the Thoth-Hermes literature, there has so far not been discovered anything that suggests the existence of a distinction between Hermes [Thoth] and Tat [Thoth]; but the absence of references proves little. Already, however, Nechepso and Petosiris, in the second century B.C., make Hermes the teacher of the younger God-disciples Anubis and Asclepius; in which connection it is of interest to note the following passage from a horoscope for the first year of the Emperor Antoninus Pius, [*2] set up by the priests of Hermes at Thebes--the Greek of which is very faulty and evidently written by "Barbari": 

"After enquiry based on many books, handed down to us by the wise Ancients, the Chaldaeans,--both Petosiris,and especially King Necheus [sic; i.e. Nechepso], in as much as they also took counsel of our Lord Hermes and of Asclepius, that is of Imouthes, son of Hephestus. . . ." [*3] 

[p. 465]

From this we learn that in the second century A.D. the writings of Petosiris and Nechepso, together with the "Chaldaean Books," still formed part of the Temple Library at Thebes; moreover, that Petosiris and Nechepso, in the second century B.C., based themselves on these Books as well as on Books ascribed to both Hermes and Asclepius. Moreover, from the Fragments of Nechepso [*1] we learn that he had before him a sermon of Asclepius called Moirogenesis, concerning the Genesis of Fate, and also Dialogues in which Hermes instructs Asclepius and Anubis concerning the mysteries of astrology. These Trismegistic works must thus be dated prior to the beginning of the second century B.C. 

Sethe, in his essay on Asclepius-Imhotep, has endeavoured to show that this Imuth was originally a man, and that divine honours were first paid to him in the reign of Amasis (Amosis--Aah-mes), about 1700 B.C. 

TOSOTHRUS-ASCLEPIUS 

Manetho, however, tells us another story, when he writes of a certain king of the Third Dynasty (B.C. 3700): "Toso[r]thrus reigned twenty-nine years. He is called Asclepius by the Egyptians, for his medical knowledge. He built a house of hewn stones, and greatly patronised literature." [*2] 

Tosothrus is Tcheser or Tcheser-sa (Dos'er), the second king of the Third Dynasty from Memphis. The "house of hewn stones" which he built, received remarkable confirmation from the excavations which were carried out by the Prussian General Minutoli in 1819, [*3] in the Step-Pyramid of Sakkara. This temple, 

[p. 466]

says Budge (op. cit., i. 219) "is certainly the oldest of all the large buildings which have successfully resisted the action of wind and weather, and destruction by the hand of man." 

In the Inscription of the Seven Famine Years, [*1] moreover, belonging in its present form to the later Ptolemaic period, but a copy of a far more ancient record, we read, in Sethe's restored Greek text: 

"Tosothrus, in whose days (lived) Imouthes. He was considered by the Egyptians to be Asclepius because of his knowledge of the healing art; he discovered the art of building with hewn stones, and, moreover, occupied himself with literature." 

We thus learn that long before Manetho's time there was an Asclepian literature, and not only did this deal with medicine but also with scripture in general and with "masonry." 

IMUTH-ASCLEPIUS THE MASTER MASON AND POET 

That Asclepius was specially occupied with the sacred building-art, may be seen from Sethe's study, whose industry has discovered a book on Temple-building ascribed to Imuth, a "Book that came from Heaven northwards from Memphis." It was according to this Book that Ptolemy X. (Soter II.) and Ptolemy XI. (Alexander I.) enlarged the building of their ancestors at Edfu, "in agreement with the writing concerning the plans of the Temple of Horus, which the chief prelector of the priests, Imhotp, the son of Ptah, had written." 

There were also certain very ancient Sermons (or Songs) of Imhotp, and a saying from one of these 

[p. 467]

[paragraph continues] Sermons, the "Song from the House of King Intf," is given by Sethe as follows: 

"I have heard the words of Imhotp and Hardadaf; they are still much spoken of, but where are their abodes?" 

Perhaps this explains the statement in S. H. I. (Stob., Ec., i. 49; W. p. 467, 4) that Asclepius-Imuth was the inventor of poetry. Imuth was to the Egyptians what Orpheus, Linus or Musaeus was to the Greeks. 

And so Reitzenstein (p. 121) concludes that the tradition of the old Egyptian and Hellenistic literature is unbroken. In Hellenistic times this view of the Divine Son of Ptah of Memphis and of his chief Shrine at Memphis spread widely, and his cult was extended to Thebes and even to Philae. At Thebes he appears united with the Theban Thoth and his younger likeness or image Amenhotep--the twin-brother of Imhotep (Asclepius) Son of Hapu, who is said to have lived as a man under King Amenophis III. (Amen-hetep), 1450 B.C., and who tells us himself how he became acquainted with the "Book of God" and saw in vision the "Pre-eminence of Thoth." [*1] 

The chief Temple of Asclepius at Memphis was still honoured in later times, and even in the days of Jerome its priesthood was renowned for its occult wisdom. [*2] 

AeSCULAPIUS THE HEALER 

Of the Cult of Aesculapius in Greece and of the widespread influence of this ideal there is little need to remind the student of the comparative history of religions; we cannot, however, refrain from appending a paragraph 

[p. 468]

from a remarkable address recently delivered by the Rev. J. Estlin Carpenter to the students of Manchester College, Oxford, [*1] in which he says: 

"Pass beyond the limits of Israel and its hopes, and you enter a world of religious phenomena, so varied as to be practically inexhaustible, and all the patient labour of the last thirty years has only begun to exhibit to us its contents. At every turn you are confronted with beliefs resembling those which pervade our New Testament, so that Prof. Cheyne has recently attempted in a very remarkable little volume, Bible Problems, to trace archaeologically the roots of four great doctrines associated with the person of Jesus--the Virgin Birth, the Descent into Hades, the Resurrection, and the Ascension. The inscriptions reveal to you the very language of Christianity in the making. The hymns and liturgies of other faiths derive their strength from similar ideas, and express similar aspirations. Does Jesus, according to the Gospels, give sight to the blind, and call the dead back to life? So does Aesculapius. He, too, is wondrously born; he, too, is in danger in his infancy. He, too, heals the sick and raises the dead, till Zeus, jealous of this infringement of his prerogatives, smites him with his thunderbolt, and translates him to the world above. But from his heavenly seat he continues to exercise his healing power. His worship spreads all through Greece. After a great plague in Rome, in 291 B.C., it is planted on a sacred island in the Tiber. In the first century of our era you may follow it all round the Eastern Mediterranean. In Greece alone Pausanias mentions sixty-three Asklepieia. There were others in Asia Minor, Egypt, Sicily; nearly two hundred being still traceable. They were both 

[p. 469]

sanctuaries and medical schools. A number of inscriptions relate details of cures, or consecrate the ex-votos, which are still dedicated at Loretto or Lourdes. The temple by the Tiber won special fame in the reign of Antoninus Pius, for the restoration of the sight of a blind man. Aesculapius himself bears the titles 'king' and theos sute'r, 'divine saviour.' He was even suter tun olun, 'saviour of the universe.' In his cosmic significance he was thus identified-with Zeus himself, and on earth he was felt to be 'most loving to man' (cp. Tit. iii. 4). Harnack, in one of the fascinating chapters of his Expansion of Christianity, has traced the action of these influences on later Christianity conceived as a religion of healing or salvation, medicine alike of body and of mind. It must be enough now to remind you that the god was believed to reveal himself to those who sought his aid, and Origen affirms that a great multitude, both of Greeks and barbarians, acknowledge that they 'have frequently seen, and still see, no mere phantom, but Aesculapius himself, healing and doing good, and foretelling the future.'" 

But to pass on to the Trismegistic Asclepius. 

ASCLEPIUS IN TRISMEGISTIC TRADITION

Asclepius comes forward in our literature as the type of a disciple of Trismegistus already trained in philosophy. This prior training must presumably be referred to the Ptah-tradition--Ptah being himself a God of Revelation, that is of teaching by means of apocalypsis, and Asclepius being originally his "son" and "priest." But not only was Ptah a God of apocalypsis generally, but also a God of medicine, as he must needs have been for his son to have learned his wisdom from him. 

[p. 470]

[paragraph continues] This view is brought out in a Hellenistic text which reads as follows: 

"A Remedy from the shrines of Hephaestus [Ptah] at Memphis interpreted by the decision and owing to the philanthropy, they say, of Thrice-greatest Hermes; for he decided that it should be published with a view to man's saving. It was found on a golden tablet written in Egyptian characters." [*1] 

The tradition of the date when Asclepius was admitted to the Trismegistic discipline is given in K. K., 3 (Stob., Ec., i. 49; W. p. 387, 1). After the ascension of Hermes, we are told: 

"To him succeeded Tat, who was at once his son and heir unto these knowledges; and not long afterwards Asclepius-Imuth, according to the will of Ptah who is Hephaestus." 

What precise historical worth this tradition may contain, it is impossible to say; all we can suppose is that there was at some early date a union of two schools of mystic discipline belonging respectively to the Thebaic and Memphitic traditions. This union may have been somewhat analogous to that of the disciples of John the Baptist and of Jesus. What is clear, however, from our Trismegistic writings, is that there is no doubt whatever in the writer's mind that the Trismegistic tradition is in possession of the higher wisdom; and, indeed, C. H., xiii. (xiv.) distinctly allows us to conclude that though. Tat was younger, in so far as he had not the technical training of the Asclepius-grade, it is nevertheless Tat, when he reaches "manhood," and not Asclepius, who succeeds to the mastership of the School. 

Nevertheless we find a number of Trismegistic writings, presupposed especially in "The Definitions of

[p. 471]

[paragraph continues] Asclepius" and in "The Perfect Sermon," in which both Tat and Asclepius share in a common instruction--Asclepius appearing as the older and riper scholar. 

This makes Reitzenstein (p. 122) suppose that this type of what we may call a company of two disciples was invented by the Hermes priests at Thebes, and that it was later on taken over by the Memphitic Ptah-Asclepius priests and developed in their own interest. 

This may be so if we must be compelled to speculate on the dim shades of history which may be recovered from these obscure indications. 

CONCERNING AMMON

Of the Trismegistic writings of Asclepius, Lactantius (D. I., ii. 15, 7) mentions a "Perfect Sermon" to the King (Ammon), [*1] and also refers to a rich ancient literature by Asclepius addressed to the same king. 

Reitzenstein (p. 123), moreover, says that C. H., (xvii.) presupposes writings addressed to the same King Ammon by Tat; but I gather that the persons of the dialogue are really Asclepius and the King, and not Tat, and that Tat has been substituted for Asclepius by some copyist in error. 

However this may be, there was a large literature addressed by Hermes himself to Ammon, as we may see from the distinct statement in P. S. A., i. 2, and also from Stobaeus, Exx. xii.-xix. The same tradition is preserved in the presumably later Hermetic treatise, Iatromathematica, which is also addressed to Ammon. [*2] 

[p. 472]

PROPHET AND KING

Here, then, we have another type of literature, and that, too, very ancient, in which the wise Priest and Prophet is set over against the King as teacher or discoverer of hidden wisdom. This we have already seen to have been the relationship between the Priest and Prophet Petosiris and King Nechepso. But the type goes still further back to pre-Greek times in Egypt. It was, as we have learned from Plutarch, who probably hands on the information direct from Manetho, a necessity that the King, to be a true King, should be initiated into the wisdom of the Priests. 

As we have already seen, Imuth-Asclepius appears in Manetho as an inventor, so also in the charming story put into the mouth of Socrates by Plato in his Phaedrus (274 C) about "the famous old God whose name was Theuth,"--Thoth is the inventor par excellence. In this story--which elicits the remark from Phaedrus: "Yes, Socrates, you can easily invent tales of Egypt, or of any other country"--Thoth takes his inventions to a certain King Thamus for his approval or disapproval, as to whether or no the Egyptians might be allowed the benefit of them. This Thamus was "King of the whole country of Egypt, and dwelt in that great city of upper Egypt which the Hellenes call Egyptian Thebes, and the God Himself is called by them Ammon." 

In Hecataeus, also, Osiris, King of Thebes, has all inventions laid before him, and gives special honour to Hermes whose inventions were far and wide renowned. [*1] 

In this connection it is to be noted that in the Theban Thoth-cult, Thoth was regarded as the Representative

[p. 473]

 of the King and Light-God Ra (or Ammon). And so we read on the tomb of Seti I.: 

"Thou art in my place, my representative. Wherefore are thou moreover called Thoth, Representative of the Light-God Ra." [*1] 

From these and other indications it is quite possible to conclude that Plato has used an ancient Egyptian logos as the basis of his story, and that this logos at a very early period found an echo in written instructions given by Thoth to the King. 

All this took place on purely Egyptian ground, and hence the type of instruction from Thoth-Hermes to Ammon was fairly established in tradition before it was taken over by our Hellenistic Trismegistic writers. 

AMENHOTEP-ASCLEPIUS 

So far, however, I believe, no reference to books written by Imhotep (Asclepius) to Ammon in the pre-Greek period has been discovered. Sethe, [*2] however, tells us that a certain Amenhotep who lived as early as the fifteenth century B.C., was a disciple and seer of Thoth. This Amenhotep was famous as a teacher of wisdom and discoverer of magic books; he was probably also renowned for his own writings as well. Gradually this Amenhotep became blended with Imhotep-Asclepius as his twin-brother, and finally in Ptolemaic times received divine honours at Thebes. Here, then, we have the blending in of another tradition, of a writer of books who was a disciple of Thoth, and was gradually confounded with Asclepius-Imuth, son of Ptah. And that there were two Asclepiuses, an older and a later, we are told distinctly by P. S. A., xxxvii. 3. 

[p. 474]

Of the Sayings of this Asclepius a Greek porcelain [*1] gives us some idea. The first three Sayings, however, are simply taken from the Sayings of the Seven Sages of Greece; the rest may be partially Egyptian. This scrap of evidence, however, is of importance; for already in the third century B.C., Orphic Sayings are known to have been worked up with Egyptian material, and here we have Greek gnomic material blended with an Egyptian Imuth-tradition of Sayings. 

Perhaps still more careful research may reward us with further side-lights on the development of this Asclepius-literature prior to the Greek period, and in its earliest Hellenistic forms. As it is, we are left with the impression that the traces which have been already discovered, justify the remarks made by the writer of our Trismegistic "Definitions of Asclepius unto the King" or "The Perfect Sermon of Asclepius unto the King"--C. H., (xvi.)--as based upon a well-established tradition in the School, concerning the change brought about by putting the Egyptian forms of the Asclepian writings, which were of a very mystical nature, into the more precise forms of the Greek tongue. 

THE SACRED GROUP OF FOUR 

What, however, is clear in "The Perfect Sermon" of Hermes himself, where he gives instruction to his three disciples, Asclepius, Tat and Ammon, assembled in the "holy place," is that the history of the matter is of small moment to the writer of that Sermon. He is dealing with the inner and more intimate side of the teaching. Asclepius, Tat and Ammon are for him the sacred triad, forming with the Master himself the "sacred group of four" (P. S. A., i. 2). 

[p. 475]

With this we may very well compare the group of three made so familiar to us by the Evangelists--the three who were always with the Master in the most intimate moments of His inner life and exaltation--James, John and Peter. 

Now, if the reader will refer to my notes on the last paragraph of Hippolytus' Introduction to the Naassene document, he will see that Clement of Alexandria expressly asserts that: 

"The Lord imparted the Gnosis to James the Just, to John and Peter, after His Resurrection; these delivered it to the rest of the Apostles, and they to the Seventy." 

JAMES, JOHN AND PETER 

Here I would suggest that we have a similarity of conception. Asclepius is the main subsequent teacher, even as James is, in Christian tradition; Peter is the organiser, to whom the rulership over the Church is given--he represents the king-power, and may be equated with Ammon; while John is the Beloved even as is Tat. 

John understands the spirit of the teaching best of all; James is more learned on the formal side; while Peter is the organiser, and in many an apocryphal story is made to display lack of control and want of understanding. 

A most interesting scrap of Johannine tradition will throw some further light on the fact that John succeeded to the spiritual directorship, even as Tat, in our sermons, succeeds to Trismegistus. 

This scrap is an addition to John xvii. 26, from a Codex of the Fourth Gospel, preserved in the Archives of the Templars of St John of Jerusalem in Paris: [*1] 

[p. 476]

"Ye have heard what I said unto you: I am not of this world, the Comforter is among you, teach through the Comforter. As the Father has sent Me, even so send I you. Amen, I say unto you, I am not of this world; but John shall be your father, till he shall go with Me into Paradise. And He anointed them with the Holy Spirit." 

So also in an addition to John xix. 26-30, we read: 

"He saith to His mother, Weep not; I go to My Father and to Eternal Life. Behold thy son! He will keep My place. Then saith He to the disciple, Behold thy mother! Then bowing His head He gave up the Ghost." 

Here then at the Supreme Crisis the Master constitutes John the spiritual Father of the School in His place. So is it with Tat. 

THE TRIAD OF DISCIPLES

The idea of triads and other groups (e.g. of five and seven) united in the Presence of a Master, is familiar to the student of Druidical mysticism. In our "Perfect Sermon" we have such a triad, each disciple distinguished by strongly-marked characteristics; the tuning of these into one harmony, so that, to use another and a familiar simile, the disciples may be as the fingers of one hand, for the Master's use, is a matter of enormous difficulty. One is characterised by Power, another by Knowledge, and another by Love. All three must sink their individually strongest characteristic in a supreme sacrifice, where all blend together into the Wisdom of the Master. This seems to me to be the inner purport of our "Perfect Sermon," and whatever may be the history of the evolution of the 

[p. 477]

forms of the literature, the eternal fact of the nature of the intimate teaching of the Christ to the Three was known to our writer. 

CHNUM THE GOOD DAIMON

Let us now turn to the type of Trismegistic literature in which Osiris and Isis came forward as disciples; and first of all let us take a glance at the God Chnum, Chnubis, or Chnuphis (Knuphis), whose name occurs in so many of the Abraxas and Abraxoid gems. 

Chnum was for Southern Egypt precisely what Ptah of Memphis was for Northern Egypt. He was the Fashioner of men, even as a potter makes pots on a wheel. Chnum was Demiurge and God of the heart. The chief centre of his cult was at Syene and the Island of Elephantine. Here he was regarded as the Father of Osiris. And so we hear of astrological dialogues between Chnum and Osiris, as, for instance, when we are told: 

"And all that Kouphis, who is with them [the Egyptians], the Good Daimon, handed on, and his disciple Osiris philosophized." [*1] 

These writings were grouped with those of Nechepso, and also with our Trismegistic writings. Compare the passage in Firmicus Maternus which runs: 

"All things which Mercurius (Hermes) and Chnubis [?] handed on to Aesculapius (Asclepius), which Petosiris discovered and Nechepso." [*2] 

[p. 478]

OSIRIS DISCIPLE OF AGATHODAIMON THE THRICE-GREATEST 

The Patristic references to our Trismegistic literature further imform us that Osiris was regarded as the disciple of Agathodaimon, who in them bears the name of Thrice-greatest. [*1] There is, however, nothing to show that Hermes himself appears in them as the disciple of Chnubis, as Reitzenstein says (p. 126). The introductory phrase of Lactantius to Frag. xix. runs: "But I [L.] will call to mind the words of Hermes the Thrice-greatest; in the 'To Asclepius' he says: 'Osiris said: How, then, O thou Thrice-greatest, [thou] Good Daimon, did Earth in its entirety appear?'" 

Here we have a sermon of Hermes quoting from a tradition in which Osiris appears as the disciple of Agathodaimon, who is also called Trismegistus; that is, the Agathodaimon-Osiris Dialogue type was old, and presumably pertained to one of the earliest forms of the Trismegistic literature, probably contemporary with the most ancient Poemandres type. This type seems to have borne impressions of the form of the "Books of the Chaldaeans" type of cosmogenesis, which we have seen to have strongly influenced Petosiris and Nechepso in the early second century B.C. 

Agathodaimon is to Osiris as Poemandres to Hermes. 

LOGOS-MlND THE GOOD DAIMON 

So also in the early Alchemical literature there is a treatise of Agathodaimon addressed to Osiris, and in it others are presupposed. [*2] These Alchemical teachings of the Good Daimon are frequently in close contact with 

[p. 479]

our Trismegistic doctrines; moreover, in the same literature, Hermes refers to Agathodaimon and appears to regard himself as his disciple. [*1] It thus may be supposed that it was from Chnum that was originally derived the tradition of the Agathodaimonites. So thinks Reitzenstein; but I do not think that we have sufficient evidence as yet for so general a conclusion. The term Agathodaimon is a very general one, it is true, but the whole idea cannot be refunded into Chnum; in fact, Osiris is quite as much Agathodaimon as Chnum, and in C. H., xii. (xiii.), which deals with the General Mind, Good Mind, or Good Daimon, Agathodaimon is taken in the most general sense, and in the three quotations there made by Hermes from the "Sayings of the Good Daimon" ( section section 1, 8, 13), [*2] we find that they are in the words of Heracleitus as inspired by the Logos; so that in reality Agathodaimon must be equated with Logos. The origin of Agathodaimon is then not solely Chnum; and Hermes therefore cannot be spoken of as the disciple of Chnubis, unless we can cite texts in which Thoth is so described. 

In our Trismegistic literature the teaching is quite simple and distinct; as, for instance, in C. H., x. (xi.) 23: "He [Mind] is the Good Daimon." 

When, however, Reitzenstein (p. 128) declares that the sentence in  section 25 of the same sermon, "For this cause can a man dare say that man on earth is God subject to death, while God in heaven is man from death immune," [*3] is a saying belonging to the 

[p. 480]

[paragraph continues] Chnuphis-literature, we think he is going beyond the limits of probable conjecture, unless we substitute for Chnuphis the general term Agathodaimon in the sense of Logos. 

When again Reitzenstein (p. 129) says that the fragments he has adduced show that Hermes was a later addition in the Agathodaimon-literature, and gradually pushed on one side Osiris the Son of the God of Revelation, we are not convinced that we have correctly recovered the "history"--for in the great Osiris-myth it is Hermes who is always the teacher of wisdom and not Osiris. 

CHNUM GOOD MIND THE AeON

Nevertheless that a wide-spread Chnuphis-literature, in the Agathodaimonistic sense, existed prior to the second century B.C., Reitzenstein has shown by a number of interesting quotations (pp. 129-133). In Hellenistic times the worship of Chnuphis as the Primal Deity and God of Revelation was strongly established, and, most interesting of all for us, his symbol was the serpent. The symbol, then, of Agathodaimon as Logos was the Serpent of Wisdom, and we are in contact with the line of tradition of the Gnostic Ophites and Naassenes. And so also in Ptolemaic times we find his syzygy, Isis, also symbolised as a serpent, and both of them frequently as serpents with human heads; they are both "as wise as serpents." And as Horus was their son, so we find the hawk-headed symbol of that God united with a serpent body. So also we find Agathodaimon, in his sun-aspect, symbolised as a serpent with a lion's head. [*1] He is the Aeon.

[p. 481]

ISIS, LADY OF WISDOM, DISCIPLE OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

In addition to the types of Hermes and his disciples, and Agathodaimon and his disciples, we have also in our Trismegistic literature another type--namely, Isis and her disciples. Isis is the ancient Lady of all wisdom, and Teacher of all magic. In the early Hellenistic period she is substituted for Hermes as Orderer of the cosmos, [*1] while Plutarch calls her Lady of the Heart and Tongue even as is Hermes. [*2] She "sees" the teaching. 

As her disciple, she has in the Stobaean Ex. xxxi. [*3] a king, probably King Ammon. 

In a Magic Papyrus she even appears as teacher of Asclepius. [*4] But the more usual and natural type is that of Isis as teacher of her son Horus, and so we find Lucian speaking of Pythagoras visiting Egypt to learn wisdom of her prophets, and saying that the sage of Samos descended into the adyta and learned the Books of Horus and Isis. [*5] To this type of literature belongs our lengthy Stobaean Exx. xxv.-xxvii. 

But in all of this Isis owes her wisdom to face to face instruction by the most ancient Hermes, with whom she gets into contact through spiritual vision. All this I have discussed in the Commentaries to Exx. xxv.-xxvii.; the conclusion being that to the mind of the Poemandrists, no matter how ancient might be any line of tradition, whether of Agathodaimon or Osiris or Isis, the direct teaching of the Mind transcended it. 

Footnotes

^460:1 See Maspero, op. cit., p. 80. Which of the numerous opp. citt. of Maspero's this may be is not clear from Budge's reference.

^460:2 Cf. Brugsch, Thesaurus, p. 783; Religion, p. 527. Sethe, Imhotep, 1903--so Budge; but, more accurately, Sethe (K.), Untersuchungen zur Geschichte und Altertumskunde Agyptens, ii. 4 ("Imhotep, der Asklepios der Agypter").

^461:1 For Asclepius among the Greeks, see Thraemer's article "Asklepios" in Reseller's Lex. d. . . . Mythologie (Leipzig, 1884-1900), i. 615-641; also the "Cornell Studies in Classical Philosophy," No. III., The Cult of Asklepios, by Alice Walton, Ph.D. (Ithaca, N.Y., U.S.A., 1894).

^462:1 Wessely, Denkschr. d. K. K. Akad. (1893), p. 38, 11. 550 ff.; Kenyon, Cat. of Gk. Pap., p. 102.

^462:2 Griffith, in Zeitschr. f. ag. Sprache (1900), p. 90.

^462:3 According to Manetho; see Muller, Manetho Fragm., 4.

^463:1 Teephibis. Cf. Catal. Cod. Astral. Graec., i. 167: "Hermes Phibi the Thrice-greatest." Sethe (op. sup. cit.) would equate this Teephibis with Hermes of Thebes, in connection with the statement of Clement of Alexandria (Strom., I. xxi. 134): "Of those, too, who once lived as men among the Egyptians, but who have been made Gods by human opinion, are Hermes of Thebes and Asclepius of Memphis." If this is correct, we have our Trismegistus nourishing as Teephibis at the end of the second century B.C. But there seems to my mind to be nothing definite in Sethe's contention.

^464:1 There is also an older and younger Isis in the K. K. extracts, and also in both these and in P. S. A. an older and younger Asclepius.

^464:2 R. (p. 119) has "des Kaisers Antonius"; but I know of no Emperor so called. The first years of Antoninus Pius would be 138-139 A.D.

^464:3 Pap. du Louvre, 19 bis, Notices et Extraits, xviii. 2, 136.

^465:1 Riess, Fr. 25.

^465:2 Cory, An. Frags., p. 100. Budge, A History of Egypt (London, 1902), i. 218.

^465:3 Reise zum Tempel des Jupiter Ammon, pp. 296 ff.

^466:1 A rock inscription found on the cataract island Sehel. R., p. 129.

^467:1 R., p. 124. Cf. Sethe, Aegyptiaca, Festschrift fur G. Ebers, pp. 106 ff.

^467:2 Ammian. Marc., xxii. 14. 7; Vit, Hil., 21.

^468:1 "Christianity in the Light of Historical Science," in The Examiner (London), Oct. 21, 1905, pp. 668 ff.

^470:1 Cod. Antinori 101, fol. 361. 

^471:1 Probably our C. H. (xvi.).

^471:2 Camerarius, Astrologica (Nurnberg, 1537); Hermetis Iatromath., ed. Hoeschel (1597); Ideler, Physici et Medici Graeci Minores, i. 387 and 430. Iatromathematici were those who practised medicine in conjunction with astrology, as was done in Egypt (Procl., Paraph. Ptol., p. 24).

^472:1 Diodor., I. 15, 16.

^473:1 Brugsch, Religion u. Myth. d. alt. Ag., p. 451.

^473:2 Op. sup. cit., ibid.

^474:1 Published by Wilcken in the "Festschrift fur Ebers," pp. 142 ff.

^475:1 Given by Thilo, Codex Apocryphus Novi Testamenti (Leipzig, 1832), p. 880. Cf. Pick (B.), The Extra-Canonical Life of Christ (New York, 1903), p. 279.

^477:1 Cramer, Anecd. Ox., iii. 171, 20.

^477:2 Fir. Mat., iv. prooem. 5 (Skutsch and Kroll, p. 196, 21). The "and Chnubis" is the emendation of R. for the unintelligible letters "einhnusuix."

^478:1 Cf. Lactantius Fragg., xiv., xix., xxi., xxii.

^478:2 Berthelot, Les Alchimistes grecs, Texte, p. 268.

^479:1 Op. cit., pp. 125, 156-263.

^479:2 We meet with a similar collection of Sayings, or Summaries of the chief points of teaching, in the Stobaean Ex. i. 7 ff., belonging to the Tat-literature, and also in (C. H., x. (xi.), xiv. (xv.), and (xvi.).

^479:3 A very similar phrase occurs in Dio Cassius, Fr. 30; i. 87, ed. Boiss.

^480:1 See the Nechepso Fragment 29 (Riess, p. 379).

^481:1 R., Zwei relig. Frag., 104 ff.

^481:2 De Is. et Os., xlviii.

^481:3 With heading: "Of Hermes from the [Sermon] of Isis to Horus."

^481:4 Wessely, Denkschr. d. K. K. Akad. (1893), p. 41, 1. 633.

^481:5 Alectruon, 18.




===== BOOK: th2.txt =====


    
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

Thrice-Greatest Hermes 

Studies in Hellenistic Theosophyand Gnosis 

Being a Translation of the Extant Sermons and Fragments of the Trismegistic Literature, with Prolegomena, Commentaries, and Notes 

By

G. R. S. Mead 

Volume II.--Sermons

London and Benares

The Theosophical Publishing Society 

[1906]

Prepared for sacred-texts.com, February 2009. This text is in the public domain because it was published prior to 1922.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

Contents

I. CORPUS HERMETICUM

CORP. HERM. I.

 

POeMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN

 <page 3>-<page 20>

 COMMENTARY--

      Of Vision and Apocalypsis

 <page 20>

      The Great and Little Man

 <page 23> 

      The Presence

 <page 24> 

      The Vision of Creation

 <page 25> 

      The Descent of the Logos

 <page 27> 

      The Revelation of the Pleroma

 <page 28> 

      The Second Emanation

 <page 33> 

      The Descent of Man

 <page 34> 

      The First Men

 <page 37> 

      "Increase and Multiply"

 <page 38> 

      Love

 <page 39> 

      The Way of Deathlessness

 <page 39> 

      The Ascent of the Soul

 <page 41> 

      The Eighth Sphere

 <page 42> 

      The Three "Bodies" of the Buddha

 <page 44> 

      The Preaching of the Gnosis

 <page 47> 

      A Hymn of Praise and Prayer for the Gnosis

 <page 49> 

      The Name "Poimandres"

 <page 50> 

      The Good Shepherd

 <page 52> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. (II.) 

 

THE GENERAL SERMON

 <page 58> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. II. (III.) 

 

TO ASCLEPIUS

 <page 59>-<page 68>

 COMMENTARY--

      "An Introduction to the Gnosis of the Nature of All Things"

 <page 68> 

      Space is a Plenum

 <page 70>

      The Spouse of Deity

 <page 71> 

      God is Cause that Spirit is

 <page 71> 

      He who is without a Wife is Half a Man

 <page 73> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. III. (IV.) 

 

THE SACRED SERMON

 <page 75>-<page 77> 

 COMMENTARY--

      Text and Title

 <page 78> 

      The Trinity

 <page 78> 

      From the System of the Nicolaitans

 <page 79> 

      The "Books of the Chaldaeans"

 <page 81> 

      The "Flood"

 <page 83> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. IV. (V.) 

 

THE CUP OR MONAD

 <page 85>-<page 91> 

 COMMENTARY--

      The Title

 <page 92> 

      The Baptism of the Mind

 <page 93> 

      The Holy Grail

 <page 94> 

      The "Hating of the Body"

 <page 95> 

      The Gnosis and its Blessings

 <page 97> 

      The Ancient Path

 <page 98> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. V. (VI.) 

 

THOUGH UNMANIFEST GOD IS MOST MANIFEST

 <page 99>-<page 106> 

 COMMENTARY-- 

      The Title

 <page 106> 

      Maya 

 <page 106> 

      The Higher Pantheism or Panmonism

 <page 108>

      Hymn to All-God

 <page 108> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. VI. (VII.) 

 

IN GOD ALONE IS GOOD AND ELSEWHERE NOWHERE

 <page 110>-<page 114> 

 COMMENTARY-- 

      The Title

 <page 115> 

      Dualism?

 <page 115> 

      God the Pleroma of Good 

 <page 117> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. VII. (VIII.) 

 

THE GREATEST ILL AMONG MEN IS IGNORANCE OF GOD

 <page 120>-<page 121>

 COMMENTARY-- 

      A Preaching

 <page 122> 

      The Probable Completion of an Oxyrhynchus Logion 

 <page 122> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. VIII. (IX.) 

 

THAT NO ONE OF EXISTING THINGSDOTH PERISH, BUT MEN IN ERRORSPEAK OF THEIR CHANGES AS DESTRUCTIONS AND AS DEATHS

 <page 124>-<page 127> 

 COMMENTARY-- 

      The Cosmos as "Second God"

 <page 127> 

      The Law of Apokatastasis 

 <page 128> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. IX. (X.) 

 

ON THOUGHT AND SENSE

 <page 129>-<page 136> 

 COMMENTARY-- 

      Title and Ordering 

 <page 136> 

      "Sense-and-Thought"

 <page 137> 

      "Those in Gnosis" 

 <page 137> 

      The True Gnostic 

 <page 138> 

      The Goal of the Gnosis 

 <page 139> 

      The Possibility of Knowing God 

 <page 140> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. X. (XI.) 

 

THE KEY

 <page 141>-<page 158> 

 COMMENTARY-- 

      The Consummation of the "General Sermons" 

 <page 159> 

      The Will of God

 <page 160> 

      Of Gnosis and Ecstasis

 <page 161> 

      Of Apotheosis

 <page 163> 

      The Metamorphoses of the Soul

 <page 163> 

      The Ladder of Being

 <page 165> 

      Concerning Transmigration

 <page 166> 

      Gnosis the Virtue of the Soul

 <page 167> 

      The Vehicles of the Soul

 <page 167> 

      The Dual Soul

 <page 169> 

      "He who Stands"

 <page 170> 

      The Olympian Path

 <page 171> 

      "When Mind becomes a Daimon"

 <page 171> 

      The "Scourge" of the Christ

 <page 173> 

      The Dispensation of the Universe

 <page 173> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. XI. (XII.) 

 

MIND UNTO HERMES

 <page 175>-<page 189> 

 COMMENTARY-- 

      Title and Form 

 <page 190> 

      The Aeon-Lore 

 <page 191> 

      The Root of Form 

 <page 193> 

      "Become all Things" 

 <page 194> 

      The Good's own Path 

 <page 196> 

      Concerning India 

 <page 197> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. XII. (XIII.) 

 

ABOUT THE COMMON MIND

 <page 199>-<page 212> 

 COMMENTARY-- 

      The Sayings of the Good Daimon 

 <page 213> 

      Hermes and Basilides 

 <page 215> 

      The Sermons on Fate 

 <page 217> 

      Materiality and Corporality are Energies of God 

 <page 218> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. XIII. (XIV.) 

 

THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN

 <page 219>-<page 233> 

 

THE SECRET HYMNODY

 <page 230>-<page 232> 

 COMMENTARY-- 

      Concerning the Title 

 <page 234> 

      The Term "Apocryphon" 

 <page 234> 

      The Three Stages of Probation 

 <page 236> 

      The Mount of Initiation 

 <page 238> 

      The Birth from Above 

 <page 239> 

      The Virgin-Birth 

 <page 240> 

      The Race of the Logos 

 <page 241> 

      The Self-taught 

 <page 242> 

      The New Creation 

 <page 243> 

      The Way of Birth in God 

 <page 244> 

      Of the Ten and the Twelve 

 <page 245> 

      The Dawn of Cosmic Consciousness 

 <page 249> 

      The Vow of Silence 

 <page 250> 

      Of the Ogdoad 

 <page 251> 

      A Hymn for Morning and for Evening Prayer 

 <page 252> 

      A Theurgic Praise-Giving 

 <page 253> 

      "Through the Word" 

 <page 255> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. XIV. (XV.) 

 

A LETTER TO ASCLEPIUS

 <page 257>-<page 263> 

 COMMENTARY-- 

      Asclepius and Tat 

 <page 263> 

      Compare with "Mind unto Hermes" 

 <page 265> 

      The Good Husbandman 

 <page 265> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. (XVI.) 

 

THE DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS UNTO KING AMMON

 <page 266>-<page 276>

 COMMENTARY-- 

      The Title 

 <page 277> 

      A Tradition Concerning the Trismegistic Literature 

 <page 278> 

      A Speculation as to Date 

 <page 281> 

      The Delineation of the Sun 

 <page 282> 

      Concerning the Daimones 

 <page 282> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. (XVII.) 

 

OF ASCLEPIUS TO THE KING

 

 <page 285>-<page 286>

 COMMENTARY-- 

      On the Adoration of Images 

 <page 286> 

  

 

CORP. HERM. (XVIII.) 

 

THE ENCOMIUM OF KINGS

 <page 288>-<page 298> 

 COMMENTARY-- 

      The Apology of a Poemandrist 

 <page 298> 

      Speculation as to Date 

 <page 299> 

      The Story of the, Pythic Grasshopper 

 <page 300> 

      The True King 

 <page 302> 

      The Fellow-Rulers of the Height 

 <page 302> 

  

 

II. THE PERFECT SERMON; OR THE ASCLEPIUS

 <page 307>-<page 390> 

 COMMENTARY-- 

      The Title

 <page 390> 

      The Old Latin Translation and the Greek Original 

 <page 391> 

      Of the Writer and the Persons of the Dialogue 

 <page 393> 

      The Doctrine of the Will of God 

 <page 395> 

      Concerning Spirit and the All-Sense 

 <page 396> 

      The Prophetic Utterances 

 <page 398> 

      The Proscription of the Worship of the Gods 

 <page 399> 

      The Last Hope of the Religion of the Mind 

 <page 401> 

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

I

Corpus Hermeticum

[p. 2]

[p. 3]

CORPUS HERMETICUM I.

 

POeMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN

(Text: R. 328-338; P. 1-18; Pat. 5b-8.) [*1]

1. IT chanced once on a time my mind was meditating on the things that are, [*2] my thought was raised to a great height, the senses of my body being held back--just as men are who are weighed down with sleep after a fill of food, or from fatigue of body.

Methought a Being more than vast, in size beyond all bounds, called out my name and saith: What wouldst thou hear and see, and what hast thou in mind to learn and know?

2. And I do say: Who art thou?

He saith: I am Man-Shepherd, [*3] Mind of all-

[p. 4]

masterhood [*1]; I know what thou desirest and I'm with thee everywhere.

3. [And] I reply: I long to learn the things that are, and comprehend their nature, and know God. This is, I said, what I desire to hear.

He answered back to me: Hold in thy mind all thou wouldst know, and I will teach thee.

4. E'en with these words His aspect changed, [*2] and straightway, in the twinkling of an eye, all things were opened to me, and I see a Vision limitless, all things turned into Light,--sweet, joyous [Light]. And I became transported as I gazed.

But in a little while Darkness came settling down on part [of it], awesome and gloomy, coiling in sinuous folds, [*3] so that methought it like unto a snake. [*4]

And then the Darkness changed into some sort of a Moist Nature, tossed about beyond all power of words, belching out smoke as from a

[p. 5]

fire, and groaning forth a wailing sound that beggars all description.

[And] after that an outcry inarticulate came forth from it, as though it were a Voice of Fire.

5. [Thereon] out of the Light . . . [*1] a Holy Word (Logos) [*2] descended on that Nature. And upwards to the height from the Moist Nature leaped forth pure Fire; light was it, swift and active too.

The Air, too, being light, followed after the Fire; from out the Earth-and-Water rising up to Fire so that it seemed to hang therefrom.

But Earth-and-Water stayed so mingled each with other, that Earth from Water no one could discern. [*3] Yet were they moved to hear by reason of the Spirit-Word (Logos) pervading them.

6. Then saith to me Man-Shepherd: Didst understand this Vision what it means?

Nay; that shall I know, I said.

That Light, He said, am I, thy God, Mind, prior to Moist Nature which appeared from Darkness; the Light-Word (Logos) [that appeared] from Mind is Son of God.

[p. 6]

What then?--say I.

Know that what sees in thee [*1] and hears is the Lord's Word (Logos); but Mind is Father-God. Not separate are they the one from other; just in their union [rather] is it Life consists.

Thanks be to Thee, I said.

So, understand the Light [He answered], and make friends with it.

7. And speaking thus He gazed for long into my eyes, [*2] so that I trembled at the look of Him.

But when He raised His head, I see in Mind the Light, [but] now in Powers no man could number, and Cosmos [*3] grown beyond all bounds, and that the Fire was compassed round about by a most mighty Power, and [now] subdued had come unto a stand.

And when I saw these things I understood by reason of Man-Shepherd's Word (Logos).

8. But as I was in great astonishment, He saith to me again: Thou didst behold in Mind the Archetypal Form whose being is before beginning without end. Thus spake to me Man-Shepherd.

And I say: Whence then have Nature's elements their being?

To this He answer gives: From Will of God.

[p. 7]

[paragraph continues] [Nature [*1]] received the Word (Logos), and gazing on the Cosmos Beautiful [*2] did copy it, making herself into a cosmos, by means of her own elements and by the births of souls.

 9. And God-the-Mind, being male and female both, as Light and Life subsisting, brought forth another Mind to give things form, who, God as he was of Fire and Spirit, [*3] formed Seven Rulers who enclose the cosmos that the sense perceives. [*4] Men call their ruling Fate. [*5]

10. Straightway from out the downward elements God's Reason (Logos) [*6] leaped up to Nature's pure formation, and was at-oned with the Formative Mind; for it was co-essential with it. [*7] And Nature's downward elements were thus left reason-less, so as to be pure matter.

11. Then the Formative Mind ([at-oned] with Reason), he who surrounds the spheres and spins them with his whirl, set turning his formations, and let them turn from a beginning boundless unto an endless end. For that the circulation

[p. 8]

of these [spheres] begins where it doth end, as Mind doth will.

And from the downward elements Nature brought forth lives reason-less; for He did not extend the Reason (Logos) [to them]. The Air brought forth things winged; the Water things that swim, and Earth-and-Water one from another parted, as Mind willed. And from her bosom Earth produced what lives she had, four-footed things and reptiles, beasts wild and tame.

 12. But All-Father Mind, being Life and Light, did bring forth Man [*1] co-equal to Himself, with whom He fell in love, as being His own child; for he was beautiful beyond compare, the Image of his Sire. In very truth, God fell in love with His own Form [*2]; and on him did bestow all of His own formations.

13. And when he gazed upon what the Enformer had created in the Father, [Man] too wished to enform; and [so] assent was given him by the Father. [*3]

Changing his state to the formative sphere, [*4] in that he was to have his whole authority, [*5] he

[p. 9]

gazed upon his Brother's creatures. [*1] They fell in love with him, and gave him each a share of his own ordering. [*2]

And after that he had well-learned their essence and had become a sharer in their nature, he had a mind to break right through the Boundary of their spheres, and to subdue [*3] the might of that which pressed upon the Fire. [*4]

14. So he who hath the whole authority o'er [all] the mortals in the cosmos and o'er its lives irrational, bent his face downwards through [*5] the Harmony, [*6] breaking right through its strength, and showed to downward Nature God's fair Form.

And when she saw that Form of beauty which can never satiate, and him who [now] possessed within himself each single energy of [all seven] Rulers as well as God's [own] Form, she smiled with love; for 'twas as though she'd seen the image of Man's fairest form upon her Water, his shadow on her Earth.

[p. 10]

He in his turn beholding the form like to himself, existing in her, in her Water, loved it and willed to live in it; and with the will came act, [*1] and [so] he vivified the form devoid of reason.

And Nature took the object of her love and wound herself completely round him, and they were intermingled, for they were lovers.

15. And this is why beyond all creatures on the earth man is twofold; mortal because of body, but because of the essential Man immortal.

Though deathless and possessed of sway o'er all, yet doth he suffer as a mortal doth, subject to Fate.

Thus though above the Harmony, within the Harmony he hath become a slave. Though male-female, [*2] as from a Father male-female, and though he's sleepless from a sleepless [Sire], yet is he overcome [by sleep].

 16. Thereon [I say: Teach on], [*3] O Mind of me, for I myself as well [*4] am amorous of the Word (Logos).

The Shepherd said: This is the mystery kept hid until this day.

[p. 11]

Nature embraced by Man brought forth a wonder, oh so wonderful. For as he had the nature of the Concord [*1] of the Seven, who, as I said to thee, [were made] of Fire and Spirit [*2]--Nature delayed not, but immediately brought forth seven "men," in correspondence with the natures of the Seven, male-female and moving in the air. [*3]

Thereon [I said]: O Shepherd, . . . [*4]; for now I'm filled with great desire and long to hear; do not run off. [*5]

The Shepherd said: Keep silence, for not as yet have I unrolled for thee the first discourse (logos).

Lo! I am still, I said.

17. In such wise then, as I have said, the generation of these seven came to pass. Earth was as woman, her Water filled with longing; ripeness she took from Fire, spirit from Aether. Nature thus brought forth frames to suit the form of Man.

And Man from Life and Light changed into soul and mind,--from Life to soul, from Light to mind.

And thus continued all the sense-world's

[p. 12]

parts [*1] until the period of their end and new beginnings.

 18. Now listen to the rest of the discourse (logos) which thou dost long to hear.

The period being ended, the bond that bound them all was loosened by God's Will. For all the animals being male-female, at the same time with man were loosed apart; some became partly male, some in like fashion [partly] female. And straightway God spake by His Holy Word (Logos):

"Increase ye in increasing, and multiply in multitude, ye creatures and creations all; and man that hath Mind in him, let him learn to know that he himself is deathless, and that the cause of death is love, [*2] though Love is all." [*3]

19. When He said this, His Forethought [*4] did by means of Fate and Harmony effect their couplings and their generations founded. And so all things were multiplied according to their kind.

And he who thus hath learned to know himself, hath reached that Good which doth transcend abundance; but he who through a love that leads astray, expends his love upon his body,--

[p. 13]

he stays in Darkness wandering, [*1] and suffering through his senses things of Death.

20. What is the so great fault, said I, the ignorant commit, that they should be deprived of deathlessness?

Thou seem'st, he said, O thou, not to have given heed to what thou heardest. Did not I bid thee think?

Yea do I think, and I remember, and therefore give Thee thanks.

If thou didst think [thereon], [said He], tell me: Why do they merit death who are in Death?

It is because the gloomy Darkness is the root and base of the material frame; from it [*2] came the Moist Nature; from this [*3] the body in the sense-world was composed; and from this [body] Death doth the Water drain.

21. Right was thy thought, O thou! But how doth "he who knows himself, go unto Him," as God's Word (Logos) hath declared?

And I reply: the Father of the universals doth consist of Light and Life, and from Him Man was born.

Thou sayest well, [thus] speaking. Light and Life is Father-God, and from Him Man was born.

If then thou learnest that thou art thyself of

[p. 14]

[paragraph continues] Life and Light, and that thou [only] happen'st to be out of them, thou shalt return again to Life. Thus did Man-Shepherd speak.

But tell me further, Mind of me, I cried, how shall I come to Life again . . . . for God doth say: "The man who hath Mind in him, let him learn to know that he himself [is deathless]."

22. Have not all men then Mind?

Thou sayest well, O thou, thus speaking. I, Mind, myself am present with holy men and good, the pure and merciful, men who live piously.

[To such] my presence doth become an aid, and straightway they gain gnosis of all things, and win the Father's love by their pure lives, and give Him thanks, invoking on Him blessings, and chanting hymns, intent on Him with ardent love.

And ere they give the body up unto its proper death, they turn them with disgust from its sensations, from knowledge of what things they operate. [*1] Nay, it is I, the Mind, that will not let the operations which befall the body, work to their [natural] end. For being door-keeper I'll close up [all] the entrances, and cut the mental actions off which base and evil energies induce.

23. But to the Mind-less ones, the wicked and depraved, the envious and covetous, and those who murder do and love impiety, I am far off,

[p. 15]

yielding my place to the Avenging Daimon, who sharpening the fire, tormenteth him and addeth fire to fire upon him, and rusheth on him through his senses, thus rendering him the readier for transgressions of the law, so that he meets with greater torment; nor doth he ever cease to have desire for appetites inordinate, insatiately striving in the dark. [*1]

24. Well hast thou taught me all, as I desired, O Mind. And now, pray, tell me further of the nature of the Way Above as now it is [for me]. [*2]

To this Man-Shepherd said: When thy material body is to be dissolved, first thou surrenderest the body by itself unto the work of change, and thus the form thou hadst doth vanish, and thou surrenderest thy way of life, [*3] void of its energy, unto the Daimon. [*4] The body's senses next pass back into their sources, becoming separate, and resurrect as energies; and passion and desire [*5] withdraw unto that nature which is void of reason.

25. And thus it is that man doth speed his way thereafter upwards through the Harmony.

[p. 16]

To the first zone he gives the Energy of Growth and Waning; unto the second [zone], Device of Evils [now] de-energized [*1]; unto the third, the Guile of the Desires de-energized; unto the fourth, his Domineering Arrogance, [also] de-energized; unto the fifth, unholy Daring and the Rashness of Audacity, de-energized; unto the sixth, Striving for Wealth by evil means, deprived of its aggrandisement; and to the seventh zone, Ensnaring Falsehood, de-energized. [*2]

26. And then, with all the energizings of the Harmony stript from him, clothed in his proper Power, he cometh to that Nature which belongs unto the Eighth, [*3] and there with those-that-are hymneth the Father.

They who are there welcome his coming there with joy; and he, made like to them that sojourn there, doth further hear the Powers who are above the Nature that belongs unto the Eighth, singing their songs of praise to God in language of their own.

And then they, in a band, [*4] go to the Father home; of their own selves they make surrender of themselves to Powers, and [thus] becoming Powers they are in God. This the good end for

[p. 17]

those who have gained Gnosis--to be made one with God.

Why shouldst thou then delay? Must it not be, since thou hast all received, that thou shouldst to the worthy point the way, in order that through thee the race of mortal kind may by [thy] God be saved?

27. This when He'd said, Man-Shepherd mingled with the Powers. [*1]

 But I, with thanks and blessings unto the Father of the universal [Powers], was freed, full of the power He had poured into me, and full of what He'd taught me of the nature of the All and of the loftiest Vision.

And I began to preach to men the Beauty of Devotion and of Gnosis:

O ye people, earth-born folk, ye who have given yourselves to drunkenness and sleep and ignorance of God, be sober now, cease from your surfeit, cease to be glamoured by irrational sleep [*2]!

28. And when they heard, they came with one accord. Whereon I say:

[p. 18]

Ye earth-born folk, why have ye given up yourselves to Death, while yet ye have the power of sharing Deathlessness? Repent, O ye, who walk with Error arm in arm and make of Ignorance the sharer of your board; get ye from out the light of Darkness, and take your part in Deathlessness, forsake Destruction!

29. And some of them with jests upon their lips [*1] departed [from me], abandoning themselves unto the Way of Death; others entreated to be taught, casting themselves before my feet.

But I made them arise, and I became a leader of the Race [*2] towards home, teaching the words (logoi), how and in what way they shall be saved. I sowed in them the words (logoi) of wisdom [*3]; of Deathless Water were they given to drink. [*4]

And when even was come and all sun's beams began to set, I bade them all give thanks to God. And when they had brought to an end the giving of their thanks, each man returned to his own resting place.

 30. But I recorded in my heart Man-Shepherd's benefaction, and with my every hope fulfilled more than rejoiced. For body's sleep became

[p. 19]

the soul's awakening, [*1] and closing of the eyes--true vision, pregnant with Good my silence, and the utterance of my word (logos) begetting of good things.

All this befell me from my Mind, that is Man-Shepherd, Word (Logos) of all masterhood, [*2] by whom being God-inspired I came unto the Plain of Truth. [*3] Wherefore with all my soul and strength thanksgiving [*4] give I unto Father-God.

 31. Holy art Thou, O God, the universals' Father.

Holy art Thou, O God, whose Will perfects itself by means of its own Powers.

Holy art Thou, O God, who willeth to be known and art known by Thine own.

Holy art Thou, who didst by Word (Logos) make to consist the things that are.

Holy art Thou, of whom All-nature hath been made an Image.

Holy art Thou, whose Form Nature hath never made.

Holy art Thou, more powerful than all power.

Holy art Thou, transcending all pre-eminence.

Holy Thou art, Thou better than all praise.

[p. 20]

Accept my reason's [*1] offerings pure, from soul and heart for aye stretched up to Thee, O Thou unutterable, unspeakable, Whose Name naught but the Silence can express.

32. Give ear to me who pray that I may ne'er of Gnosis fail, [Gnosis] which is our common Being's nature [*2]; and fill me with Thy Power, and with this Grace [of Thine], that I may give the Light to those in ignorance of the Race, my Brethren, and Thy Sons.

For this cause I believe, and I bear witness; I go to Life and Light. Blessed art Thou, O Father. Thy Man [*3] would holy be as Thou art holy, e'en as Thou gavest him Thy full authority [*4] [to be].

Footnotes

^3:1 P. = Parthey (G.), Hermetis Trismegisti Poemander (Berlin; 1854). Pat. = Patrizzi (F.), Nova de Universis Philosophia (Venice; 1593).

^3:2 peri tun ontun.

^3:3 Poimandres.

^4:1 o teis aythentias nous. The aythentia was the summa potestas of all things; see R. 8, n. 1; and  section 30 below. Cf. also C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 15.

^4:2 ellage tei ideai.

^4:3 skolius espeiramenon. The sense is by no means certain. Menard translates "de forme sinueuse"; Everard, "coming down obliquely"; Chambers, "sinuously terminated." But cf. in the Sethian system "the sinuous Water--that is, Darkness (see Hipp., Philos., v. 19).

^4:4 Cf. Hipp., Philos., v. 9 (S. 170, 71): "They say the Serpent is the Moist Essence."

^5:1 A lacuna of six letters in the text.

^5:2 The idea of the Logos was the central concept of Hellenistic theology; it was thus a word of many meanings, signifying chiefly Reason and Word, but also much else. I have accordingly throughout added the term Logos after the English equivalent most suitable to the context.

^5:3 Cf. Il., vii. 99, as quoted by Apion in the chapter "Concerning the Aeon" as Comment, on C. H., xi. (xii.).

^6:1 That is, in vision.

^6:2 Cf. C. H., xi (xii) 6.

^6:3 kosmon. The word kosmos (world-order) means either "order" or "world"; and in the original there is frequently a play upon the two meanings, as in the case of logos.

^7:1 Nature and God's Will are identical.

^7:2 That is, the ideal world-order in the realms of reality.

^7:3 Presumably the Pure Air of  section 3.

^7:4 ton aistheton kosmon. The sensible or manifested world, our present universe, as distinguished from the ideal eternal universe, the type of all universes.

^7:5 eimarmene.

^7:6 The Logos which had previously descended into Nature.

^7:7 omoousios, usually translated "consubstantial"; but oysia is "essence" and "being" rather than "substance."

^8:1 The Prototype, Cosmic, Ideal or Perfect Man.

^8:2 Or Beauty (morfeis).

^8:3 Cf. The Gospel of Mary in the Akhmim Codex: "He nodded, and when He had thus nodded assent . . . ." (F. F. F., 586).

^8:4 The Eighth Sphere bounding the Seven.

^8:5 For note on exoysia, see R. in loc. and 48, n. 3.

^9:1 That is the Seven Spheres fashioned by his Brother.

^9:2 taxis, rank or order.

^9:3 Or "wear down" (kataponeisai). The reading katanoeisai, however, may be more correct; "he had a mind to come to knowledge of" this Boundary or Ring Pass not. See R. 49, n. 1.

^9:4 Sc. the Mighty Power of  section 9.

^9:5 parekypsen. Cf. Cyril, C. J., i. 33 (Frag. xiii.); R. 50: "beugt sich . . . nieder" But compare especially Plato, Phaedrus, 249 C., where he speaks of the soul "raising up her face (anakupsasa) to That which is." Cf. also Apion in Clement. Hom., vi. 4, in Comment. C. H., xi. (xii.)

^9:6 That is, the harmonious interplay, concord or system of the spheres ruled by the Rulers; in other words, the cosmos of Fate.

^10:1 energeia, energy, and realization.

^10:2 That is "a-sexual" but having the potentiality of both sexes.

^10:3 For the various suggestions for filling up this lacuna, see R. in loc.; and for that of Keil, see R. 367.

^10:4 Sc. as well as Nature.

^11:1 Harmony.

^11:2 See  section 9.

^11:3 metarsioys. A term that must have a more definite meaning than the vague "sublime" by which it is generally translated.

^11:4 For Keil's completion of the lacuna, see R. 368.

^11:5 me ektrexe, perhaps meaning diverge from the subject, or go too fast; lit., it means "do not run away."

^12:1 That is, the parts of what Hermes elsewhere calls the "cosmic man."

^12:2 Cf. C. H., xvi. 16.

^12:3 Omitting the ta before onta.

^12:4 pronoia, that is Nature as Sophia or Providence or Will.

^13:1 There is a word-play between planes and planw'menos.

^13:2 Sc. Darkness.

^13:3 Sc. The Moist Nature.

^14:1 eidotes aytun ta energe'mata.

^15:1 The text of this paragraph is hopelessly confused in the MSS.

^15:2 peri teis anodoy teis ginomenes.

^15:3 to Ethos, the "habitual" part of man, presumably way of life impressed by habit on the body; or it may be "class" of life as in the Vision of Er.

^15:4 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 16.

^15:5 o thymos kai e epithymia,--the masculine and feminine as positive and negative aspects of the "animal soul."

^16:1 anenergeton.

^16:2 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 7.

^16:3 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 15.

^16:4 taxei, order, group, sc. of the Nine;--the Father being the Ten, or consummation.

^17:1 Cf. K. K., 25: "Thus speaking God became Imperishable Mind."

^17:2 Cf. the logos, "Jesus saith, I stood in the midst of the world, and in the flesh was I seen of them, and I found all men drunken, and none found I athirst among them, and my soul grieveth over the sons of men, because they are blind in heart." Sayings of Our Lord from an Early Greek Papyrus, Grenfell & Hunt (London; 1897).

^18:1 Cf. P. S. A., xii. 2.

^18:2 The Race of the Logos, of all who were conscious of the Logos in their hearts, who had repented and were thus logoi.

^18:3 Cf. Mark iv. 4: "He who soweth soweth the Word (Logos)"

^18:4 Cf. K. K., 1--the drink given by Isis to Horus.

^19:1 neipsis, lit. soberness, watchfulness, lucidity.

^19:2 See  section 2 above.

^19:3 Cf. K. K. (Stob., Ec., i. 49; p. 459, 20, W.), and Damascius, in Phot., Bibl., p. 337b, 23.

^19:4 eylogian,--a play on logos.

^20:1 logikas.

^20:2 teis gnw'seus teis kat' oysian emun, "our being," that is, presumably, the "being" of man and God, the "being" which man shares with God.

^20:3 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 20.

^20:4 exoysian.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

COMMENTARY

OF VISION AND APOCALYPSIS

The "Poemandres" treatise not only belongs to the most important type of the Trismegistic literature, but is also the most important document within that type. It constitutes, so to speak, the Ground-Gospel of the Poemandres Communities, in the form of a revelation or apocalypse received by the founder of the tradition,

[p. 21]

that founder, however, being not a historical personage but the personification of a teaching-power or grade of spiritual illumination--in other words, of one who had reached the "Hermes," or rather "Thrice-greatest," state of consciousness or enlightenment.

This stage of enlightenment was characterized by a heightening of the spiritual intuition which made the mystic capable of receiving the first touch of cosmic consciousness, and of retaining it in his physical memory when he returned to the normal state.

The setting forth of the teaching is thus naturally in the form of apocalyptic, and of apocalyptic of an ordered and logical nature; for it purports to be a setting forth of the spiritual "Epopteia" of the Inner Mysteries, the Vision revealed by the Great Initiator or Master-Hierophant, Mind of all-masterhood.

This Vision, as we are told by many seers and prophets of the time, was incapable of being set forth by "tongue of flesh" in its own proper terms, seeing that it transcended the consciousness of normal humanity. Being in itself a living, potent, intelligible reality, apart from all forms either material or intellectual in any way known to man, it pervaded his very being and made his whole nature respond to a new key of truth, or rather, vibrate in a higher octave, so to say, where all things, while remaining the same, received a new interpretation and intensity.

The interpretation of this Vision, however, was conditioned by the "matter" of each seer; he it was who had to clothe the naked beauty of the Truth--as the Gnostic Marcus would have phrased it--with the fairest garment he himself possessed, the highest thoughts, the best science, the fairest traditions, the most grandiose imagination known to him. Thus it is that we have so many modes of expression among the

[p. 22]

mystics of the time, so many varieties of spiritual experience--not because the experience itself was "other," the experience was the "same" for all, but the speaking of it forth was conditioned by the religious and philosophical and scientific heredity of the seer.

This element, then, is the basic fact in all such apocalyptic. It is, however, seldom that we meet with a document that has come to us straight from the hand of a seer writing down his own immediate experience without admixture; for the delight of the Vision was not that it gave new facts or ideas of the same nature as those already in circulation, but that it threw light on existing traditions, and showed them forth as being parts of a whole. Once the man had come into touch with the Great Synthesis, there rushed into his mind innumerable passages of scripture, scraps of myths, fragments of cosmogenesis, logoi and logia, and symbols of all kinds that fitted naturally. These were not any special writer's monopoly, there was no copyright in them, they were all utterances of the same Logos, the Great Instructor of humanity.

Thus the literature that was produced was anonymous or pseudepigraphic. There was first of all a nucleus of personal vision and direct illumination, then a grouping of similar matter from various sources into a whole for didactic purposes. Nor was there any idea among these mystics and scripture-writers that the form once issued should become for ever stereotyped as inerrant; there were many recensions and additions and interpolations. It was left to those without the sense of illumination to stereotype the forms and claim for them the inerrancy of verbal dictation by the Deity. Those who wrote the apocalypses from personal knowledge of vision could not make such claim for their scriptures, for they knew

[p. 23]

how they were written, and what was the nature of hearing and sight.

We have accordingly to treat all such documents as natural human compositions, but while doing so, while on the one side analyzing them with microscopic attention as literary compositions, put together from other sources, over-written, redacted and interpolated, we have also, on the other, to bear in mind that this was not done by clever manipulators and literary charlatans, but by men who regarded such work as a holy and spiritual task, who endeavoured to arrange all under the inspiration of a sweet influence for good, who believed themselves under guidance in their selection of matter, and in recombining the best in other scriptures into a new whole that might prove still better for the purpose of further enlightenment suitable to their immediate environment.

The "Poemandres" treatise is of this nature--that is to say, though we have not the original form before us, we have what was intended to be read as a single document. We shall accordingly endeavour in our comments not to allow the anomalies of its outer form to detract from our appreciation of its inner spirit, and yet, on the other hand, not to permit the beauty of much that is in it to blind us to the fact that the present form has evolved from simpler beginnings.

THE GREAT AND LITTLE MAN

1. In deep meditation the disciple reaches the consummation of his efforts, and receives initiation from the Master of the masters, who is to confer upon him authority (exoysian--see  section 32) to teach, that is, to be a master or a Hermes.

2. That this Grand Master of the Inner Mysteries

[p. 24]

was Man and Shepherd of men, the Very Self of men, has been amply shown in the Prolegomena, but the striking parallelism with the very wording of our text, the Great Man, the "Being more than vast," who tells the little man, that though for the first time he now knows his Greater Self, that Self has ever been "everywhere with thee," is best shown by the beautiful logos from the Gospel of Eve (presumably an Egyptian gospel), which we have already quoted elsewhere [*1]:

"I stood on a lofty mountain, [*2] and saw a gigantic Man and another, a dwarf; and I heard, as it were, a voice of thunder, and drew nigh for to hear; and He spake unto me and said: I am thou, and thou art I; and wheresoever thou mayest be, I am there. [*3] In all am I scattered, and whencesoever thou willest, thou gatherest Me; and gathering Me, thou gatherest Thyself."

THE PRESENCE

3. The conditions of the seeing of the Holy Sight had been fulfilled by the disciple; he had weaned himself from all lower desires. No longer, like the theurgist in the Hermes-invocations of the popular cult, does he pray for wealth and fame and cheerful countenance, and the rest; his one desire, his only will, is now to "learn the things that are, and comprehend their nature and know God." He craves for Gnosis,--Gnosis of Cosmos and its mysteries, Gnosis

[p. 25]

of Nature, the Great Mother, and, finally, Gnosis of God, the Father of the worlds. This is the one question he "holds in his mind," his whole nature is concentrated into this one point of interrogation.

It is to be noticed that we are not told, as in the Gospel of Eve, that the seer stood, as it were, apart from himself, and saw his little self and Greater Self simultaneously. He is conscious of a Presence, of a Persona in the highest theological meaning of the word, who is not seen so much as felt, speaking to him Mind to mind; he hears this Presence rather than sees it.

THE VISION OF CREATION

4. The first part of his mental question is: How came this cosmos into being? The answer is the changing of the Boundless Presence into "Light, sweet joyous Light." He loses all sight of "all things" in his mind, the mental image he had formed of cosmos, and is plunged into the infinitude of Limitless Light and Joy, which transports him out of himself in highest ecstasy.

But he has craved for Gnosis, not Joy and Light, but Wisdom, the understanding and reconciliation of the great Opposites, the Cross of all Manifestation.

Therefore must he know the Mystery of Ignorance as well as that of Knowledge. Within the Infinitude of Light appears the Shadow of the Unknown, which translates itself to his consciousness as Darkness,--the Shadow of the Thrice-unknown Darkness, which, as Damascius tells us, [*1] was the First Principle of the Egyptians, the Ineffable Mystery, of which they "said nothing," and of which our author says nothing.

[p. 26]

This Darkness comes forth from within outwards to the disciple's consciousness, it spreads "downwards" in sinuous folds like a Great Snake, symbolizing, presumably, the unknown, and to him unknowable, mysteries of the differentiation of the root of matter of the cosmos that was to be; its motion was spiral, sinuous, unending vibrations, not yet confined into a sphere; not yet ordered, but chaotic, in unceasing turmoil, a terrible contrast to the sweet peace of the Light, gradually changing from Dark Space or Spirit into a Fluid or Flowing Matter, or Moist Nature; that is, presumably, what the Greek mystics would have called Rhea, the Primal Mother or Matter of the future universe.

It wails and groans--that is, its motion is as yet unharmonized. In the terminology of the Sophia-mythus, it is the inchoate birth from the Sophia Above, in the Fullness, brought forth by herself alone, without her syzygy or consort. On account of its imperfection she wails and groans to the Father of All and His Perfections, that her Perfection may be sent to fashion her child, who is herself in manifestation, into a world of order, and eventually into a Perfection in its turn. [*1]

The Primal Undifferentiated or Chaotic Sound, from the Darkness of its first state, gradually manifests itself under the brooding power of the Boundless Light, into less confused thunderings and murmurings, and finally reaches a stage symbolized by a "Cry," a "Voice of Fire," of Fire, not Light, expressing a need and want, longing for union with the Articulate Power or Cosmic Word.

The three most primal stages thus seem to be symbolized by Darkness, Moist Essence, Fire. These 

[p. 27]

were not our differentiated elements, but the Primal Pre-cosmic Elements.

The same idea, though in different forms, is met with in a system of the Gnosis preserved for us by the Old Latin translator of Irenaeus, [*1] and also by Theodoret, [*2] who ascribes it to the Sethians, whom he says are also called Ophianae or Ophitae. Now Seth was Typhon or Darkness, Dark Light, and this Seth may very well have been symbolized as the Great Serpent of Darkness, as it is in our text; hence the name "Those of the Serpent," perhaps given them by their theological adversaries (orthodox Jews and Christians). In this system the Primal Elements are given as Water, Darkness, Abyss, and Chaos. The Light was the Child of the supreme Trinity--the First Man, the Second Man, and the Holy Spirit or First Woman. This Light the Jewish and Christian over-working of the original tradition called the Cosmic Christ.

Thus the Fire of Desire, or Cry of the Darkness, was to be satisfied or checked or quenched by the Light's fashioning its inchoate substance into the cosmos; and so in another Vision, preserved in a treatise of the same type, Hermes sees, by gazing "through the Master," the cosmos in its finished beauty, when all things in it are full of Light and nowhere is there Fire. [*3]

THE DESCENT OF THE LOGOS

5. Upon this Cry for Light, into the Heart of the Dark-Moist-Fiery-Nature is dropped a Holy Word, the Seed of the future Cosmos. This Word is Articulate (its Limbs are perfect), Seasonable and Ordering. The

[p. 28]

[paragraph continues] Cosmic Animal Nature is impregnated with the Light of the Supernal Reason, which pervades its whole being.

This pervading immediately effects an ordering of the Chaotic Elements into Pure Fire, Pure Air, and Pure Water-Earth. Moreover, it is to be gathered from the sequel that Nature saw the Word and all his Beauty in her Fire and Air, but as yet only heard him in her Water-Earth.

6. The Shepherd thus explains that Light [*1] is really Mind, and Mind is God,--God prior to Nature, but not prior to Darkness. The Unity of Light and Darkness is a still higher Mystery. Light and Mind is the highest concept the disciple can yet form of God. The Light-Word, or emanation of Supernal Reason, is Son of God, Son of Great Mind.

THE REVELATION OF THE PLEROMA

With the words "What then?" Reitzenstein (p. 37) perceives that the sequence of the narrative is broken by a second vision, and is only resumed with  section 9. This he regards as an interpolation of another form of cosmogenesis, into the one which is being described.

It seems to me, however, that the breaking of the main narrative may be regarded as a necessary digression rather than as an interpolation of foreign material--necessary in order to bring on to the scene the hitherto invisible Greatnesses, "within" the Veil of Light, which constitute the Economy of the Pleroma. More had to be seen by the disciple before he was in a position to understand what he had so far seen. He must now unite with the Light, his previous seeing being that of its reflection, the logos within him. Not that this 

[p. 29]

logos and Light (or Mind) are separate. They are in reality one, the Son is one with the Father in the state that transcends the opposites. The Logos apparently comes forth, yet it remains ever with the Father, and this coming forth and yet remaining constitutes its Life--in other words, it is an emanation. Thus Hermes is bidden to understand the Light as Life, and so make friends with it.

7. Hitherto the Light had been one for him a sameness which his highest vision could not pierce, the Veil of Light that shut the Beauties, Perfections and Greatnesses of the Intelligible from the eyes of his mind. To pierce this veil a still more expanded power of sight had to be given him by the Master. The little word or light-spark within him is intensified by the Great Word of the Master, this Word being an Intelligible Utterance of the Mind, an intensification of being.

He now sees and understands the countless Powers within the Light, which constitute the Intelligible Archetypal Form or Idea of all worlds. Between the special sensible cosmos of his prior vision and this Immensity was a Mighty Power, or Great Boundary (Horos), [*1] that encircled the elements of the sensible cosmos and held its Fire in check.

8. In amazement he asks whence come these apparently disorderly and untamed elements of the new world in process that have to be subdued and separated from the Concord of the Perfection of the Powers? And the answer is that Chaos, too, has its being from God's Will. Discord and Concord, Chaos and Cosmos, are both of God. The Primal Elements are, as it were, the Passions of God's Will desiring Himself. It is Himself as Mother or Spouse

[p. 30]

desiring Himself as Father. In other of the Trismegistic tractates [*1] this "Feminine Aspect" of Deity is called Wisdom and Nature and Generation and Isis. He is Wisdom as desiring Himself,--that Desire being the Primal Cause as Mother of the whole world-process, which is consummated by His Fullness uniting with His Desire or Wisdom, and so perfecting it.

This is the whole burden of the Gnostic Sophia-mythus, which I have given very good reasons for believing derived its main element from Egypt. [*2] Curiously enough, Reitzenstein (pp. 39, 40) quotes the two chapters (liii. and liv.) from Plutarch on which I base my conclusions, but he does not notice that in this respect the Christianized Gnosis is distinctly dependent on Egypt.

And so Philo [*3] also tells us that the Mother of All is Gnosis (episte'me), the very same name that Plutarch gives to Isis.

The Mother, when thought of as without the Pleroma, is impregnated by the Word, which Basilides would have called the All-seed Potency of the Pleroma, endowed with all Powers, and sent forth as the seed of the sensible cosmos that is to be. The Mother in her higher Nature contemplates the Eternal Cosmos or Order of the Pleroma, and in her lower Nature copies its Beauties by means of the permutations and combinations of her elements and the generations and transformations of her lives or souls.

This form of cosmogenesis Reitzenstein (p. 46) regards as of a pantheistic nature, while the general narrative he holds to set forth a world-representation of a dualistic tendency. It is true, as he himself

[p. 31]

admits, that this blend of contradictory conceptions meets us frequently in Gnostic systems of a more or less contemporary date; nevertheless he lays great stress upon this difference, and so insists upon an interpolation.

In this he is confirmed (p. 39) by the fact that whereas  section 9 speaks of God the Mind being male-female, we are in the second vision face to face with "eine weibliche Allgottheit" who stands next to the Highest God.

I must, however, confess that these contradictions do not make so great an impression upon my mind as they seem to have done on the critical faculty of Professor Reitzenstein. There is no system known to me, even of the most exclusive monotheism, into which dualism does not creep somehow or other at some stage; it cannot be avoided, for it is in the nature of things.

The dualism of our text is, however, by no means so very marked, for though it is not distinctly stated in  section 4, it leaves it clearly to be inferred that the Darkness comes from the Light itself, for previously there was nothing but Light; "all things" had become Light to the eye of the seer. It is the mystery of the sad-eyed Serpent of Darkness wrapping itself round the lower limbs of the Light.

It was, in my opinion, precisely for the sake of removing the thought of dualism that the seer is shown a still more intimate vision within the Light Veil, where all ideas of monotheism, dualism, tritheism, polytheism, and pantheism lose their formal distinctions in a Formless State, or, at any rate, in a State of Being where all are interblended with all. In describing it, the "tongue of flesh" has to use the familiar language of form, but every word employed has a new significance;

[p. 32]

for even the "tongue of angels" cannot describe it, or any of the "tongues" of heaven; He alone who speaks forth the Words of the One Tongue can express it.

Whence this sublime conception of the Pleroma came, I do not know; it seems to me impossible to find a geographical origin for such things, as, indeed, it seems vain to seek a geographical origin for dualism and the rest. For the writer or writers of our tractate these ideas came from the nature of things, from the immediate experience of sight.

The form of expression, of course, may be susceptible of a geographical treatment, but as yet I am not satisfied that any clear heredity has been made out for this supposed interpolation. The Feminine Divinity, next the Highest God, is not set over against that God, but is His own Will. He is in the Pleroma Vision as much and as little male and female as in the general narrative. He transcends all opposites and contains all opposites in Himself.

What is clear, however, is that in the combination of both visions we have before us a simple and early form of the Gnosis which we meet with later in Christian over-workings, and especially in the very elaborate expositions of the Basilidian and Valentinian schools, the systems of which can, in their main elements, be paralleled and compared point by point with our treatise; but this would be too lengthy a proceeding in our present study, for it would require a volume to itself in any way adequately to treat of it. [*1]

[p. 33]

THE SECOND EMANATION

9. We now return to the main narrative. Within the World-Egg, which was encircled by the Mighty Power (the Gnostic Horos), there had already been developed three Cosmic Elements (not our mixed elements)--Fire, Air, and Water-Earth. This had been effected by the descent of the Cosmic Logos into the Primal Elements of Disorder. As the Logos descended, Fire and Air ascended, and the Logos remained in Water-Earth. This was the result of the First Outpouring from the Potency of the Pleroma, the First Word uttered by Mind.

The Second Outpouring of Mind was of Mind no longer regarded as Light only, but as Light and Life, Male-Female. This emanation appeared as Enforming Mind--that is, the Fashioner or Former, Artificer or Demiurge of lives or souls; it was the ensouling of the Ordered Elements of Nature with lives, whereby these Elements were drawn together into forms.

The Great Mind, as Light and Life, reflected itself in the "pure formation" of Nature--that is to say, in Fire and Spirit (Air), Fire for Light and Spirit for Life, to further enform things.

The Mighty Power or Self-limitation of Mind, the Boundary that no mortal can pass, marks off the formative area of the whole cosmos. This area, however, was by no means only the mixed sensible world (cosmos) which we perceive with our present physical senses. On the contrary, there are within it various orders (cosmoi) of the main cosmos. For the Ordering Mind, as the Enformer or Soul-fashioner, differentiates itself into seven Ruling Forms or Spheres which "enclose" the mixed sensible cosmos; these spheres, therefore, must be of a psychic nature--that is to say,

[p. 34]

of a pure or subtle substance; they are Forms of subtle matter endowed with reason. They constitute the Cosmic Engine of the fashioning of souls, or psychic natures, and of their perpetual transforming. Their energies and activities are those of Fate, or the ordered sequence of cause and effect, symbolized by spheres perpetually entering into themselves.

10. In all the main phases there is to be observed the idea of a downward tendency followed by an upward. The Darkness descends; it then transmutes itself and aspires above in a Cry or Yearning for Light. The Word descends; immediately the Fire and Air ascend. The Formative Mind descends; immediately the Word ascends from the mixed Water-Earth--and at-ones itself with its co-essential emanation from the Father--to a space about the Seven, and thus leaves the still down-tending elements in the Element Water-Earth deprived of its immediate presence, after giving physical matter the initial impulse to order. This physical matter our author calls "pure matter," meaning thereby matter deprived of the immediate presence of Reason.

11. Hereupon from the impulse she has received Nature begins her physical enformation, develops her physical elements and bodies of irrational lives. Water-Earth divides into water and earth, and also air, for this air is clearly something different from the Spirit-Air that ascended; the lower air is one of the downward elements.

THE DESCENT OF MAN

12. When this had been accomplished, there followed a Third Outpouring--the descent of Man, the consummation of the whole Enformation of things, a still

[p. 35]

more transcendent manifestation of Mind, the One Form that contains all forms, His Very Image coequal with Himself. He finally comes Himself to consummate and save the cosmos in the Form of Man--that is, to gather it to Himself and take it back into the Pleroma.

Nevertheless the Word and the Formative Mind and Man are not three different Persons; they are all co-essential with each other and one with the Father. For the Word is co-essential with the Demiurgic Mind ( section 10), and the latter is Brother of Man ( section 13), and Man is co-equal with God ( section 12).

13. And so Man, the Beloved, descends; and in his descent he is clothed with all the powers of his Brother's creative energy, the creative energy of Life conjoined with rational Light.

Having learned the lesson of the conformations and of the limitations of the Spheres, he desires to break right through the Great Boundary itself; but to do this he must descend still further into matter. Before he can burst through upwards he must break through downwards.

14. Accordingly he breaks through the Spheres downwards, seeking his consort Nature below, and shows her his Divine Form radiant with all the energies bestowed on him by all the Powers above.

And she in her great love wound herself round the image of this Form mirrored upon her water, and the shadow of it thrown upon her earth; just as the Darkness wound itself, like a Great Serpent, round the lower parts of the Light, so does Nature coil herself round the shadow and reflection of Man. Man is above, yet is he below; man is free, yet is he bound--bound willingly in love for her who is himself.

Reitzenstein (pp. 47-49) is greatly puzzled with all

[p. 36]

this, and seeks to distinguish several contradictory elements, presumably supposing that these elements are woven together into a literary patchwork from distinct traditions. I cannot myself follow him here with any clearness. Of course the writer or writers of our treatise did not discover new ideas or invent new terms; they used what was in their minds and the minds of their circle. It was, however, the weaving of it into a whole, not as a literary exercise, but as a setting forth in the most understandable terms with which they were acquainted of the "things seen," that was their main interest. Those who had the "sight" would understand and appreciate their labours, those who had not would never understand, no matter what terms or what language were used.

When, then, Reitzenstein (p. 47) says that in  section 11, in the bringing forth by Nature of irrational lives, there is a confusion of contradictory conceptions, he fails to see that Nature is ever the World-Soul, the spouse of Mind; though Darkness she is spouse of Light. Unaided she brings forth things irrational, a phase of that birth of Nature by herself that is incomplete.

So also in  section 13, Reitzenstein detects contradictory elements, which he ascribes to two different regions of ideas. He does not, however, perceive that though in one sentence the "formations" are said to be those of the Father, and in the next those of the Brother, this is no real confusion, because the Formative Mind is the Father, enforming Himself in Himself; this self-energizing, when regarded by itself, may be spoken of as other than the Father, but is not really so.

Nor can I see that there is any real contradiction in the breaking through of the Spheres as though they were the product of an opposing Power to that of the Son. The Fate was certainly so regarded by men who

[p. 37]

were under its sway; but our treatise is endeavouring precisely to give an insight into the state of things beyond the Fate. The burden of its teaching is that all these oppositions are really illusory; man can transcend these limitations and come into the freedom of the Sons of God. Even the most terrible and fundamental oppositions are not really so, but all are Self-limitations of God's Will; and man is Son of God co-equal with Him.

THE FIRST MEN

16. Our treatise then describes the first appearance of man on earth, which it regards as a great mystery never before revealed, "the mystery kept hid until this day." This I take to mean that it had hitherto never been written about, but had been kept as a great secret.

This secret was the doctrine that the first men, of which there were seven types, were hermaphrodites, and not only so, but lived in the air; their frames were of fire and spirit, and not of the earth-water elements. The Celestial Man, or type of humanity, was gradually differentiating himself from his proper nature of Light and Life, and taking on bodies of fire and air, was changing into mind (Light-fire) and soul (Life-spirit).

This presumably lasted for long periods of time, the lower animal forms gradually evolving to greater complexity as Nature strove to copy the "Form" of Man, and Man devolving gradually until there was a union, and the human subtle form could find vehicles among the highest animal shapes.

The first incarnate men appear to have been at first also hermaphrodite; and it must have been a time when everything was in a far greater state of flux than things are now.

[p. 38]

"INCREASE AND MULTIPLY"

18. This period of pre-sexual or bi-sexual development having come to an end, the separation of the sexes took place. The commandment is given by the Word: "Increase ye in increasing and multiply in multitude" (ayxanesthe en ayxe'sei kai plethunesthe en ple'thei).

It is true that this is reminiscent of the oft-repeated formula in the Greek Targum of Genesis,--ayxanesthe kai plethunesthe, [*1]--but it is only slightly reminiscent, the main injunction being strengthened, and the rest of the logos being quite different from anything found in Genesis. As nothing else in the whole treatise can be referred to direct Hebrew influence, we must conclude that the formula was, so to speak, in the air, and has so crept into our treatise. [*2]

It has, however, given rise to a diatribe copied on to the margin of one MS.--B. (Par. 1220)--by a later hand, and incorporated into the text of M. (Vat. 951). It is in B. ascribed to Psellus, [*3] who goes out of his way to stigmatize Hermes as a sorcerer and a plagiarist throughout of Moses; in brief, the Devil is a thief of the Truth to lead men astray. In this we learn more about the limitation of the so-called "Prince of Philosophers" [*4] than of aught else.

[p. 39]

19. This increasing and multiplying, the perpetual coupling of bodies, and the birth of new ones, is effected by the Fate, or Harmony of the Formative Spheres, the Engine of Birth, set under Forethought or Providence (pronoia). This Pronoia can be none else than Nature herself as the Wisdom or Knowledge of God--in other words, His Will.

LOVE

The motive power of all is Love. If this Love manifests itself as Desire for things of Matter, the Lover stays in Darkness wandering; if it becomes the Will to know Light, the Lover becomes the Knower of himself, and so eventually at-one with Good.

20. But why should love of body merit Death--that is to say, make man mortal? The disciple attempts an explanation from what he has seen. Although his answer is approved, the meaning is by no means clear.

The physical body, or body in the sense-world, is composed of the Moist Nature, which in a subsequent phase remains as Water-Earth, and in a still subsequent phase divides itself into the elements of physical earth, water, and air. The dissolution of the combination of these elements is effected by Death--that is, Darkness, the Drainer of the Water, the Typhonean Power. Water must thus here symbolize the Osirian Power of fructification and holding together. The Moist Nature then seems to be differentiated from the Darkness by the energizing of Light in its most primitive brooding. But seeing that the Light is also Life, the Darkness, which is posited as the ultimate opposite, is Death.

THE WAY OF DEATHLESSNESS

21. The Way of Deathlessness is then considered. The disciple repeats his lesson, and the Master commends

[p. 40]

him; the Way Up is the Path of Self-knowledge.

Still the disciple cannot believe that this is for him; he cannot understand that Mind is in him, or rather is himself, in so much as Mind as Teacher seems to be without him. The play is on Mind and mind; the one gives the certitude of Immortality, the other is still bound by the illusion of Death. The disciple has not this certitude; Mind, then, is not his.

22. The Master then further explains the mystery. Gnosis must be preceded by moral purification; there must be a turning-away before the Re-turn can be accomplished. The whole nature must be changed. Yet every effort that the little man seems to make of his own striving is really the energizing of the Great Man.

23. Those, however, who yield themselves to lower desires, drive the Mind away, and their appetites are only the more strengthened by the mind.

The text of this paragraph is very corrupt, so that the exact sense of the original is not recoverable; and this makes it all the more difficult to understand what is meant by the Avenging Daimon, the Counterpart of the Mind. This difficulty is increased by  section 24, where we are told that the "way of life" (to Ethos) is at death surrendered to the Daimon.

If, however, the reader will refer to the section on "The Vision of Er" (in the Miscellanea of the "Prolegomena"), which in my original MS. followed as a Digression on this passage, he will be put in contact with the Platonic view of the Daimon and "way of life"; in our treatise, however, the teaching is of a more intimate character, and must be taken in conjunction with C. H., x. (xi.) 16 and 21, where we shall comment on it at further length.

[p. 41]

THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL

24. The subject of instruction is now the Way Above (anodos), or ascent of the soul out of the body at death.

The physical body is left to the work of change and dissolution. The life of integration and conservation ceases, and the life of disintegration begins.

The form (eidos) thus vanishes, apparently from the man's consciousness; that is to say, presumably, he is no longer clothed in the form of his physical body, but is apparently in some other vehicle; the particular fixed form, or "way of life," or "habit," he wore on earth being handed over to the Daimon deprived of all energy, so that apparently it becomes an empty shell.

The next sentence is a great puzzle, and I can only guess at the meaning. The senses which had previously been united by the mind become separate--that is, instead of a whole they become parts (mere), they return to the natural animal state of sensation, and the animal part of man, or his vehicle of passion and desire, begins in its turn to disintegrate, the mind or reason (logos) being gradually separated from it, or, rather, its true nature showing forth in the man as he gradually strips off the irrational tendencies of the energies.

25. Those irrational tendencies have their sources in the Harmony of the Fate-Sphere of seven subordinate spheres or zones; and in these zones he leaves his inharmonious propensities, deprived of their energy. For the Harmony is only evil apparently; it is really the Engine of Justice and Necessity to readjust the foolish choice of the soul--that is, to purify its irrational desires, or those propensities in it that are not under the sway of right reason and philosophy. For a better understanding of the characteristics ascribed to

[p. 42]

the "seven spheres," we must "run off" into another Digression, which the reader will find relegated to ch. xii. of the "Prolegomena," under the title "Concerning the Seven Zones and their Characteristics." This, then, having been taken as a direct commentary on  section 25, we continue with the text of our treatise.

THE EIGHTH SPHERE

26. The soul of the initiated strips itself naked of the "garment of shame," the selfish energizings, and stands "clothed in its own power." This refers probably to the stripping off of the "carapace of selfhood," the garments woven by its vices, and the putting on of the "wedding garment" of its virtues.

This state of existence is called the Eighth, [*1] a state of comparative "sameness" as transcending the zones of "difference." It is the Ogdoad of the Gnostics, the Jerusalem Above, the plane of the Ego in its own form, the natural state of "those-that-are."

In another sense it may perhaps mean that the man, after passing through the phases of the lower mind, now enters within into the region of the pure mind, the Higher Ego, and there is at-oned with all the experiences of his past lives that are worthy of immortality, his virtuous energizings,--the "those-that-are," that perhaps constitute the "crown of mighty lives" sung of by the Pythian Oracle when celebrating the death of Plotinus. [*2]

In this state the man, who has freed himself from the necessity of reincarnation, hears the Song of the Powers above the Ogdoad--that is to say, in Gnostic terms, the

[p. 43]

[paragraph continues] Hymn of the Aeons of the Pleroma. Such a man would have reached the consummation of his earthly pilgrimage, and be ready to pass on into the Christ-state, or, at any rate, the state of super-man. He would be the Victor who had won the right of investiture with the Robe of Glory, and the dignity of the crowning with the Kingship of the Heavens. This Final Initiation is most beautifully set forth in the opening pages of the Pistis Sophia, and especially in the Song of the Powers (pp. 17 ff.) beginning with the words: "Come unto us, for we are thy fellow-members. We are all one with thee."

The consummation of the mystery is that the alter-egos of the Individual Ego, or the sum total of purified personalities which in that state constitute its membership, or taxis, of their own selves surrender themselves to a fullness of union or a transcendency of separation, in which they become the powers or energies of a New Man, the true Son of Man; they pass into a state where they each blend with all, and yet lose nothing of themselves, but rather find in this new union the consummation of all their powers. In this state of Sonship of the Divine they are no longer limited by bodies, nor even by partial souls or individual minds; but, becoming Powers, they are not only in God, but one with the Divine Will--nay, in final consummation, God Himself.

27. Of such a nature was the Shepherd; He, too, was the Christ of God, the Son of the Father, who could take all forms to carry out the Divine Will. When the form,--even though that form might for the disciple take on the appearance of the cosmos itself, as he conceived it,--had served its purpose, the Shepherd once more "mingled with the Powers."

[p. 44]

THE THREE "BODIES" OF THE BUDDHA

The Shepherd was a Christ for those who prefer the name of Christian Tradition, a Buddha for those who are more familiar with Eastern terms. And that this is so may be clearly seen by considering the so-called "three bodies" (trikayam) of a or the Buddha, for Buddhahood is a state beyond individuality in the separated sense in which we understand the term.

In the Chinese Version of Ashvaghosha's now lost Sanskrit treatise, Mahayana-shraddhotpada-shastra, [*1] we read:

"It is characteristic of all the Buddhas that they consider all sentient beings as their own self, and do not cling to their individual forms. How is this? Because they know truthfully that all sentient beings as well as their own self come from one and the same Suchness, and no distinction can be established among them."

"All Tathagatas are the Dharinakaya [*2] itself, are the highest truth (paramarthasatya) itself, and have nothing to do with conditionality (samvrittisatya) and compulsory actions; whereas the seeing, hearing, etc., of the sentient being diversify the Activity [*3] of Tathagatas.

"Now this Activity has a twofold aspect.

"The first depends on the phenomena-particularizing consciousness by means of which the Activity is conceived by the minds of all who fall short of the state of a Bodhisattva in their various degrees. This aspect is called the Body of Transformation (Nirmanakaya).

"But as the beings of this class do not know that the

[p. 45]

[paragraph continues] Body of Transformation is merely the shadow [or reflection] of their own evolving consciousness, they imagine it comes from some external sources, and so they give it a corporeal limitation. But the Body of Transformation [or what amounts to the same thing, the Dharmakaya] has nothing to do with Limitation or measurement."

That is to say, a Buddha can only communicate with such minds by means of a form, that form being really that of their own most highly evolved consciousness. There are, however, others who have the consciousness of the "formless" state, but have not yet reached the Nirvanic Consciousness. These in this system are called Bodhisattvas.

"The second aspect [of the Dharmakaya] depends on the activity-consciousness (karmavijnana), by means of which the Activity is conceived by the minds of the Bodhisattvas while passing from their first aspiration (chittotpada) stage up to the height of Bodhisattva-hood. This is called the Body of Bliss (Sambhogakaya)" (pp. 100, 101).

We have used the term "formless state" in the penultimate paragraph to signify the states of consciousness in "worlds" called Arupa; but these are only "formless" for consciousness which has not reached the Bodhisattva level--presumably the Buddhic plane of Neo-theosophical nomenclature.

For "this Body has infinite forms. The form has infinite attributes. The Attribute has infinite excellencies. And the accompanying reward of Bodhisattvas--that is, the region where they are predestined to be born--also has infinite merits and ornamentations. Manifesting itself everywhere, the Body of Bliss is infinite, boundless, limitless, unintermittent, directly coming forth from the Mind" (p. 101).

The older Chinese Version says: "It is boundless,

[p. 46]

cannot be exhausted, is free from the signs of limitation. Manifesting itself wherever it should manifest itself, it always exists by itself and is never destroyed" (p. 101, n. 2).

In other words, one who has reached the Nirvanic Consciousness--that is to say, a Master--can teach or be active on "planes" that are as yet unmanifest to us ordinary folk; these "planes," however, even when the disciple is conscious of them, are conditioned by the self-limitation of his own imperfection. The Vehicles of this Activity are called Dharmakaya, Sambhogakaya and Nirmanakaya; and the limitation of their Activity is determined on the side of the disciple by the degree of his ability to function consciously in those states which are known in Neo-theosophical nomenclature respectively as those of Atman, Buddhi and Higher Manas, or, in more general terms, those of the divine, spiritual and human aspects of the self.

In the first degree of conscious discipleship, then, the Master communicates with His disciples and teaches them by means of the Nirmanakaya; that is to say, He quickens the highest form of consciousness or conception of masterhood they have so far attained to--taking the form of their greatest love, perhaps, as they have known Him in the flesh, or as He has been told of as existing in the flesh, but not His own-form, which would transcend their consciousness.

The next stage is when the disciple learns to transcend his own "egoity," in the ordinary sense of the word; this does not mean to say that his true individuality is destroyed, but instead of being tied down to one ego-vehicle, he has gained the power of manifesting himself wherever and however he will, at any moment of time; in brief, the power of self-generation on the plane of egoity, in that he has reached a higher

[p. 47]

state which is free from the limitations of a single line of egoity.

He now begins to realise in the very nature of his being that the "Self is in all and all in the Self." Such a disciple, or Bodhisattva, is taught by the Master in this state of being, and the Kaya which he supplies for the energizing of his beloved Father is perfectly unintelligible to us, and can only be described as an expanded consciousness of utmost sympathy and compassion, which not only strives to blend with the Life of all beings, but also with the One Being in the world for him, the Beloved. Such a sensing of the Master's Presence is called the Sambhogakaya of the Master, His Body of Bliss.

There is a still higher Perfection, the Dharmakaya, or Own-Nature of Masterhood. But how should the dim mind of one who is Without imagine the condition of One who is not only Within, but who combines both the Without and the Within in the Transcendent Unity of the Perfect Fullness?

THE PREACHING OF THE GNOSIS

27. With the exposition of the Consummation of the Teaching and the return to earth of the consciousness of the Seer, our treatise breaks off into a graphic instruction of how the Gnosis is to be utilized. The Wisdom is no man's property; he who receives it holds it in trust for the benefit of the world-folk.

I am, however, inclined to believe that  section section 27 to 29 are a later interpolation, and that the treatise originally ran straight on after the conclusion of the Shepherd's Instruction with the words: "But I recorded in my heart the Shepherd's benefaction" ( section 30).

Until the end of  section 26 we have moved in the

[p. 48]

atmosphere of an inner intimate personal instruction, set forth in a form evidently intended only for the few; indeed, as we find in other treatises emphatic injunctions to keep the teaching secret, we cannot but conclude that the oldest and most authoritative document of the school was guarded with the same secrecy. The general impression created by the instruction is not only that it itself is the consummation and reward of a strict and stern probation, and not a sermon to be preached on the house-tops, but also that those who followed that way were not propagandists, but rather members of a select philosophic community.

With  section 27, however, all is changed; we are introduced to the picture of a man burning with enthusiasm to communicate, if not the direct teaching itself, at any rate the knowledge of its existence and saving power to all without distinction. In a few graphic sentences the history of the fortunes of this propagandist endeavour is sketched. An appeal is made of the most uncompromising nature; it is a clarion call to repentance, and we seem to be moving in an atmosphere that is Hebrew rather than Greek, prophetical rather than philosophical.

It would seem almost that this propagandist phase had been forced upon the community rather than that it was natural to it; something seems to have occurred which obliged it to enter the arena of general life and proclaim its existence publicly. What this compulsion was we have no means of determining with any exactitude, for the historical indications are very obscure. If we were to conjecture that it was the vigorous preaching of nascent Christianity which wrought this change, we should, I think, be taking part for whole, for prior to Christianity there was the most energetic propaganda made by the Jews, the

[p. 49]

intensity of which may be estimated by the phrase "Ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte," and the nature of which may be most clearly seen in the propaganda of the Sibylline writers, with whose diction the appeals to the "earth-born folk" in our text may be aptly compared, while the prayer at sunset may be paralleled with the prayers of the Essenes and Therapeuts.

On the other hand, the tradition of the Gnosis and Saving Faith preached by our Poemandrists is distinctly not Hebrew; it is a philosophizing of other materials--materials which, as we have seen, were also partly used by Jewish and Christian mystics, and adapted to their own special traditions.

We thus see that at the time when Christianity came to birth there were many rival traditions contending for general recognition, all of them offering instruction in the Gnosis and hopes of Salvation, and I myself believe that all of them were partial manifestations of the impartial Quickening of the Spiritual Life which was at that time more abundantly poured forth than ever before or after in the Western world.

With  section 30, if my conjecture of an interpolation is correct, the original treatise is continued, and we are told the nature of the awakening of the spiritual consciousness which has come to the new-born disciple.

Henceforth all things are new for him, they all have new meanings. He has become a man, instead of a "procession of fate"; he has reached the "Plain of Truth." In Christian terms the Christ has been born in his heart consciously.

A HYMN OF PRAISE AND PRAYER FOR THE GNOSIS

31. The treatise is concluded with a most noble hymn, in which the further growth and effort of the 

[p. 50]

man in spirit is set forth. Henceforth his effort will be to become like unto the Father Himself, to pass from Sonship into the Perfection of perfection, Identity or At-one-ment with the Father.

The sentence, "That I may give the Light to those in ignorance of the Race, my Brethren and Thy Sons," seems to me to be either an interpolation, showing the same tendency as that of the propagandist section, or an indication that the whole hymn was added at the same time as the propagandist paragraphs, for the treatise proper seems to end naturally and consistently in the Hellenistic form of the tradition with the words, "I reached the Plain of Truth." [*1]

THE NAME "POIMANDRES"

Many have already remarked that the name "Poimandres" is formed irregularly in Greek, and this has led to an interesting speculation by Granger, who writes:

"While, however, the name Poimandres does not answer to any Greek original, it is a close transliteration of a Coptic phrase. In the dialect of Upper Egypt pemenetre means 'the witness.' That the Coptic article [pe] should be treated as part of the name itself is not unusual; compare the name Pior. [*2] Such a title corresponds very closely in style with the titles of other works of this same period--for example, the True Word of Celsus, or the Perfect Word, which is an alternative title of the Asclepius. The term Poemandres, therefore, on this supposition, contains an allusion to

[p. 51]

the widely spread legend of Hermes as witness, [*1] a legend which is verified for us from several sources. But the writer has adapted the details to his purpose. Hermes is not himself the witness, but the herald of the witness." [*2]

Granger then propounds the very strange theory, contradicted by all the phenomena and opposed to every authority, that the Coptic Gnostic works of the Askew and Bruce Codices were originally composed in Coptic with the adoption of Greek technical terms, whereas they are manifestly translations from the Greek. He, however, continues:

"There seems no adequate reason why such works may not have been composed in Coptic. The Egyptian Gnostic writings of the third century exhibit the same qualities of style as the Coptic biographies and apocalypses of the fourth and following centuries. And so I am prepared to believe that the Poemandres may have been first composed in Coptic. Or shall we say that the work was current from the first in both languages?" [*3]

We should say that the last guess is most highly improbable, and only denotes the indecision of the writer. The original "Poemandres" may very well have been composed not in Coptic but in Demotic; but the reasons given by Granger, as based on the phenomena of the Gnostic Coptic writings, are not to be seriously considered. Nevertheless, the name "Poimandres" may be a Greek transliteration of an Egyptian name, though we hardly think that "The Witness"

[p. 52]

will suit the theme. In any case "Man-Shepherd" was certainly the idea conveyed to the Non-Egyptian by the name, however philologically unsound its form may be in Greek.

THE GOOD SHEPHERD

It has been no part of our task to attempt to trace the Hermes-idea along the line of pure Greek descent, for this would have led us too far from our immediate subject. There is, however, one element of that tradition which is of great interest, and to which we may draw the attention of the reader in passing. The beautiful idea of the Christ as the "Good Shepherd" is familiar to every Christian child. Why the Christ is the Shepherd of all men is shown us by this first of our marvellous treatises. In it we have the universal doctrine apart from any historical dogma, the eternal truth of an ever-recurring fact, and not the exaggeration of one instance of it.

The representation of Christ as the Good Shepherd was one of the earliest efforts of Christian art; but the prototype was far earlier than Christianity--in fact, it was exceedingly archaic. Statues of Hermes Kriophoros, or Hermes with a ram or lamb standing beside him, or in his arms, or on his shoulder, were one of the most favourite subjects for the chisel in Greece. We have specimens dating to the archaic period of Greek art. [*1] Hermes in these archaic statues has a pointed cap, and not the winged head-dress and sandals of later art. This type in all probability goes back to Chaldaean symbolic art, to the bearers of the twelve "signs of the zodiac," the "sacred animals." These were, in one human correspondence, the twelve

[p. 53]

septs or classes of priests. Here we see that the Greek tradition itself was not pure Aryan even in its so-called archaic period. Chaldaea had given of her wisdom to post-diluvian Greece, even as she had perchance been in relation with Greece before the "flood." Here, then, we have another element in the Hermes-idea. In fact, nowhere do we find a pure line of tradition; in every religion there are blendings and have been blendings. There was unconscious syncretism (and conscious also) long before the days of Alexandria, for unconscious syncretism is as old as race-blendings. Even as all men are kin, so are popular cults related; and even as the religion of nobler souls is of one paternity, so are the theosophies of all religions from one source.

One of the greatest secrets of the innermost initiated circles was the grand fact that all the great religions had their roots in one mother soil. And it was the spreading of the consciousness of this stupendous truth which subsequently--after the initial period of scepticism of the Alexandrian schools--gave rise to the many conscious attempts to synthesise the various phases of religion, and make "symphonies" of apparently contradictory philosophical tenets. Modern research, which is essentially critical and analytical, and rarely synthetical, classifies all these attempts under the term "syncretism," a word which it invariably uses in a depreciatory sense, as characterising the blending of absolutely incompatible elements in the most uncritical fashion. But when the pendulum swings once more towards the side of synthesis, as it must do in the coming years--for we are but repeating to-day in greater detail what happened in the early centuries--then scholarship will once more recognise the unity of religion under the diversity of creeds and return to the old doctrine of the mysteries.

[p. 54]

In connection with the "Good Shepherd" glyph, it will be useful to quote from Granger's instructive exposition on the subject, [*1] where he writes:

"Since the identification of Jesus with Hermes took place in circles which formed part of the Christian community, [*2] we shall not be surprised to find that one of the leading types of Christian art, the Good Shepherd, was immediately adopted from a current representation of the Greek Hermes. [*3] As we see from Hippolytus (Refut., v. 7), the Gnostics were especially interested in Hermes as Hermes Logius, a type which was increasingly frequent in later Greek art. And this epithet was connected by them with the conception of Jesus as the Logos. Now another type of Hermes, the Kriophoros, seemed to bring together Jesus as the Logos and Jesus as the Good Shepherd. These representations of Jesus begin in the second century; and so they correspond in order of time with the appearance of the Gospel according to the Egyptians, and of those Gnostic compositions which largely depend upon it. [*4]

"Another fact leads us to think that the figure of

[p. 55]

the Good Shepherd had its roots in a previous tradition. 'It is probable that there were no statues before the age of Constantine, except the Good Shepherd.' [*1] We must therefore add Hermes to the list of pagan types which were taken over for its own purpose by the rising Christian art.

"Moreover, we are enabled to advance one step further the long-standing controversy as to the portraits of Jesus. Since the figure of the Good Shepherd is borrowed from Greek sculpture, it cannot be used as evidence for the earliest conceptions about the appearance of Jesus. And so the arguments of Farrar and others fall to the ground, in so far as they take the presence of this type to show that there was no genuine tradition of Christ's appearance. [*2]

"We are now in a position to throw a little further light upon the famous inscription of Abercius. The inscription speaks of a Shepherd--'Who feedeth on the plains His flock of sheep, and hath great eyes that gaze forth every way. For He did teach me [how to understand and] scriptures worthy to believe.' [*3]

"The Shepherd, whose great eyes look in every direction, is no other than Hermes treated as a symbol of Christ. And so some of the arguments which may be directed against the Christian character of this inscription, and to which Harnack [*4] attaches an exaggerated weight, are turned aside."

With all of this may be compared what we have

[p. 56]

already written in the Prolegomena on "The Popular Symbolic Representation of the Shepherd" in the chapter on "'Hermas' and 'Hermes.'"

Compare also the Hymn to Attis in the Naassene tradition, where he is invoked "as Pan, as Bacchus, as Shepherd of bright stars." This is the macrocosmic side of the microcosmic mystery.

We should also not forget the interesting grouping on a Christian lamp [*1] and gem, [*2] which goes back very probably to the third century. [*3] It represents the Christ as the Good Shepherd, after the Hermes type, with a lamb on his shoulder. Above his head are the Seven "Planets," the Lords of the Fate, and in addition the Sun and Moon on either side, as is frequently the case in Mithraic representations. Round his feet seven lambs [*4] crowd, symbolical of the "seven peoples," one under each "planet." Moreover, on the right is Noah's dove and ark, and Jonah being swallowed by the whale, while on the left is Jonah again, vomited on to the land and peacefully resting beneath the shade of the miraculous gourd-tree.

This seems to me to be a symbol of the mysteries, a glyph of rebirth. The lambs are the purified lower nature of the man, the purest essence of which is exalted to the head of the Great Man. This purified "little man" is swallowed by the Cosmic Fish, the Great Mother, the Womb of the Almighty, and the man is born again to rest under his own tree in the Paradise of the Further Shore.

It is also of interest to note that the Hermetic colonies already planted in Mesopotamia, in the earliest

 

[p. 57]

[paragraph continues] Islamic times of which the Arabian writers tell us, called their head the "Shepherd." [*1]

From all of which we conclude that the Good Shepherd was one of the leading ideas of Hellenistic theology.

Footnotes

^24:1 From Epiphanius, Haeres., xxvi. 3; see note to the first Hermes-Prayer (i. 11).

^24:2 Symbolical of a high state of consciousness, the Mount of Perfection.

^24:3 Cf. the Oxyrhynchus logion 5: "Jesus saith: Wherever there are [two], they are not without God, and wherever there is one alone, I say, I am with him."

^25:1 See note to the fifth Hermes-Prayer (v. 2).

^26:1 Cf. F. F. F., 340, 341.

^27:1 Haer., I. xxx. (Stieren, i. 363 ff.).

^27:2 Haer., Fabb., i. 14. See F. F. F., pp. 188 ff.

^27:3 "The Mind to Hermes," C. H., xi. (xii.) 6, 7.

^28:1 That is, the condition "seeing."

^29:1 Not Horus.

^30:1 For references, see R. 39, n. 1; also 44.

^30:2 Cf. my note on Plut., De Is. et Os., liv. 6, in the Prolegg.

^30:3 De Ebriet.,  section 30.

^32:1 The reader, however, may be referred to the chapters on "The Basilidian Gnosis," "The Valentinian Movement," "Some Outlines of Aeonology," and "The Sophia-Mythus," in F. F. F., pp. 253-357.

^38:1 Cf. Gen. i. 22 and 28, viii. 17, ix. 7, and xxxv. 11 (in the singular).

^38:2 See, however, Frag. XX., and R. 126, n. 1. Cf. the same formula in C. H., iii. (iv.) 3 (P. 32, 11), and R. 116, n. 2.

^38:3 And is printed in Boissonade's (V. C.) edition of Michael Psellus, De Operatione Daemonum (Nurnberg, 1838), pp. 153, 154.

^38:4 If, indeed, the Psellus of our scholion is the Younger Psellus (eleventh century); the De Op. Daem., however, is ascribed by many to the Elder Psellus (ninth century). See, however, the section "The Original MS. of our Corpus" in ch. i. of the "Prolegomena."

^42:1 Cf. Com. on C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 14.

^42:2 Cf. Porphyry, Plotini Vita, xxii., ed. Creuzer (Oxford, 1835); also Theosoph. Rev. (July 1898), p. 403.

^44:1 Ashvaghosha's Discourse on the Awakening of Faith in the Mahayana. Translated for the first time from the Chinese Version by Teitaro Suzuki (Chicago, 1900). Mahayana means the "Great Vehicle" of Buddhism.

^44:2 Lit. Body of the Law.

^44:3 The italics are mine throughout.

^50:1 It is to be noticed that the Hymn is a Song of Holiness. "Holy art thou" is nine times repeated--most probably intentionally. This was noticed long ago by Casaubon. See R. 58, n. 3.

^50:2 Palladius, Hist. Laus., 89.

^51:1 G. has just referred to the story of Hermes being witness for Horus when indicted on a charge of bastardy by Typhon, as related in Plutarch.

^51:2 Granger (F.), "The Poemandres of Hermes Trismegistus," J. Th. Stud., vol. v., no. 191, p. 400.

^51:3 Ibid., p. 401.

^52:1 See Reseller's Lexikon, art. "Hermes." "Hermes in der Kunst"--"Periode des Archaismus."

^54:1 Op. cit., pp. 408 ff.

^54:2 G. seems here to be referring to the Naassene Document, but without any suspicion apparently of its composite character.

^54:3 See Sittl, Klassische Kunstarchaologie, 777, 809, 819.

^54:4 G. here again refers apparently to the Naassene Documents, which, however, did not depend on the Gospel according to the Egyptians, as we have shown; nor have we any sure ground for dating this widespread mystic gospel of Egypt as being of the second century rather than of the first. G. (p. 411) suggests that the scene of the Gospel of the Egyptians was on top of the Mount of Olives after the resurrection, which may very well be the case, and that the title of C. H., xiii. (xiv.), "The Secret Sermon on the Mountain," has reference to this gospel, which is by no means probable, for our sermon keeps entirely within its own tradition in its setting.

^55:1 Lowrie, Christian Art and Archaeology, p. 290.

^55:2 Taken in connection with the above quotation from Lowrie, we should say that it disposes of the whole contention. And for further corroboration of this view we would refer the reader to the Acts of John.

^55:3 G. gives the Greek text only, omitting the first line, which runs: "The disciple of the Pure Shepherd." Cf. R. 115.

^55:4 Cf. Class. Rev., ix. 297.

^56:1 Garucci, Storia della Arte christiana, vi. tav. 474; Perret, Catacombes de Rome, tab. 17, no. 5.

^56:2 Perret, ibid., tab. 16, no. 80

^56:3 R. 113.

^56:4 The gem has only six.

^57:1 Cf. Chwolsohn (D.), Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus, ii. 628. Cf. R. 166 ff.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 58]

CORPUS HERMETICUM (II.)

 

THE GENERAL SERMON

(THE title only is preserved in our Corpus, the text having disappeared with the loss of a quire or quires before the parent copy came into the hands of Psellus.)

*          *          *          *          *

*          *          *          *          *

*          *          *          *          *

*          *          *          *          *

*          *          *          *          *

*          *          *          *          *

*          *          *          *          *

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 59]

CORPUS HERMETICUM II. (III.)

 

TO ASCLEPIUS

(Text: P. 19-30; Pat. 18b-20.)

*          *          *          *          *

1. Hermes. [*1] All that is moved, Asclepius, is it not moved in something and by something?

Asclepius. Assuredly.

Her. And must not that in which it's moved be greater than the moved?

Asc. It must.

Her. Mover, again, has greater power than moved?

Asc. It has, of course.

Her. The nature, furthermore, of that in which it's moved must be quite other from the nature of the moved?

Asc. It must completely.

2. Her. Is not, again, this cosmos vast, [so vast] that than it there exists no body greater?

[p. 60]

Asc. Assuredly.

Her. And massive too, for it is crammed with multitudes of other mighty frames, nay rather all the other bodies that there are?

Asc. It is.

Her. And yet the cosmos is a body?

Asc. It is a body.

Her. And one that's moved?

3. Asc. Assuredly.

Her. Of what size, then, must be the space in which it's moved; and of what kind [must be] the nature [of that space]? Must it not be far vaster [than the cosmos], in order that it may be able to find room for its continued course, so that the moved may not be cramped for want of room and lose its motion?

Asc. Something, Thrice-greatest one, it needs must be, immensely vast.

4. Her. And of what nature? Must it not be, Asclepius, of just the contrary? And is not contrary to body bodiless?

Asc. Agreed.

Her. Space, then, is bodiless. But bodiless must either be some godlike thing or God [Himself]. And by "some godlike thing" I mean no more the generable but the ingenerable. [*1]

[p. 61]

5. If, then, space be some godlike thing, it is substantial [*1]; but if 'tis God [Himself], it transcends substance. But it is to be thought of otherwise [than God], and in this way.

God is first "thinkable" [*2] for us, not for Himself, for that the thing that's thought doth fall beneath the thinker's sense. God then can not be "thinkable" unto Himself, in that He's thought of by Himself as being nothing else than what He thinks. But He is "something else" for us, and so He's thought of by us.

6. If space is, therefore, to be thought, [it should] not, [then, be thought as] God, but space. If God is also to be thought, [He should] not [be conceived] as space, but energy that can contain [all space].

Further, [*3] all that is moved is moved not in the moved but in the stable. And that which moves [another] is of course stationary, for 'tis impossible that it should move with it.

Asc. How is it, then, that things down here, Thrice-greatest one, are moved with those that are [already] moved? For thou hast said [*4] the errant spheres were moved by the inerrant one.

Her. This is not, O Asclepius, a moving with, but one against; they are not moved with

[p. 62]

one another, but one against the other. It is this contrariety which turneth the resistance of their motion into rest. For that resistance is the rest of motion.

7. Hence, too, the errant spheres, being moved contrarily to the inerrant one, are moved by one another by mutual contrariety, [and also] by the stable one through contrariety itself. And this can otherwise not be.

The Bears [*1] up there, which neither set nor rise, think'st thou they rest or move?

Asc. They move, Thrice-greatest one.

Her. And what their motion, my Asclepius?

Asc. Motion that turns for ever round the same.

Her. But revolution--motion round same--is fixed by rest. For "round-the-same" doth stop "beyond-same." "Beyond-same" then, being stopped, if it be steadied in "round-same"--the contrary stands firm, being rendered ever stable by its contrariety.

8. Of this I'll give thee here on earth an instance, which the eye can see. Regard the animals down here,--a man, for instance, swimming! The water moves, yet the resistance of his hands and feet give him stability, so that he is not borne along with it, nor sunk thereby.

[p. 63]

Asc. Thou hast, Thrice-greatest one, adduced a most clear instance.

Her. All motion, then, is caused in station and by station.

The motion, therefore, of the cosmos (and of every other hylic animal [*1]) will not be caused by things exterior to the cosmos, but by things interior [outward] to the exterior--such [things] as soul, or spirit, or some such other thing incorporal.

'Tis not its body that doth move the living thing in it; nay, not even the whole [body of the universe a lesser] body e'en though there be no life in it. [*2]

9. Asc. What meanest thou by this, Thrice-greatest one? Is it not bodies, then, that move the stock and stone and all the other things inanimate?

Her. By no means, O Asclepius. The something-in-the-body, the that-which-moves the thing inanimate, this surely's not a body, for that it moves the two of them--both body of the lifter and the lifted? So that a thing that's lifeless will not move a lifeless thing. That which doth move [another thing] is animate, in that it is the mover.

Thou seest, then, how heavy laden is the soul,

[p. 64]

for it alone doth lift two bodies. That things, moreover, moved are moved in something as well as moved by something is clear.

10. Asc. Yea, [*1] O Thrice-greatest one, things moved must needs be moved in something void. [*2]

Her. Thou sayest well, O [my] Asclepius! [*3] For naught of things that are is void. Alone the "is-not" 's void [and] stranger to subsistence. For that which is subsistent can never change to void. [*4]

Asc. Are there, then, O Thrice-greatest one, no such things as an empty cask, for instance, and an empty jar, a cup and vat, and other things like unto them?

Her. Alack, Asclepius, for thy far-wandering from the truth! Think'st thou that things most full and most replete are void?

11. Asc. How meanest thou, Thrice-greatest one?

Her. Is not air body? 

Asc. It is.

[p. 65]

Her. And doth this body not pervade all things, and so, pervading, fill them? And "body"; doth body not consist from blending of the "four"? Full, then, of air are all thou callest void; and if of air, then of the "four." [*1]

Further, of this the converse follows, that all thou callest full are void--of air; for that they have their space filled out with other bodies, and, therefore, are not able to receive the air therein. These, then, which thou dost say are void, they should be hollow named, not void; for they not only are, but they are full of air and spirit.

12. Asc. Thy argument (logos), Thrice-greatest one, is not to be gainsaid; air is a body. Further, it is this body which doth pervade all things, and so, pervading, fill them. What are we, then, to call that space in which the all doth move?

Her. The Bodiless, Asclepius.

Asc. What, then, is Bodiless?

Her. 'Tis Mind and Reason (Logos), whole out of whole, all self-embracing, free from all body, from all error free, unsensible to body and untouchable, self stayed in self, containing all, preserving those that are, whose rays, to use a

[p. 66]

likeness, are Good, Truth, Light beyond light, the Archetype of soul. 

Asc. What, then, is God?

13. Her. Not any one of these is He; for He it is that causeth them to be, both all and each and every thing of all that are. Nor hath He left a thing beside that is-not; but they are all from things-that-are and not from things-that-are-not. For that the things-that-are-not have naturally no power of being anything, but rather have the nature of the inability-to-be. And, conversely, the things-that-are have not the nature of some time not-being.

14. Asc. What say'st thou ever, then, God is? 

Her. God, therefore, is not Mind, but Cause that the Mind is; God is not Spirit, but Cause that Spirit is; God is not Light, but Cause that the Light is. Hence should one honour God with these two names [the Good and Father]--names which pertain to Him alone and no one else.

For no one of the other so-called gods, no one of men, or daimones, can be in any measure Good, but God alone; and He is Good alone and nothing else. The rest of things are separable all from the Good's nature; for [all the rest] are soul and body, which have no space that can contain [*1] the Good.

[p. 67]

15. For that as mighty is the Greatness of the Good as is the Being of all things that are--both bodies and things bodiless, things sensible and intelligible things. Call not thou, therefore, aught else Good, for thou would'st impious be; nor anything at all at any time call God but Good alone, for so thou would'st again be impious.

16. Though, then, the Good is spoken of by all, it is not understood by all, what thing it is. Not only, then, is God not understood by all, but both unto the gods and some of men they out of ignorance do give the name of Good, though they can never either be or become Good. For they are very different from God, while Good can never be distinguished from Him, for that God is the same as Good.

The rest of the immortal ones are natheless honoured with the name of God, and spoken of as gods; but God is Good not out of courtesy but out of nature. For that God's nature and the Good is one; one is the kind of both, from which all other kinds [proceed].

The Good is He who gives all things and naught receives. [*1] God, then, doth give all things and receive naught. God, then, is Good, and Good is God.

17. The other name of God is Father, again

[p. 68]

because He is the that-which-maketh all. The part of father is to make.

Wherefore child-making is a very great and a most pious thing in life for them who think aright, and to leave life on earth without a child a very great misfortune and impiety; and he who hath no child is punished by the daimons after death.

And this the punishment: that that man's soul who hath no child, shall be condemned unto a body with neither man's nor woman's nature, a thing accurst beneath the sun.

Wherefore, Asclepius, let not your sympathies be with the man who hath no child, but rather pity his mishap, knowing what punishment abides for him.

Let all that has been said, then, be to thee, Asclepius, an introduction to the gnosis of the nature of all things.

Footnotes

^59:1 From here till the end of  section 4 is quoted by Stobaeus, Phys., xviii. 2; G. pp. 147-149; W. 157, 6 ff.

^60:1 That is, beyond genesis, the universe of becoming, or the sensible universe.

^61:1 oysiudes.

^61:2 Or intelligible.

^61:3 From here till the end of  section 9 (exclusive of the last sentence) is quoted by Stobaeus, Phys., xix. 2; G. pp. 154-157; W. 163, 14 ff.

^61:4 Sc. in some previous sermon.

^62:1 Sc. Ursa Major and Ursa Minor.

^63:1 That is, living material organism.

^63:2 That is, in the lesser body.

^64:1 For a criticism of Parthey's text of the following three paragraphs, see R., pp. 209, 300. Parthey had uncritically conflated the text of our Corpus and the readings of Stobaeus, in ignorance that he had before him two different recensions of the same text. I follow Reitzenstein.

^64:2 Cf. P. S. A., xxxiii. 1.

^64:3 From here to the end of  section 12 is quoted by Stobaeus, Phys., xviii. 3; G. pp. 149-150; W. 158, 13 ff.

^64:4 The variant in Stobaeus reads: "No single thing of things that are is void by reason of the [very nature of] subsistence. The 'is' could not be 'is' were it not full of subsistence [itself]." The rest of the variants need not be noted in translation.

^65:1 The physical elements--earth, air, water and fire--were supposed to be severally combinations of the Primal Elements, Earth, Air, Water and Fire, one Element dominating in each. Thus our air would consist of a proportion of all four Great Elements, but would have Air predominant in it; and so for the rest.

^66:1 In the original there is a word-play--xurista (separable) and xureisai (contain)--which is impossible to reproduce in translation.

^67:1 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 3: 'Tis "He alone who taketh naught."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

COMMENTARY

"AN INTRODUCTION TO THE GNOSIS OF THE NATURE OF ALL THINGS"

This treatise has no precise title, for, as we have already seen in treating of the make-up of the Corpus, the traditional title, "Of Hermes to Tat, the General Sermon," found in all the MSS., cannot apply to our

[p. 69]

tractate, which is addressed to Asclepius, and from which Stobaeus quotes under the general title, "Of Hermes, from the [Sermons] to Asclepius."

The supposition, however, that Sermon (II.) has dropped out from the parent copy of our Corpus, owing to the loss of one or more quires or quaternions, explains those phenomena so admirably, that it has only to be brought forward, as it has been by Reitzenstein, to carry conviction.

It is a curious fact, however, that Stobaeus starts his quotations from this treatise precisely with the same words with which our text begins; nevertheless these words plunge us so immediately into a secondary subject, that Reitzenstein thinks there may have been a more general introduction which Johannes may very well have omitted.

That, however, the lost pages of our Corpus should have contained such an introduction, broken at precisely the very same point to a word, would seem to be a coincidence the reverse of probable; nevertheless the treatise itself purports to be a very formal one, for we learn from the concluding words ( section 17) that it was intended to be "An Introduction to the Gnosis (prognusia) of the Nature of All Things."

We are, therefore, driven to conclude that, in spite of a most improbable coincidence, the beginning may have been lost, and that we have therefore to regret the loss not only of the whole of the "General Sermon" to Tat, but also of the introduction to the "Introduction to the Gnosis" addressed to Asclepius, and therewith, in all probability, some precious indications of how "Tat" and "Asclepius" are to be precisely defined.

Parthey's conflated title (p. 19) from the MSS., and Stobaeus, "Of Hermes the Thrice-greatest, the General Sermon to Asclepius," must therefore be definitely

[p. 70]

abandoned, and, in lieu of the lost general title, we must be content with the simple heading, "To Asclepius."

SPACE IS A PLENUM

The subject is that of the Fullness of Being or the Plenum of things. Space is a Plenum,--the fundamental concept of modern scientific speculation.

Asclepius, however, must guard himself against the confusion of Space with God; for God is not Space, but Cause thereof,--the True Transcendency of "that which can contain all things" ( section 6).

"In Him we move." "All that is moved is moved in what is stable," or "in Him who stands" (en estuti); where it is to be noticed that the term, "He who stands," is found in Philo, and is made much of in Gnostic tradition, especially in the so-called Simonian Gnosis, for in The Great Announcement, from which Hippolytus has preserved some passages, the Logos is called "He who stands" or "He who has stood, stands and will stand." [*1] This is the aspect of the Reason of things that holds and compacts all together, the Stock or Pillar of Immobility, the opposite aspect being that of the Separator or Divider; the two together forming the Cross of Manifestation, the resolution of the Sphere of Sameness.

The World-Soul is in perpetual motion; this perpetual motion is ordered and reduced to a cosmos and harmony of motion by the introduction into it, by means of the Reason, of the root-forms of motion (mentioned in the Timaeus and elsewhere);--up, down; right, left; front, back; in, out; round,--and no-motion.

All bodies are essentially inert; it is the soul that moves them, either immediately or mediately ( section 9). 

[p. 71]

What the precise meaning of  section 10 may be I cannot say; the tradition of the original text was variable, showing that the copyists had difficulty with it. As, however, the doctrine throughout is that of a Plenum (as, indeed, it is elsewhere in the Trismegistic writings), I can only suppose that the instructor of "Asclepius" was endeavouring to clinch his point by arguing that the only Void was the "is-not" or non-being; now as nonbeing cannot possibly "exist," there can be no such thing as Void.

THE SPOUSE OF DEITY

That, then, in which "the All doth move," in which all things "live and move and have their being," is the Bodiless; in other words, the Mind or Reason of God, the Logos,--who, as Philo tells us, is the Place of God,--that is, Infinite Space itself, the Container of all things, the very Spouse of Deity. Spouse or Son, it matters not; that in which all moves and lives and breathes is Wisdom, Good and Truth, the Aeon of aeons, Light of light, Life of life, the Archetype of Soul itself ( section 12).

GOD IS CAUSE THAT SPIRIT IS

"God, then, is not Spirit," [*1] much less "a spirit," [*2] "but Cause that Spirit is"; for God is "Good alone." Therefore: "Call not thou aught else Good."

And now let us turn to F. C. Conybeare's important criticism of Matt. xix. 17 = Mk. x. 18 = Lk. xviii. 19, in the first number of The Hibbert Journal, [*3] where he

[p. 72]

brings forward very strong evidence that the original reading was: "Call thou me not Good; One only is Good, God the Father,"--a reading known to Marcion, the Clementine Homilies, Athanasius, Didymus, Tatian, and Origen (the two last inferentially).

If we compare this with our text, "Call not thou, therefore, aught else Good, for thou would'st impious be; nor any thing at all at any time call Good but God alone," and "He is Good alone and nothing else,"--we cannot fail to be struck with the precise similarity of the phrasing and blend of ideas.

If, further, we take this in connection with the still more striking contrast, "God is not Spirit," with the Johannine "God is Spirit," we might at first sight almost persuade ourselves that our treatise had these Christian declarations immediately in mind. But the general phenomena of similarity of diction and idea of the Trismegistic literature with those of the New Testament documents is so much more satisfactorily explained by the fact that both literatures use mainly the common Hellenistic theological phrases of the time, that we need not distress ourselves with any suggestions either of plagiarism or of direct controversy.

Doubtless the declaration, "God is Spirit," was a commonplace among the religio-philosophical circles of the time, and Hermes is here simply refining on a common idea. The reading, "Call thou not me Good," which appears to have been preserved mainly in Gnostic tradition, may also as easily have come from a similar general idea that the One and Only One was Good alone.

It is, moreover, of special interest to notice that the second clause of the Marcionite reading runs: "There is one [only] Good, God the Father," while in our

[p. 73]

treatise the two names of God are given as Good and Father; and so we read ( section 16): "God, then, is Good, and Good is God"; and immediately after ( section 17): "The other name of God is Father." [*1]

Striking however, as are those coincidences, we are nevertheless wholly unpersuaded that there was any immediate literary contact between those two sets of Scripture. All that can be said is that their literary similarities are due to a common theological language and their many points of contact in ideas to a generally common atmosphere of theological conceptions.

HE WHO IS WITHOUT A WIFE IS HALF A MAN

Again, the doctrine of the duty to beget children ( section 17) seems at first sight to be an interpolation by a Jewish editor, the Jews holding that "he who is without a wife is half a man." We must, however, remember that the Egyptian priests were married, and that the rule with them, as with the Pythagoreans, was that a man should first of all discharge his duty to society and live the "practical," "political" or "social" life, before retiring into the life of contemplation. He must first beget children, not only that the race might be continued, but also that bodies might be supplied by parents devoted to the ideal of the religious or philosophic life, so that advanced souls might find birth in favourable conditions, and so the Order be continued.

This also is the ancient rule laid down by the Manu of the Aryan Hindus in the Manava Dharma Shastra. The duties of the householder station of life (Grihastha ashrama) must first be performed, before the parents can retire to the contemplative life (Vanaprastha

[p. 74]

ashrama). In special cases, however, exceptions could be made.

It may then be that Asclepius stands for those pupils who were still living the married life.

The scribe of the thirteenth century, Codex B. (Parisinus, 1220), has laconically written on the margin of this paragraph the single word "nonsense" (flyaria); he was presumably a monk.

Footnotes

^70:1 R., p. 305, also makes a brief reference to this.

^71:1 Cf. Joh. iv. 24: "pneuma o Theos."

^71:2 As the A.V. has it erroneously.

^71:3 See his article, "Three Early Doctrinal Modifications of the Text of the Gospels," in The Hibbert Journal (Oct. 1902), pp. 98-113. J. R. Wilkinson's few remarks (H. J., Ap. 1903, pp. 575, 576) on Conybeare's criticism of this synoptic passage do not seem to me to be of any weight.

^73:1 Cf. the expression, "God, Father and the Good," C. H., x. (xi.) 1.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 75]

CORPUS HERMETICUM III. (IV.)

 

THE SACRED SERMON

OF HERMES

(Text: P. 31-33; Pat. 8b-9.)

1. THE Glory of all things is God, Godhead and Godly Nature. Source of the things that are is God, who is both Mind and Nature,--yea Matter, the Wisdom that reveals all things. Source [too] is Godhead,--yea Nature, Energy, Necessity, and End, and Making-new-again. [*1]

Darkness that knew no bounds was in Abyss, and Water [too] and subtle Breath intelligent; these were by Power of God in Chaos.

Then Holy Light arose; and there collected 'neath Dry Space [*2] from out Moist Essence

[p. 76]

[paragraph continues] Elements; and all the Gods do separate things out from fecund Nature.

2. All things being undefined and yet unwrought, the light things were assigned unto the height, the heavy ones had their foundations laid down underneath the moist part of Dry Space, [*1] the universal things being bounded off by Fire and hanged in Breath to keep them up.

And [*2] Heaven was seen in seven circles; its Gods were visible in forms of stars with all their signs; while Nature had her members made articulate together with the Gods in her. And [Heaven's] periphery revolved in cyclic course, borne on by Breath of God.

3. And every God by his own proper power brought forth what was appointed him. Thus there arose four-footed beasts, and creeping things, and those that in the water dwell, and things with wings, and everything that beareth seed, and grass, and shoot of every flower, all having in themselves seed of again-becoming. [*3]

And they selected out [*4] the births [*5] of men for gnosis of the works of God and attestation of the energy of Nature; the multitude of men for

[p. 77]

lordship over all beneath the Heaven and gnosis of its blessings, that they might increase in increasing and multiply in multitude, and every soul infleshed by revolution of the Cyclic Gods, for observation of the marvels of the Heaven and Heaven's Gods' revolution, and of the works of God and energy of Nature, for tokens of its blessings, for gnosis of the power of God, that they might know the fates that follow good and evil [deeds] and learn the cunning work of all good arts.

4. [Thus] there begins their living and their growing wise, according to the fate appointed by the revolution of the Cyclic Gods, and their deceasing for this end.

And there shall be memorials mighty of their handiworks upon the earth, leaving dim trace behind when cycles are renewed.

For every birth of flesh ensouled, and of the fruit of seed, and every handiwork, though it decay, shall of necessity renew itself, both by the renovation of the Gods and by the turning-round of Nature's rhythmic wheel.

For that whereas the Godhead is Nature's ever-making-new-again the cosmic mixture, Nature herself is also co-established in that Godhead.

Footnotes

^75:1 Cf. P. S. A., xxvi 2.

^75:2 Lit. "Sand"; this presumably refers to the Light, and would thus mean "within the area or sphere of Light"--that is to say, manifestation. The "Moist Essence" is apparently the Water of Chaos, or primal substance.

^76:1 yf' ygrai ammui; presumably the "Water" of space. The heavy things are apparently primaeval or cosmic "Earth."

^76:2 The emended text from here to the end of the first sentence of  section 3 is given by R. 47, n. 1.

^76:3 Or "reincarnation" (paliggenesias).

^76:4 espermologoyn.

^76:5 tas geneseis.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 78]

COMMENTARY

TEXT AND TITLE

The text seems to be very corrupt, and at one time I thought it incomplete; but it may very well end with the reference to the mighty deeds of the men of old.

The title "Sacred Sermon" would lead us to expect something of a special nature, something that would constitute a basis of doctrine. For we hear of the "Sacred Sermon" of Orpheus, and of the "Sacred Sermon" of Pythagoras, and are told that they formed the most sacred deposits of these two mystic schools respectively, and were regarded with special reverence; they thus seem to have been looked upon in some fashion as containing the groundwork of these systems.

And this is precisely what we find with our treatise; it is to a large extent a summary of the general ideas of the "Shepherd" cosmogony adapted to the needs of a simpler formularization.

When, however, Reitzenstein (p. 193) refers to this treatise cursorily as the preaching of some prophet or other which has been transferred to Hermes by the Redactor of our Corpus, he suggests that we are dealing with a doctrine foreign to the cosmogonical ideas of the "Shepherd." It is, indeed, true that if we compare the data of the two treatises together, detail by detail, we shall find strong contradictions; but the general "feel" of both is the same, the general atmosphere is identical.

THE TRINITY

Prefixed to the cosmogenesis is a formal theological prooem, the precise meaning of which escapes me because of its almost mnemonic nature; it is, indeed

[p. 79]

quite in sutra style. There appears, however, to be a distinct trinitarian [*1] idea lurking in the first sentence, the trinity consisting of God (o Theos) and Godhead (to theion) and Nature (e fusis). The Glory or Power of all things is this Divine Trinity. The Source (or Beginning), the End and the Ever-renewing of all things are owing to this Triad. All three seem to be almost interchangeable terms. The Godhead is the Mind of God, Godly Nature is the Wisdom of God. Again, at the end of the sermon ( section 4) we are told that the Godhead (or that which is Divine) is "Nature's ever-making-new-again the cosmic mixture." Godhead in operation is Nature, while at the same time Nature is co-established in Godhead, and both are one in God, the Source of all.

The cosmogenesis begins with the grandiose image: "Darkness that knew no bounds was in Abyss."

We have already, in commenting on "Darkness" in the "Poemandres" treatise, referred, in explanation, to a Gnostic tradition in which the Primal Elements appear as Water, Darkness, Abyss, and Chaos, and have given some reason for ascribing the form of this tradition to Egypt--that is, Archaic Egypt, a parallel tradition to the Sumerian, both derived from a still more Archaic source.

FROM THE SYSTEM OF THE NICOLAITANS

If, now, we turn to Epiphanius (remembering that he picked up what he knew or thought he knew about the Gnostics in Egypt), we shall find that he has preserved from another Gnostic system an even more striking parallel with our text.

The Bishop of Salamis is denouncing the Nicolaitans, [*2] who for him were the earliest Christian Gnostics, there

[p. 80]

being very numerous and various sects of them, all deriving from a certain Nicolaus, whom Epiphanius would have us believe to have been one of the first seven deacons of the Church.

If, in reality, however, the Nicolaitans = the Balaamites of early Talmudic Rabbinism, [*1] then the original Nicolaitans were the earliest Christians, for "Balaamites" was the Rabbinical by-name of the followers of Balaam (Bileam) = Jeschu, and Balaam = Nicolaos, in Hebrew and Greek respectively.

Curiously enough, moreover, in the paragraph ( section 4) before the one from which we are going to quote, Epiphanius ascribes the use of the mystic words, "Kaulakau Kaulakau," to the Nicolaitans, words which we have, with high probability, shown in the chapter "Myth of Man in the Mysteries" ( section 16 J., end) to have been used by a Jewish Gnostic of the time of Philo, writing in an Egyptian environment, and dealing with the Man-tradition, which is one of the main elements of the "Poemandres" doctrine. All of which carries us back to the dawn of Christianity.

Speaking, then, of these Nicolaitans, Epiphanius writes (xxv. 5):

"Others of them, again, plaster together empty names, saying: There was Darkness and Abyss (bythos) and Water; and Spirit in the midst of them made separation of them." [*2]

Here we have precisely the same elements as in our text for the foundation of a cosmogonical representation. What precise relationship these various traditions may have had to one another we cannot say with any certainty; but what we can say is that the writer or

[p. 81]

writers of our treatise are dealing with a material common to themselves, to pre-Christian Jewish Gnosticism and the earliest forms of the Christian Gnosis.

THE "BOOKS OF THE CHALDAeANS"

The sentence (in  section 2), "All things being undefined and yet unwrought (akataskeyastun)" is also to be noticed, and, together with the opening sentence of the cosmogony, compared with the LXX. version of Gen. i. 2:

"And the earth was invisible and as yet unwrought (akataskeuastos), and Darkness was upon the Abyss, and the Spirit of God was borne upon the Water."

Are we, then, to suppose that our Trismegistic writer based himself directly upon this famous "oracle" of Jewish Scripture?

The Jewish Gnostics would doubtless do so in their commentaries; but the phenomena of the Christianized Jewish Gnostic systems persuade us rather that these Gnostic Jews did not derive their ideas directly from the text of their national Scripture, but from what we may call parallel traditions of an esoteric nature. We shall see later on, when treating of Zosimus, that there were translations of the Chaldaean sacred books in the Alexandrian Library, and we cannot but believe that the general ideas of Chaldaean cosmogony were familiar to all the learned of the time. For Chaldaea and Egypt were regarded as the two most wisdom-loving nations of antiquity, the two most sacred lands. What wonder, then, that Chaldaean and Egyptian ideas should be blended together, and turned out into a "scientific" whole, by the spirit of Greek "philosophizing," in our treatises?

I would therefore conclude that both here, and in

[p. 82]

the repetition of the formula, "increase in increasing and multiply in multitude" ( section 3), from the "Poemandres" treatise ( section 18), the similarities are not due to direct plagiarism, but to the fact that such logoi were "in the air." I would also suggest that the somewhat peculiar term akataskeuastos was not original with the Greek Targum of Genesis, first made at Alexandria some 250 years B.C., but that it was rather taken from the theological and philosophical language of the day and used by the Hebrew translators; that, in brief, in the LXX. translation already we have to take into account the strong influence of the technology of Hellenistic theology.

With regard to the whole of our treatise, I would suggest that we have the heads of topics which were to be subsequently explained and commented upon, rather than a didactic treatise setting forth a clear teaching. Like the proem, the cosmogenesis itself is straitly condensed, so condensed that the indications are too vague for us to form any clear mental picture of the process that is suggested. We have nothing but a series of headings that may have meant something very definite to the writer--may, in fact, have summed up for him a whole body of doctrine--but which for us, in our ignorance of detail, can have but little precise meaning.

To add to our difficulties, the text, as we have already said, appears to be very faulty. It is very probable that owing to its original brevity, copyists and readers would be tempted to gloss it in the interests of what would appear to them greater clearness; these glosses creeping into the text later on would, since the gloss-makers did not know the original scheme, blurr rather than elucidate the mother-text--and hence our tears.

[p. 83]

The most striking doctrine in the exposition is that of Renewal or Making-new-again (ananeusis). All animal and vegetable forms contain in themselves "the seed of again-becoming" (to sperma teis paliggenesias). I do not think that this is intended simply to mean that the individual is continued in the species; for we read that "every birth of flesh ensouled . . . shall of necessity renew itself (ananeuthe'setai)." The doctrine that is preached is, therefore, that of palingenesis or "re-incarnation"; the renewal on the karmic wheel of birth-and-death (fuseus kukloy enarithmioy dromema).

THE "FLOOD"

The last point to which we need call the reader's attention is the sentence: "And there shall be memorials mighty of their handiworks upon the earth, leaving dim trace behind when cycles are renewed."

The thought of the writer is evidently turned back towards the past, to a time when a mighty race, devoted to growth in wisdom, lived on earth and left great monuments of their wisdom in the work of their hands, dim traces of which were to be seen "in the renewal of the times." This seems to me to be a clear reference to the general belief of the time (commonly, though erroneously, called Stoic) that there were alternate periods of destruction, by fire and water, and of renewal. In Egypt the common belief, as we have pointed out elsewhere, was that the last destruction had been by water and flood. Before this Flood our author believed there had been a mighty race of Egyptians, the race of the First Hermes, and that some dim traces of the mighty works of this bygone wisdom-loving civilization were still to be seen.

[p. 84]

I am, myself, strongly inclined to believe in this tradition; and I have sometimes speculated as to the possibility of there being buried beneath one or more of the pyramids the remains of some prehistoric buildings (perhaps also of pyramid-shape) that have survived the "Flood."

Footnotes

^79:1 Not, of course, in a technical Christian sense.

^79:2 Adv. Haer., xxv. 1-5.

^80:1 See D. J. L., p. 188, where this identification is worked out with some probability.

^80:2 Ed. Dindorf (Leipzig, 1859), ii. 35, 36.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 85]

CORPUS HERMETICUM IV. (V.)

 

THE CUP OR MONAD

OF HERMES TO TAT

(Text: P. 34-40; Pat. 26b-27.)

1. Hermes. With Reason (Logos), not with hands, did the World-maker [*1] make the universal World [*2]; so that thou thus shouldst think of Him as everywhere and ever-being, the Author of all things, and One and Only, who by His Will [*3] all beings hath created.

This Body of Him is a thing no man can touch, or see, or measure, a Body inextensible, like to no other frame. 'Tis neither Fire nor Water, Air nor Breath [*4]; yet all of them come from it. [*5] Now being Good He willed to consecrate this [Body] to Himself alone, and set its Earth in order and adorn it. [*6]

[p. 86]

2. So down [to Earth] He sent the Cosmos [*1] of this Frame Divine, [*2]--man, a life that cannot die, and yet a life that dies. And o'er [all other] lives and over Cosmos [too], did man excel by reason of the Reason (Logos) and the Mind. For contemplator of God's works did man become; he marvelled and did strive to know their Author.

3. Reason (Logos) indeed, O Tat, among all men hath He distributed, but Mind not yet; not that He grudgeth any, for grudging cometh not from Him, [*3] but hath its place below, within the souls of men who have no Mind.

Tat. Why then did God, O father, not on all bestow a share of Mind?

Her. He willed, my son, to have it set up in the midst for souls, just as it were a prize.

4. Tat. And where hath He had it set up? 

Her. [*4] He tilled a mighty Cup [*5] with it, and sent it down, joining a Herald [to it], to whom He gave command to make this proclamation to the hearts of men:

[p. 87]

Baptize [*1] thyself with this Cup's baptism, what heart can do so, thou that hast faith thou canst ascend to Him that hath sent down the Cup, thou that dost know for what thou didst come into being!

As many then as understood the Herald's tidings and doused themselves in Mind, became partakers in the Gnosis; and when they had "received the Mind" they were made "perfect men."

But they who do not understand the tidings,these, since they possess the aid of Reason [only] and not Mind, are ignorant wherefor they have come into being and whereby.

5. The senses of such men are like irrational creatures'; and as their [whole] make-up is in their feelings and their impulses, [*2] they fail in all appreciation of [*3] those things which really are worth contemplation. These centre all their thought upon the pleasures of the body and its appetites, in the belief that for its sake man hath come into being.

But they who have received some portion of God's gift, [*4] these, Tat, if we judge by their deeds, have from Death's bonds won their release; for they embrace in their own Mind all things,

[p. 88]

things on the earth, things in the heaven, and things above the heaven,--if there be aught. [*1] And having raised themselves so far they sight the Good; and having sighted It, they look upon their sojourn here as a mischance; and in disdain of all, both things in body and the bodiless, they speed their way unto that One and Only One.

6. This is, O Tat, the Gnosis of the Mind, Vision of things Divine; God-knowledge is it, for the Cup is God's.

Tat. Father, I, too, would be baptized. 

Her. Unless thou first shalt hate thy Body, son, thou canst not love thy Self. But if thou lov'st thy Self thou shalt have Mind, and having Mind thou shalt share in the Gnosis. 

Tat. Father, what dost thou mean? 

Her. It is not possible, my son, to give thyself to both,--I mean to things that perish and to things divine. For seeing that existing things are twain, Body and Bodiless, in which the perishing and the divine are understood, the man who hath the will to choose is left the choice of one or other; for it can never be the twain should meet. And in those souls to whom the choice is left, the waning of the one causes the other's growth to show itself.

[p. 89]

7. Now the choosing of the Better not only proves a lot most fair for him who makes the choice, seeing it makes the man a God, but also shows his piety to God. Whereas the [choosing] of the Worse, although it doth destroy the "man," it only doth disturb God's harmony to this extent, that as processions pass by in the middle of the way, without being able to do anything but take the road from others, so do such men move in procession through the world led by their bodies' pleasures. [*1]

8. This being so, O Tat, what comes from God hath been and will be ours; but that which is dependent on ourselves, let this press onward and have no delay; for 'tis not God, 'tis we who are the cause of evil things, preferring them to good.

Thou see'st, son, how many are the bodies through which we have to pass, how many are the choirs of daimones, how vast the system of the star-courses [*2] [through which our Path doth lie], to hasten to the One and Only God.

For to the Good there is no other shore [*3]; It hath no bounds; It is without an end; and

[p. 90]

for Itself It is without beginning, too, though unto us it seemeth to have one--the Gnosis.

9. Therefore to It Gnosis is no beginning; rather is it [that Gnosis doth afford] to us the first beginning of Its being known.

Let us lay hold, therefore, of the beginning, and quickly speed through all [we have to pass].

'Tis very hard, to leave the things we have grown used to, which meet our gaze on every side, and turn ourselves back to the Old Old [Path].

Appearances delight us, whereas things which appear not make their believing hard.

Now evils are the more apparent things, whereas the Good can never show Itself unto the eyes, for It hath neither form nor figure.

Therefore the Good is like Itself alone, and unlike all things else; for 'tis impossible that That which hath no body should make Itself apparent to a body.

10. The "Like's" superiority to the "Unlike "and the "Unlike's" [*1] inferiority unto the "Like" consists in this:

The Oneness [*2] being Source [*3] and Root of all, is in all things as Root and Source. Without [this] Source is naught; whereas the Source [Itself] is from naught but Itself, since It is

[p. 91]

[paragraph continues] Source of all the rest. It is Itself Its Source, since It may have no other Source.

The Oneness then being Source, containeth every number, but is contained by none; engendereth every number, but is engendered by no other one.

11. Now all that is engendered is imperfect, it is divisible, to increase subject and to decrease; but with the Perfect [One] none of these things doth hold. Now that which is increasable increases from the Oneness, but succumbs through its own feebleness when it no longer can contain the One.

And now, O Tat, God's Image [*1] hath been sketched for thee, as far as it can be [*2]; and if thou wilt attentively dwell on it and observe it with thy heart's eyes, believe me, son, thou'lt find the Path that leads above; nay, that Image shall become thy Guide [*3] itself, because the Sight [Divine] hath this peculiar [charm], it holdeth fast and draweth unto it those who succeed in opening their eyes, just as, they say, the magnet [draweth] iron. [*4]

Footnotes

^85:1 o demioyrgos.

^85:2 ton panta kosmon.

^85:3 thelesis.

^85:4 Perhaps meaning Aether.

^85:5 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 6.

^85:6 kosmeisai, the whole is a play on the word kosmos (kosmos) which means "order," "ornament," and "world." I have tried to retain it in English by using both meanings. The three preceding sentences, from "This Body" onwards, are quoted by Stobaeus, Phys., I. ii. 30; G. i. 26; W. 38, 10 ff., under the heading "Of Hermes."

^86:1 That is, "Order."

^86:2 That is, the Body of God; the One Element.

^86:3 Cf. C. H., v. (vi.) 2.

^86:4 A critical text of most of these two paragraphs is given, R. 214, n. 1.

^86:5 krateira, lit. a crater or mixing-bowl.

^87:1 The meaning of this term is not to "sprinkle" with water, but to "plunge the whole body" into water.

^87:2 kai en thymui kai en orgei ten krasin exontes.

^87:3 Lit. "they do not wonder at."

^87:4 Sc. the Mind.

^88:1 Cf. C. H. xi. (xii.) 19: "And contemplate what is beyond--if there be aught beyond the Cosmos."

^89:1 Critical text of simile is also given by R. 102, n. 2. Quoted by Zosimus in  section "On the Anthropos Doctrine."

^89:2 kai synexeian kai dromoys asterun, the Septenary Spheres or "Cyclic Gods"; for the syexeia (lit. continuity) is evidently the same as the armonia, Harmony, Concord, System.

^89:3 adiabaton,--lit. not to be crossed, not to be forded.

^90:1 Reading with B., tou anomoioy.

^90:2 monas,--the Monad, that is the Good.

^90:3 Or, Beginning.

^91:1 The Universal Cosmos or Monad.

^91:2 The above sentences, beginning with "The Oneness," second paragraph of  section 10, are quoted by Stobaeus, Phys., I. x. 15; G. pp. 116, 117; W. 127, 6 ff .; under the heading, "Of Hermes."

^91:3 Cf. C. H., vii. (viii.) 2; ix. (x.) 10; x. (xi.) 21; R. 23, n. 5.

^91:4 This simile is also used in the Naassene Document, and in Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris, where I have noticed it.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 92]

COMMENTARY

THE TITLE

This beautiful little treatise, in which the great principles of the Gnosis are set forth so clearly and lucidly by the philosopher-mystic who penned it so many centuries ago, bears a double, or rather a triple, title: "Of Hermes to Tat: The Cup or Monad [or Oneness]." [*1] The double title, however, is but a choice of names, for The Cup is The Oneness,--The One Element, [*2] the "Body" of God, which is the Cause of all bodies and yet itself is bodiless; in other words, the Monad is the Intelligible Cosmos itself, God's Image, elsewhere called His Alone-begotten Son.

That this idea of a Cup or Mixing-bowl (Crater), in the symbolic sense of an all-containing receptacle, in which all the elements were blended together, and in the metaphysical sense of a transcendent Unity, the source of all things measurable and numberable, was one of the main doctrines of the Trismegistic tradition, is plain from the Poemandrist Zosimus, who refers especially to this Cup as the symbol of Spiritual Baptism--that is, the plunging of the whole nature into the Great Ocean of Spirit or Mind, so that the man becomes irradiate with Life and illumined with Light.

For a consideration of this Crater or Cup symbolism I must refer the reader to the chapter so entitled in the "Prolegomena"; it there being shown that in all probability it was transmitted along the Orphic line

[p. 93]

of tradition, though doubtless the Egyptian had some similar ideas.

Our treatise should be read in the closest connection with C. H., xi. (xii.), "The Mind to Hermes," which is its "esoteric" counterpart. What is here set forth for Tat by Hermes is there imparted to Hermes by the Mind; what is here set forth for the probationer or "hearer" is there set forth for the advanced disciple or "seer"; or, to use Mystery terms, what is here told to the Mystes is there revealed to the Epopt. Thus, then, the Tat-instruction begins.

THE BAPTISM OF THE MIND

1. All things are made by Reason, the Formative Energy of the Mind. The Ideal Cosmos, or World-Order, is the Divine Body.

2. Earth is the sensible Cosmos; on Earth man, the image of the Image, or Reason, of God rules. The purpose of man is thus to become the contemplator (theate's) of the works of God; it is by the "wonder" aroused in him by the sight of these marvels that he will rise eventually into a knowledge of God Himself. This "wonder" is, then, the beginning of the True Philosophy or God-knowledge (e tou theou katanoesis).

3. All men have in them "reason" (the ray of the Reason or Logos), but as yet few have "Mind." This "mind" is the true Son of Mind, it is the real man, the perfect man, self-conscious of his Self. This true Self-consciousness is the prize set up for souls to win: the crown of humanity, the Christ-state (or, at any rate, the super-man or true man state).

The Christ-Baptism is the plunging of the whole nature into the Mind-filled Cup,--the Pleroma of the Divine Being whose Body and Mind are one,--for is

[p. 94]

not the Cup the Body of God, "consecrated unto Himself alone" ( section 1), the Universal Body of all things?

THE HOLY GRAIL

It would be fascinating to speculate on what connection this Cup of Initiation may have had with the Mystic Eucharist, and the Original of the later Grail-tradition, which a great master of music and song has in our days made to live again in undying melody, and so restored it to its more universal significance. How Wagner sensed the marvel of the wondrous Vision with a poet's intuition may be seen from his own words:

"To the enraptured gaze of one longing for celestial love, the clear blue atmosphere of heaven seems at first to condense itself into a wonderful, scarcely perceptible, but dazzlingly beautiful Vision. Then with gradually increasing precision the wonder-working angelic host is delineated in infinitely delicate outlines, as, conveying the holy vessel in its midst, it insensibly descends from the blazing heights of heaven. As the vision grows more and more distinct, . . . the heart throbs with the pain of ecstasy; . . . and when at last the Grail shows itself in the marvel of undraped reality, . . . the beholder's brain reels--he falls down in a state of adoring annihilation. . . . With chaste rejoicing the angelic host then returns to the heavenly height, fading away into the nothingness whence it first emanated."

But for the Seers of the Gnosis there was a more intimate realization, for they were bidden to cast aside all hesitation and fearlessly to plunge themselves into the very Cup Itself, the Ocean of Divine Love and Wisdom.

This was the Proclamation or Preaching (ke'rygma),

[p. 95]

or Good Tidings, of the Herald of God to men, to those who had the Living Faith they could "ascend to Him who had sent down the Cup," God's Greatest Gift.

By such a Baptism as this, not by a symbolic sprinkling with water, is it that man is to be redeemed. This is the consummation of man's earthly pilgrimage, the realization of the "Gnosis of the Mind, Vision of things Divine; God-knowledge is it; for the Cup is God's."

THE "HATING OF THE BODY"

6. In  section 6 we have given us a discipline of the mystic way, the "hating of the body," which is by no means to be taken literally.

A misunderstanding of this discipline led many of the mystics of the time (and, for a matter of that, has led most of the mystics of all time) to the false belief that the body (or matter generally) was the source of evil. Hence we have all the mortifications and chastisements of the flesh which the monkish spirit introduced into Christendom, and which persist in some quarters even to our own day. Against this the Common Sense of Christianity as a general religion, basing itself on the general utterances of the Christ, has ever protested.

Our mystic philosopher, in urging his disciples to hate the body, apparently does so because they are in the first stages of awakening, and so far have not got the "Mind" active in them.

In taking the first steps there must be developed a consciousness of the strong antithesis of good and evil, of love and hate, in order that the will of the disciple may be strengthened towards the good and weakened towards the bad.

When, however, his will is balanced between the two, when he as easily wills good as evil, then, and

[p. 96]

not till then, is he prepared to learn the further great lesson: that real wisdom consists in balance, in the Middle Way; that nothing is evil in itself--the Body is as honourable in its own sphere, as absolutely necessary and indispensable, as is the Mind in its.

He learns the great secret that to have one's thoughts always in heaven is as erroneous as to have them always on earth; that there is a higher mode of existence, when the things of heaven and earth are within each other, and not apart.

As the Introduction to The Book of the Great Logos according to the Mystery has it:

"Jesus saith: Blessed is the man who knoweth this Word (Logos), and hath brought down the Heaven and borne up the Earth and raised it Heavenwards." [*1]

Heaven and Earth must kiss each other for this consummation, this truly Sacred Marriage.

And yet in the third Synoptic (xvi. 25, 26) we read:

"Jesus saith: If any man come unto Me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own soul also, he cannot be My disciple."

Here we have precisely the same word "hate" (misei) as in our text. That, however, this "dark saying" was interpreted in a mystical sense by Gnostic tradition, as by no means referring to physical parents but to the past causes of our imperfections, [*2] I have already pointed out on several occasions [*3]; we may therefore

[p. 97]

conclude that in a gnostic teaching, such as is our treatise, the terms "hate" and "body" are not to be literally interpreted.

8. And that this is so may be seen from the declaration in  section 8: "For 'tis not God, 'tis we who are the cause of evil things, preferring them to good";--where the cause of evil is not assigned to the body but to man's own choice. And finally, to clinch our contention, we would refer the reader to the Sermon to Asclepius, C. H., vi. (vii.) 6:

"Such are the things that men call good and beautiful, Asclepius--things which we cannot flee or hate."

THE GNOSIS AND ITS BLESSINGS

9. In  section 9 we have to notice the phrase: "Therefore to It Gnosis is no beginning; rather is it that Gnosis doth afford to us the first beginning of Its being known"; and compare it with the logos quoted by the Jewish commentator in the Naassene Document ( section 25): "The Beginning of Perfection is Gnosis of Man, but Gnosis of God is Perfect Perfection."

The claim for the Gnosis is therefore a modest one. The Gnosis is not an end in itself; it is but the beginning of the True Knowledge of God. They who receive the Baptism of the Mind are made "perfect men," not Perfect; not until they have received this touch of the Christ-consciousness have they reached true manhood.

Those who have received this Baptism know why they have come into being,--the purpose of life. They become consciously immortal; they know they are deathless, they do not only believe it; their immortality is no longer a belief, it is a fact of knowledge.

They have won their freedom from Death and Fate, and know the real constitution of the cosmos up to the Threshold of the Good, the Plain of Truth--that is to

[p. 98]

say, presumably in Buddhist terms, as far as the Nirvanic state of consciousness. Not yet, however, have they entered Nirvana--that is to say, become one with the Logos. They have seen the Sight or Vision of Nirvana, but not entered into the Promised Land, that "Blessed Space," which, as Basilides tells us, "can neither be conceived of nor characterized by any word." [*1]

The Vision is an earnest of what they may be. They have become Gods, it is true, already, or, in other words, enjoy the same freedom and consciousness as the Gods or Angels, but there is a still more transcendent state, when they will be at-oned with Deity Himself.

THE ANCIENT PATH

Hard as it is to leave the "things we have grown used to," the things habitual, it must be done if we are to enter into the Way of the Gnosis. But no new Path is this, no going forth into new lands (though it may have all the appearance of being so). The entrance on the Path of the Gnosis is a Going-Home, it is a Return--a Turning-Back (a True Repentance). "We must turn ourselves back unto the Old Old Way" (ta palaia kai arxaia).

And for the followers of the Doctrine of Thrice-greatest Hermes, this Old Old Path could have meant nothing but the Archaic Wisdom of Ancient Egypt. The Wisdom of Egypt was thus the Gnosis.

Footnotes

^92:1 See R. 193. Unfortunately, though he twice quotes from our treatise, Stobaeus adds nothing to our knowledge of the title, since he prefixes his extracts with the simple heading, "Of Hermes."

^92:2 Which is to be equated, I believe, "meta-physically" with the Quintessence or Aether.

^96:1 Codex Brucianus; see F. F. F., p. 520.

^96:2 Cf. the Pistis Sophia, 341-343, where the text is given as: "He who shall not leave father and mother to follow after Me is not worthy of Me," and explained by the Saviour to mean: "Ye shall leave your Parents the Rulers, that ye may be Children of the First Everlasting Mystery."

^96:3 See, for instance, Extracts from the "Vahan" (London, 1904), pp. 374-376.

^98:1 See F. F. F., p. 261.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 99]

CORPUS HERMETICUM V. (VI.)

 

THOUGH UNMANIFEST GOD IS MOST MANIFEST

OF HERMES TO HIS SON TAT

(Text: P. 41-48; Pat. 12b-13b.)

1. I WILL recount for thee this sermon (logos) too, O Tat, that thou may'st cease to be without the mysteries of the God beyond all name. [*1] And mark thou well how That which to the many seems unmanifest, will grow most manifest for thee.

Now were It manifest, It would not be. For all that is made manifest is subject to becoming, for it hath been made manifest. But the Unmanifest for ever is, for It doth not desire to be made manifest. It ever is, and maketh manifest all other things.

Being Himself unmanifest, as ever being and ever making-manifest, Himself is not made

[p. 100]

manifest. God is not made Himself; by thinking-manifest, [*1] He thinketh all things manifest.

Now "thinking-manifest" deals with things made alone, for thinking-manifest is nothing else than making.

2. He, then, alone who is not made, 'tis clear, is both beyond all power of thinking-manifest, and is unmanifest.

And as He thinketh all things manifest, He manifests through all things and in all, and most of all in whatsoever things He wills to manifest.

Do thou, then, Tat, my son, pray first unto our Lord and Father, the One-and-Only One, from whom the One [*2] doth come, to show His mercy unto thee, in order that thou mayest have the power to catch a thought of this so mighty God, one single beam of Him to shine into thy thinking. For thought alone "sees" the Unmanifest, in that it is itself unmanifest.

If, then, thou hast the power, He will, Tat, manifest to thy mind's eyes. The Lord begrudgeth not Himself to anything, but manifests Himself through the whole world.

Thou hast the power of taking thought, of seeing it and grasping it in thy own "hands," and gazing face to face upon God's Image. [*3] But

[p. 101]

if what is within thee even is unmanifest to thee, how, then, shall He Himself who is within thy self be manifest for thee by means of [outer] eyes?

3. But if thou wouldst "see" Him, bethink thee of the sun, bethink thee of moon's course, bethink thee of the order of the stars. Who is the One who watcheth o'er that order? For every order hath its boundaries marked out by place and number.

The sun's the greatest god of gods in heaven; to whom all of the heavenly gods give place as unto king and master. And he, this so-great one, he greater than the earth and sea, endures to have above him circling smaller stars than him. Out of respect to Whom, or out of fear of Whom, my son, [doth he do this]?

Nor like nor equal is the course each of these stars describes in heaven. Who [then] is He who marketh out the manner of their course and its extent?

4. The Bear up there that turneth round itself, and carries round the whole cosmos with it--Who is the owner of this instrument? Who He who hath set round the sea its bounds? Who He who hath set on its seat the earth?

For, Tat, there is someone who is the Maker and the Lord of all these things. It could not be that number, place and measure could be kept without someone to make them. No order

[p. 102]

whatsoever could be made by that which lacketh place and lacketh measure; nay, even this [*1] is not without a lord, my son. For if the orderless lacks something, in that it is not lord of order's path, it also is beneath a lord--the one who hath not yet ordained it order.

5. Would it were possible for thee to get thee wings, and soar into the air, and, poised midway 'tween earth and heaven, behold the earth's solidity, the sea's fluidity (the flowings of its streams), the spaciousness of air, fire's swiftness, [and] the coursing of the stars, the swiftness of heaven's circuit round them [all]!

Most blessed sight were it, my son, to see all these beneath one sway--the motionless in motion, and the unmanifest made manifest; whereby is made this order of the cosmos and the cosmos which we see of order.

6. If thou would'st see Him too through things that suffer death, [*2] both on the earth and in the deep, [*3] think of a man's being fashioned in the womb, my son, and strictly scrutinize the art of Him who fashions him, and learn who fashioneth this fair and godly image of the Man. [*4]

[p. 103]

Who [then] is He who traceth out the circles of the eyes; who He who boreth out the nostrils and the ears; who He who openeth [the portal of] the mouth; who He who doth stretch out and tie the nerves; who He who channels out the veins; who He who hardeneth the bones; who He who covereth the flesh with skin; who He who separates the fingers and the joints; who He who widens out a treading for the feet; who He who diggeth out the ducts; who He who spreadeth out the spleen; who He who shapeth heart like to a pyramid; who He who setteth ribs together; who He who wideneth the liver out; who He who maketh lungs like to a sponge; who He who maketh belly stretch so much; who He who doth make prominent the parts most honourable, so that they may be seen, while hiding out of sight those of least honour?

7. Behold how many arts [employed] on one material, how many labours on one single sketch; and all exceeding fair, and all in perfect measure, yet all diversified! Who made them all? What mother, or what sire, save God alone, unmanifest, who hath made all things by His Will?

8. And no one saith a statue or a picture comes to be without a sculptor or [without] a painter; doth [then] such workmanship as this exist without a Worker? What depth of blindness, what deep impiety, what depth of ignorance!

[p. 104]

[paragraph continues] See, [then] thou ne'er, son Tat, deprivest works of Worker!

Nay, rather is He greater than all names, so great is He, the Father of them all. [*1] For verily He is the Only One; and this His work, to be a father.

9. So, if thou forcest me somewhat too bold, to speak, His being is conceiving of all things and making [them]. [*2]

And as without its maker it is impossible that anything should be, so ever is He not unless He ever makes all things, in heaven, in air, in earth, in deep, in all of cosmos, in every part that is and that is not of everything. For there is naught in all the world that is not He.

He is Himself, both things that are and things that are not. The things that are He hath made manifest, He keepeth things that are not in Himself.

10. He is the God beyond all name; He the unmanifest, He the most manifest; He whom the mind [alone] can contemplate, He visible unto the eyes [as well]; He is the one of no body, the one of many bodies, nay, rather He of every body.

Naught is there which He is not. For all are

[p. 105]

[paragraph continues] He and He is all. [*1] And for this cause hath He all names, in that they are one Father's. And for this cause hath He Himself no name, in that He's Father of [them] all. [*2]

Who, then, may sing Thee praise of Thee, or [praise] to Thee?

Whither, again, am I to turn my eyes to sing Thy praise; above, below, within, without?

There is no way, no place [is there] about Thee, nor any other thing of things that are.

All [are] in Thee; all [are] from Thee, O Thou who givest all and takest naught, for Thou hast all and naught is there Thou hast not.

11. And when, O Father, shall I hymn Thee? For none can seize Thy hour or time.

For what, again, shall I sing hymn? For things that Thou hast made, or things Thou hast not? For things Thou hast made manifest, or things Thou hast concealed?

How, [*3] further, shall I hymn Thee? As being of myself? As having something of mine own? As being other?

For that Thou art whatever I may be; Thou art whatever I may do; Thou art whatever I may speak.

For Thou art all, and there is nothing else

[p. 106]

which Thou art not. Thou art all that which doth exist, and Thou art what doth not exist,--Mind when Thou thinkest, and Father when Thou makest, and God when Thou dost energize, and Good and Maker of all things.

(For that the subtler part of matter is the air, of air the soul, of soul the mind, and of mind God.)

Footnotes

^99:1 Cf.  section 8 end, and  section 9 beginning.

^100:1 en fantasiai--that is to say, by thinking into manifestation.

^100:2 Presumably the Manifested God; the One-and-Only One being the Unmanifested, the God beyond all name.

^100:3 The Intelligible Cosmos.

^102:1 Namely, that which lacketh place, number, and order; that is, disorder, chaos.

^102:2 As opposed to the immortal world-order.

^102:3 Cf.  section 9 below, where it almost seems to mean "water."

^102:4 The Heavenly Man of "The Shepherd" treatise; man is the image of The Man, the Logos or Image of God. This and the following passage is referred to by Lactantius, D. Institt., ii. 10.

^104:1 The translation of this sentence is conjectural; for the text is not only corrupt, but there appears to be a lacuna in it.

^104:2 The male and female energies of the Divine Parent.

^105:1 For emended reading, see R. 244.

^105:2 That is, of all names. For the following, cf. P. S. A., xxxi. 3.

^105:3 Text from here on given in R. 68, n. 4.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

COMMENTARY

THE TITLE

The redactor of our Corpus must have taken this sermon from some collection of "Those to Tat," for it begins "kai tonde soi ton logon." One other sermon at least, then, must have preceded it; but whether it was our C. H., iv. (v.), "The Cup," or the lost C. H. (ii.), "The General Sermon," it is impossible to say.

The sermon bears no title proper, and the enunciation of the subject, which stands in its place, is derived from the second sentence of the treatise itself, and has plainly been superscribed by some later Byzantine editor.

MAYA

The opening paragraphs of this fine tractate are very difficult to render into English in any way that can preserve the subtle shades of meaning of the Greek. As this subtle word-play has been entirely missed by all previous translators, I have made a rough attempt to preserve it by using the somewhat clumsy term "manifest." The word-play in Greek may be seen

[p. 107]

from the following list of the original terms taken in the order of their occurrence: afanes, fanerw'taton, emfanes, fainomenon, efane, afanes, faneinai, fanera, afane's, fanerun, faneroutai, fantasiai, fantasiun, fantasia, afantasiastos kai afane's, fantasiun, fainetai, faneinai. These all occur in  section 1 and the first two lines of  section 2.

I have translated fantasia by "thinking-manifest," seeing that it is the power by which an object is made apparent or manifest. The doctrine is the same as that of the Vedanta philosophy, the Maya of the Vedantavadins. Maya is generally translated "illusion," but this is not a good equivalent, for it comes from the root ma, to make or measure. The Logos is called in the Vedanta, Mayin (masc.), the Maker, Measurer, or Creator, and His Power, or Shakti, is Maya (fem.). It is the Power of the Divine Thought, and so far from being illusion in any ordinary sense of the word, is very real for us, and is only non-real as compared to the Logos Himself, the One Reality in the highest philosophical sense of the term.

The idea is magnificently summed up for us in a logos of Phosilampes, [*1] quoted by the redactor of the Untitled Apocalypse of the Codex Brucianus, which runs as follows:

"Through Him is that-which-really-is and that-which-really-is-not, through which the Hidden-which-really-is and the Manifest-which-really-is-not exists."

Also compare Hippolytus' summary of the "Simonian" Gnosis:

"Of this Twofold Nature he calls the one side the Hidden and the other the Manifest, saying that the concealed [parts] of the Fire are hidden in the manifest, and the manifest produced by the concealed. . . . 

[p. 108]

"And the manifest side of the Fire has all things in itself which a man can perceive of things visible, or which he unconsciously fails to perceive. Whereas the hidden side is everything that we can conceive as intelligible, . . . or which a man fails to conceive." [*1]

2. "The Lord begrudgeth not Himself to any thing." Compare this with C. H., iv. (v.) 3: "Not that He grudgeth any, for grudging cometh not from Him"; and compare both with the saying of Plato in the Timaeus (29 E):

"He was Good, and to the Good there can never at any time be any grudging of aught."

THE HIGHER PANTHEISM OR PANMONISM

10. With the soul-satisfying pantheism of  section 10 we may with interest compare the address to the Logos in The Martyrdom of Peter, which still retains many Gnostic elements.

"Thou that art to be understood by spirit alone! Thou art my father, Thou my mother, Thou my brother, Thou my friend, Thou my servant, Thou my master. Thou art the all, and all is in Thee. Yea, all that is, is Thou; and there is nothing else that is but Thee alone!" [*2]

HYMN TO ALL-GOD

The treatise ends with one of the most magnificent Hymns to God ever written in any language--a hymn which some foolish copyist has spoilt by tagging on to it the gloss of a reader noted on the margin of the MS. from which our scribe copied.

[p. 109]

With the sentence: "All are in Thee, all are from Thee," compare the Naassene Hymn (quoted in Hippolytus' Introduction, in "The Myth of Man"):

"'From Thee' is Father, and 'Through Thee,' Mother,--the two Immortal Names, Parents of Aeons, O Thou who hast the Heaven for Thy City, O Man of Mighty Names!"

Footnotes

^107:1 Perhaps a by-name of Basilides; see F. F. F., p. 554.

^108:1 Hipp., Philos., vi. 9; see my Simon Magus (London, 1892), p. 13.

^108:2 Lipsius (R. A.) and Bonnet (M.), Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha (Leipzig, 1891), i. 98.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 110]

CORPUS HERMETICUM VI. (VII.)

 

IN GOD ALONE IS GOOD AND ELSEWHERE NOWHERE

(Text: P. 48-53; Pat. 14a-15a.)

1. GOOD, O Asclepius, is in none else save God alone; nay, rather, Good is God Himself eternally.

If it be so, [Good] must be essence, from every kind of motion and becoming free (though naught is free from It), possessed of stable energy around Itself, never too little, nor too much, an ever-full supply. [Though] one, yet [is It] source of all; for what supplieth all is Good. When I, moreover, say [supplieth] altogether [all], it is for ever Good. But this belongs to no one else save God alone.

For He stands not in need of any thing, so that desiring it He should be bad; nor can a single thing of things that are be lost to Him, on losing which He should be pained; for pain is part of bad.

[p. 111]

Nor is there aught superior to Him, that He should be subdued by it; nor any peer to Him to do Him wrong, or [so that] He should fall in love on its account; nor aught that gives no ear to Him, whereat He should grow angry; nor wiser aught, for Him to envy.

2. Now as all these are non-existent in His being, what is there left but Good alone?

For just as naught of bad is to be found in such transcendent Being, so too in no one of the rest will Good be found.

For in them all are all the other things [*1]--both in the little and the great, both in each severally and in this living one [*2] that's greater than them all and mightiest [of them].

For things subject to birth [*3] abound in passions, birth in itself being passible. But where there's passion, nowhere is there Good; and where is Good, nowhere a single passion. For where is day, nowhere is night; and where is night, day is nowhere.

Wherefore in genesis the Good can never be, but only be in the ingenerate.

But seeing that the sharing in all things hath been bestowed on matter, so doth it share in Good.

[p. 112]

In this way is the Cosmos good; that, in so far as it doth make all things, as far as making goes it's Good, but in all other things it is not Good. For it's both passible and subject unto motion, and maker of things passible.

3. Whereas in man by greater or by less of bad is good determined. For what is not too bad down here, is good; and good down here is the least part of bad.

It cannot, therefore, be that good down here should be quite clean of bad, for down here good is fouled with bad; and being fouled, it stays no longer good, and staying not it changes into bad.

In God alone, is, therefore, Good, or rather Good is God Himself.

So then, Asclepius, the name alone of Good is found in men, the thing itself nowhere [in them], for this can never be.

For no material body doth contain It,--a thing [*1] bound on all sides by bad, by labours, pains, desires and passions, by error and by foolish thoughts.

And greatest ill of all, Asclepius, is that each of these things that have been said above, is thought down here to be the greatest good.

And what is still an even greater ill, is belly-lust, the error that doth lead the band of all

[p. 113]

the other ills--the thing that makes us turn down here from Good.

4. And I, for my own part, give thanks to God, that He hath cast it in my mind about the Gnosis of the Good, that it can never be It [*1] should be in the world. [*2] For that the world is "fullness" [*3] of the bad, but God of Good, and Good of God.

The excellencies of the Beautiful are round the very essence [of the Good]; nay, they do seem too pure, too unalloyed; perchance 'tis they that are themselves Its essences.

For one may dare to say, Asclepius,--if essence, sooth, He have--God's essence is the Beautiful; the Beautiful is further also Good.

There is no Good that can be got from objects in the world. For all the things that fall beneath the eye are image-things and pictures as it were; while those that do not meet [the eye are the realities [*4]], especially the [essence] of the Beautiful and Good.

Just as the eye cannot see God, so can it not behold the Beautiful and Good. For that they are integral parts of God, wedded to Him alone, inseparate familiars, most beloved, with whom God is Himself in love, or they with God.

[p. 114]

5. If thou canst God conceive, thou shalt conceive the Beautiful and Good, transcending Light, made lighter than the Light by God. That Beauty is beyond compare, inimitate that Good, e'en as God is Himself.

As, then, thou dost conceive of God, conceive the Beautiful and Good. For they cannot be joined with aught of other things that live, since they can never be divorced from God.

Seek'st thou for God, thou seekest for the Beautiful. One is the Path that leadeth unto It--Devotion joined with Gnosis.

6. And thus it is that they who do not know and do not tread Devotion's Path, do dare to call man beautiful and good, though he have ne'er e'en in his visions seen a whit that's Good, but is enwrapped with every kind of bad, and thinks the bad is good, and thus doth make unceasing use of it, and even feareth that it should be ta'en from him, so straining every nerve not only to preserve but even to increase it.

Such are the things that men call good and beautiful, Asclepius,--things which we cannot flee or hate; for hardest thing of all is that we've need of them and cannot live without them.

Footnotes

^111:1 That is, things not Good.

^111:2 Or animal; that is, cosmos as a single life or living creature.

^111:3 Or genesis.

^112:1 Sc. the body.

^113:1 Sc. the Good.

^113:2 Cosmos.

^113:3 Or pleroma. The "world" is the pleroma of evil, but 'God" the pleroma of good.

^113:4 A lacuna unfortunately occurs here in the text.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 115]

COMMENTARY

THE TITLE

This sermon, which bears no proper title, but has been headed by some editor with the enunciation of the subject taken from the opening sentence of the treatise itself, belongs to the Asclepius-group.

Reitzenstein (p. 194) thinks that this tractate and the previous Asclepius-Dialogue--C. H., ii. (iii.)--may very well have formed part of the same collection of Asclepiana.

DUALISM?

The teaching of our sermon is apparently dualistic; but is it not only formally so, and as an exercise to raise the thought of the pupil away from the "things he has grown used to"? For at the end Hermes declares:

"Such are the things that men call good and beautiful, Asclepius--things which we cannot flee or hate; for hardest thing of all is that we've need of them and cannot live without them."

This is a clear advance on the formal Tat-teaching as to "hating" the body given in C. H., iv. (v.) 6, and points clearly to an instruction in which the cosmos was not regarded as the pleroma of bad, in spite of the formal and emphatic statement in  section 4:

"o gar kosmos ple'ruma esti teis kakias."

Moreover, if we turn to C. H., ix. (x.), 4--another treatise of Hermes to Asclepius, and curiously enough having as superscription almost the same proposition as heads our present treatise we read:

"xurion gar ayteis [kakias] e gei, oyx o kosmos, us enioi pote erousi blasfemountes."

[p. 116]

"Bad's place is earth, and not the world, as some will sometimes say with impious tongue."

Here we have a formal denial in an Asclepius-tractate of the formal proposition in our Asclepius-sermon.

The cosmos is not evil; it is the beautiful world-order. Evil is a thing connected with the earth; there is no such thing as a ple'ruma of evil; evil has at best only a xurion. They who say such things blaspheme.

This is strong language, and there seems no other conclusion to be drawn from it but that there were various schools within the Trismegistic tradition, and that they wrangled theologically together.

Is it, however, possible that the Hermes of our treatise is only speaking metaphorically, so that he may intensify the ideal of the Good, and that he was subsequently taken as speaking literally? For he must have known that the Cosmos was regarded as the Son of God, par excellence, the fairest and best-beloved of all, God's Very Image.

On the other hand, we know that in the Trismegistic doctrine the "cosmic man" was opposed to the "essential man," that, in fact, the term "cosmic" was used in the nomenclature of the time in a theological as well as in a philosophical sense. This was especially the case in Christianity. Many instances could be cited from the New Testament documents; and we have also a striking example of the use of "cosmos" in this sense in the second logion of the First Oxyrhynchus Fragment:

"Jesus saith: Except ye fast to the world (ton kosmon), ye shall in no wise find the Kingdom of God."

As, moreover, we nowhere else find mention of a "pleroma of evil," we may permissibly conclude that it is here not intended to be taken literally, but only as a metaphorical expression.

[p. 117]

GOD THE PLEROMA OF GOOD

"God is the Pleroma of Good, and Good is the Pleroma of God."

And so, speaking of the Triumphant Christ as the Cosmic Logos, Paul writes:

"And Him hath He (God) given as Head over all things unto the Church, [*1] which is His Body--the Fullness (Pleroma) of Him who doth fulfil all things in all." [*2]

The thought-atmosphere in which the idea of the "Church" as the Pleroma arose may be sampled from Philo, De Proem. et Poen.,  section xi. (M. ii. 418, p. 920; Ri. v. 232):

"And thus the soul, becoming a Pleroma of virtues by means of the three best [blessings]--nature, instruction (mathesis) and practice (askesis),--leaving no vacant spot in her for entrance of aught else, brings unto birth a perfect number,--her two hexads of sons, a miniature and copy of the circle of the types of life, [*3] for the improvement of the things down here.

"This is the House [*4] that naught can harm, the perfect and continual in the public scriptures, and also in the secret meanings of the mystic ones,--the House that won the prize, as I have said, of lordship o'er the tribes of its [own] race."

"It was thus from this House in course of time, as it increased and became populous, that well-regulated cities were established, yea, disciplines of wisdom and of righteousness and holiness, in which the

[p. 118]

transmutation (metapoiesis) of the rest of virtue was sought out in manner worthy of so high a work."

In the Trismegistic tradition, however, the idea is simpler, as we learn from "The Definitions of Asclepius," C. H. (xvi.) 3:

"For that the Fullness of all things is One and is in One,--this latter One not coming as a second One, but both being One. . . .

"For should one try to separate what seems to be both All and One and Same from One,--he will be found to take his epithet of 'All' from the idea of multitude and not from that of fullness (pleroma),--which is impossible; for if he put All for the One, he will destroy the All."

Nevertheless, the Pleroma [*1] of Life is more specially the Cosmos as the Son of God--that is, as the Logos. Thus in C. H., xii. (xiii.) 15, we read:

"Matter is one; and the World-order (Cosmos), as a whole,--the Mighty God and Image of the Mightier One, both with Him unified, and the Conserver of the Will and Order of the Father,--is Life's Fullness (Pleroma). . . .

"How then, O son, could there be in the God,--the Image of the Father, the Plenitude (Pleroma) of Life, [*2]--dead things?"

And again in C. H., ix. (x.) 7:

"For [Cosmos] being a most wise Breath, bestows their qualities on bodies together with the one Pleroma--that of Life."

5. This Pleroma of God is the Good and Beautiful. The Path to this True Good is one of balance,--for it

[p. 119]

is the Way of Devotion united unto Gnosis--in Sanskrit terms, the Bhakti-Marga and Jnana-Marga combined. [*1]

6. Finally we learn, though inferentially, that things are not bad in themselves; the evil is that men are content with the little goods they have and cling desperately to these, in ignorance of the greater blessings to which they could attain, did they but open their spiritual eyes for the True Vision of the Good. For even the psychic visions of the soul, in spite of their beauty, give man no hint of that Most Blessed Sight of All.

Footnotes

^117:1 tei ekklesiai, that is, the Spiritual Body of the "Elect."

^117:2 Eph. i. 23. Cf. Col. ii. 19: "In Him dwelleth the whole Fullness of the Godhead as in a body."

^117:3 Sc. the Zodiac.

^117:4 Sc. of God.

^118:1 Cf. John i. 16: "Of His Fullness we have all received, and grace on grace."

^118:2 Cf. John i. 4: "In Him was Life and the Life was the Light of men."

^119:1 Compare C. H., i. 27: "And I began to preach to men the beauty of Devotion and of Gnosis."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 120]

CORPUS HERMETICUM VII. (VIII.)

 

THE GREATEST ILL AMONG MEN IS IGNORANCE OF GOD

(Text: P. 54, 55; Pat. 18a.)

1. WHITHER stumble ye, sots, who have sopped up the wine of ignorance unmixed, and can so far not carry it that ye already even spew it forth?

Stay ye, be sober, gaze upwards with the [true] eyes of the heart! And if ye cannot all, yet ye at least who can!

For that the ill of ignorance doth pour o'er all the earth and overwhelm the soul that's battened down within the body, preventing it from fetching port within Salvation's harbours.

2. Be then not carried off by the fierce flood, but using the shore-current, [*1] ye who can, make for Salvation's port, and, harbouring there, seek ye for one to take you by the hand and lead you [*2] unto Gnosis' gates.

[p. 121]

Where shines clear Light, of every darkness clean; where not a single soul is drunk, but sober all they gaze with their hearts' eyes on Him who willeth to be seen.

No ear can hear Him, nor can eye see Him, nor tongue speak of Him, but [only] mind and heart.

But first thou must tear off from thee the cloak which thou dost wear,--the web of ignorance, the ground of bad, corruption's chain, the carapace of darkness, the living death, sensation's corpse, the tomb thou carriest with thee, the robber in thy house, who through the things he loveth, hateth thee, and through the things he hateth, bears thee malice.

3. Such is the hateful cloak thou wearest,--that throttles thee [and holds thee] down to it, in order that thou may'st not gaze above, and, having seen the Beauty of the Truth, and Good that dwells therein, detest the bad of it; having found out the plot that it hath schemed against thee, by making void of sense those seeming things which men think senses.

For that it hath with mass of matter blocked them up and crammed them full of loathsome lust, so that thou may'st not hear about the things that thou should'st hear, nor see the things that thou should'st see.

Footnotes

^120:1 Lit. back or up-current.

^120:2 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 11; ix. (x.) 10; x (xi.) 2; R. 23, n. 5.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 122]

COMMENTARY

A PREACHING

THERE is little to be said about this powerful appeal to cease from the drunkenness of physical sensations and to awaken to the Light.

Reitzenstein (p. 194) calls it a "Prophetenpredigt" and says that nowhere in the MSS. is it ascribed to Hermes; by which he can only mean that it bears no other superscription than the descriptive sentence which heads it.

The style and spirit remind us not so much of C. H., iii. (iv.), as Reitzenstein (p. 206, 1) suggests, as of the interpolated or superadded passages in the "Poemandres" treatise ( section 27):

"O ye people, earthborn folk, ye who have given yourselves to drunkenness, and sleep, and ignorance, be sober now, cease from your surfeit, cease to be glamoured by irrational sleep!"

Did this sentence give rise to our little sermon; or is the sentence a summary of the preaching? Or do both sentence and sermon come from a common stock?

THE PROBABLE COMPLETION OF AN OXYRHYNCHUS LOGION

The last hypothesis seems to be the most satisfactory choice; and we may compare what would appear to be a familiar figure of speech among such communities with logion 3 of the First Oxyrhynchus Fragment:

"Jesus saith: I stood in the midst of the world (tou kosmoy), and in the flesh did I appear unto them; and I found all men drunken, and none found I athirst among them; and my soul grieveth over the souls of

[p. 123]

men, because they are blind in their heart and see not . . ."

Can we fill up the missing word from our sermon?

"But sober all they gaze with their hearts' eyes on Him who willeth to be seen."

The missing word seems, therefore, to be "God."

The Gospel that is preached is the Beauty of the Gnosis,--"the Beauty of the Truth and Good that dwells therein"; just as in C. H., i. 27:

"And I began to preach to men the Beauty of Devotion and of the Gnosis."

The tempest-tossed on the Sea of Ignorance are to make for the Harbour of Salvation--evidently some great organization devoted to the holy life; therein they must seek for one who knows, who can take them by the hand and lead them unto the Gates of the Gnosis.

This suggests that the organization consisted of a general body, within which were grades of instruction; the many were striving for illumination, some few had reached it.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 124]

CORPUS HERMETICUM VIII. (IX.)

 

THAT NO ONE OF EXISTING THINGS DOTH PERISH, BUT MEN IN ERROR SPEAK OF THEIR CHANGES AS DESTRUCTIONS AND AS DEATHS

[OF HERMES TO TAT]

(Text: P. 56-59; Pat. 48a, 48b.)

1. [Hermes.] Concerning Soul and Body, son, we now must speak; in what way Soul is deathless, and whence comes the activity [*1] in composing and dissolving Body.

For there's no death for aught of things [that are]; the thought [this] word conveys, is either void of fact, or [simply] by the knocking off a syllable what is called "death," doth stand for "deathless." [*2]

[p. 125]

For death is of destruction, and nothing in the Cosmos is destroyed. For if Cosmos is second God, a life [*1] that cannot die, it cannot be that any part of this immortal life should die. All things in Cosmos are parts of Cosmos, and most of all is man, the rational animal.

2. For truly first of all, eternal and transcending birth, is God the universals' Maker. Second is he "after His image," Cosmos, brought into being by Him, sustained and fed by Him, made deathless, as by his own Sire, living for aye, as ever free from death.

Now that which ever-liveth, differs from the Eternal; for He [*2] hath not been brought to being by another, and even if He have been brought to being, He hath not been brought into being by Himself, but ever is brought into being.

For the Eternal, in that It is eternal, is the all. The Father is Himself eternal of Himself, but Cosmos hath become eternal and immortal by the Father.

3. And of the matter stored beneath it, [*3] the Father made of it a universal body, and packing it together made it spherical--wrapping it round the life [*4]--[a sphere] which is immortal in itself, and that doth make materiality eternal.

[p. 126]

But He, the Father, full-filled with His ideas, did sow the lives [*1] into the sphere, and shut them in as in a cave, willing to order forth [*2] the life with every kind of living.

So He with deathlessness enclosed the universal body, that matter might not wish to separate itself from body's composition, and so dissolve into its own [original] unorder.

For matter, son, when it was yet incorporate, was in unorder. And it doth still retain down here this [nature of unorder] enveloping the rest of the small lives [*3]--that increase-and-decrease which men call death.

4. It is round earthly lives that this unorder doth exist. For that the bodies of the heavenly ones preserve one order allotted to them from the Father as their rule [*4]; and it is by the restoration [*5] of each one [of them] this order is preserved indissolute. [*6]

The "restoration" then of bodies on the earth

[p. 127]

is [thus their] composition, whereas their dissolution restores them to those bodies which can never be dissolved, that is to say, which know no death. Privation, thus, of sense is brought about, not loss of bodies.

5. Now the third life--Man, after the image of the Cosmos made, [and] having mind, after the Father's will, beyond all earthly lives--not only doth have feeling with the second God, but also hath conception of the first; for of the one 'tis sensible as of a body, while of the other it conceives as bodiless and the Good Mind.

Tat. Doth then this life not perish?

Her. Hush, son! and understand what God, what Cosmos [is], what is a life that cannot die, and what a life subject to dissolution.

Yea, understand the Cosmos is by God and in God; but Man by Cosmos and in Cosmos.

The source and limit and the constitution of all things is God.

Footnotes

^124:1 energeia.

^124:2 The text is obscure, and the translations without exception make nonsense of it. Some words seem to be missing.

^125:1 Living thing, "animal."

^125:2 Sc. the Eternal.

^125:3 Sc. beneath the cosmos, world-order or universe.

^125:4 The text here seems to me to be very faulty; for poion, poia, I read zuion, zuia. In such unintelligible phrases as aytui to poion, and to met' aytou poion, the writer is evidently dealing with the Cosmos as the one life, the aytozuion, from which all other lives are derived; and if he did not write aytozuion, he assuredly wrote zuin. He wrote sense and not the nonsense of the present text.

^126:1 Sc. the great lives or so-called heavenly "bodies."

^126:2 Or beautify.

^126:3 As distinguished from the great lives or animals, the so-called heavenly "bodies."

^126:4 ten arxe'n,--or source or principle.

^126:5 apokatastasis, a term used of the cyclic return of stars to their original positions.

^126:6 If we may be permitted to coin a neologism.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

COMMENTARY

THE COSMOS AS "SECOND GOD"

The superscription enunciates the nature of the treatise. It is evidently taken from the Dialogues to Tat, and originally formed part of some General Dissertation or of a collection of Dissertations.

It formed part of an instruction in which the Cosmos

[p. 128]

was treated of as "Second God," as we find it also in Philo [*1]; but just as Philo guards against any idea of duality, so does our treatise when it ends with the words ( section 5):

"The source and limit and the constitution of all things is God."

The Great Body of the Cosmos, the Sphere or Perfect Form, the root of all forms, seems to be bounded by the idea of the Aeon or Eternity, or Deathlessness. It is, as it were, the Cave or Womb of all things in genesis, centred in the Pleroma of ideas, the Intelligible Cosmos, which is full-filled with the ideas of God ( section 3).

THE LAW OF APOKATASTASIS

The eternal order and life of Cosmos is preserved by the law of apokatastasis or restoration ( section 4), the law of ever-becoming, and cyclic renewal, the making-new-again (ananeusis) of C. H., iii. (iv.) 1.

There is no question of loss of body,--this is an illusion; there is a privation of sense, a going into latency of some particular phase of consciousness.

There are then Great Lives--God, Cosmos, Man. Cosmos is made in the image of God, Man in the image of Cosmos. Therefore has Man sense and mind; by the former he is "in sympathy with" the Cosmos, as Body by the latter he is conscious of God as Mind,--that is the Bodiless. Or as we might phrase it, by sense Man knows the Sensible Cosmos, by mind the Intelligible Cosmos, the Good Mind; for God is Source and Limit and the Constitution of all things--the Cosmos, both Intelligible and Sensible, included.

Footnotes

^128:1 Leg. Alleg.,  section 21; M. i. 82; P. 1103 (Ri. i. 113); Quaest. Sol., i. (quoted by Euseb., Praep. Evang., vii. 13). See in the "Prolegomena," "Philo Concerning the Logos."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 129]

CORPUS HERMETICUM IX. (X.)

 

ON THOUGHT AND SENSE

THAT THE BEAUTIFUL AND GOOD IS IN GOD ONLY AND ELSEWHERE NOWHERE

(Text: P. 60-67; Pat. 14, 15.)

1. I GAVE the Perfect Sermon (Logos) yesterday, Asclepius; to-day I think it right, as sequel thereunto, to go through point by point the Sermon about Sense.

Now sense and thought do seem to differ, in that the former has to do with matter, the latter has to do with substance. But unto me both seem to be at-one and not to differ--in men I mean. In other lives [*1] sense is at-oned with nature, but in men thought.

Now mind doth differ just as much from thought as God doth from divinity. For that divinity by God doth come to be, and by mind thought, the sister of the word (logos) [*2] and

[p. 130]

instruments of one another. For neither doth the word (logos) find utterance without thought, nor is thought manifested without word.

2. So sense and thought both flow together into man, as though they were entwined with one another. For neither without sensing can one think, nor without thinking sense.

But it is possible [they say] to think a thing apart from sense, as those who fancy sights in dreams. But unto me it seems that both of these activities occur in dream-sight, and sense doth pass out of the sleeping to the waking state.

For man is separated into soul and body, and only when the two sides of his sense agree together, does utterance of its thought conceived by mind take place.

3. For it is mind that doth conceive all thoughts good thoughts--when it receives the seeds from God, their contraries when [it receiveth them] from one of the daimonials; no part of Cosmos being free of daimon, who stealthily doth creep into the daimon who's illumined by God's Light, [*1] and sow in him the seed of its own energy.

And mind conceives the seed thus sown,

[p. 131]

adultery, murder, parricide, [and] sacrilege, impiety, [and] strangling, casting down precipices, and all such other deeds as are the work of evil daimones.

4. The seeds of God, 'tis true, are few, but vast and fair, and good--virtue and self-control, devotion. Devotion is God-gnosis; and he who knoweth God, being filled with all good things, thinks godly thoughts and not thoughts like the many [think].

For this cause they who Gnostic are, [*1] please not the many, nor the many them. They are thought mad and laughed at [*2]; they're hated and despised, and sometimes even put to death.

For we did say [*3] that bad must needs dwell here on earth, where 'tis in its own place. Its place is earth, and not Cosmos, as some will sometimes say with impious tongue.

But he who is a devotee of God, will bear with all--once he has sensed the Gnosis. For such an one all things, e'en though they be for others bad, are for him good; deliberately he doth refer them all unto the Gnosis. And, thing most marvellous, 'tis he alone who maketh bad things good.

5. But I return once more to the Discourse

[p. 132]

[paragraph continues] (Logos) on Sense. That sense doth share with thought in man, doth constitute him man. But 'tis not [every] man, as I have said, who benefits by thought; for this man is material, that other one substantial.

For the material man, as I have said, [consorting] with the bad, doth have his seed of thought from daimons; while the substantial men [consorting] with the Good, are saved by God.

Now God is Maker of all things, and in His making, He maketh all [at last] like to Himself; but they, while they're becoming [*1] good by exercise of their activity, are unproductive things.

It is the working of the Cosmic Course [*2] that maketh their becomings what they are, befouling some of them with bad and others of them making clean with good.

For Cosmos, too, Asclepius, possesseth sense-and-thought peculiar to itself, not like to that of

[p. 133]

man; 'tis not so manifold, but as it were a better and a simpler one.

6. The single sense-and-thought of Cosmos is to make all things, and make them back into itself again, as Organ of the Will of God, so organised that it, receiving all the seeds into itself from God, and keeping them within itself, may make all manifest, and [then] dissolving them, make them all new again; and thus, like a Good Gardener of Life, things that have been dissolved, it taketh to itself, and giveth them renewal once again.

There is no thing to which it gives not life; but taking all unto itself it makes them live, and is at the same time the Place of Life and its Creator.

7. Now bodies matter [-made] are in diversity. Some are of earth, of water some, some are of air, and some of fire.

But they are all composed; some are more [composite], and some are simpler. The heavier ones are more [composed], the lighter less so.

It is the speed of Cosmos' Course that works the manifoldness of the kinds of births. For being a most swift Breath, it doth bestow their qualities on bodies together with the One Pleroma--that of Life.

8. God, then, is Sire of Cosmos; Cosmos, of [all] in Cosmos. And Cosmos is God's Son; but things in Cosmos are by Cosmos.

[p. 134]

And properly hath it been called Cosmos [Order]; for that it orders [*1] all with their diversity of birth, with its not leaving aught without its life, with the unweariedness of its activity, the speed of its necessity, the composition of its elements, and order of its creatures.

The same, then, of necessity and of propriety should have the name of Order.

The sense-and-thought, then, of all lives doth come into them from without, inbreathed by what contains [them all]; whereas Cosmos receives them once for all together with its coming into being, and keeps them as a gift from God.

9. But God is not, as some suppose, beyond the reach of sense-and-thought. It is through superstition men thus impiously speak.

For all the things that are, Asclepius, all are in God, are brought by God to be, and do depend on Him--both things that act through bodies, and things that through soul-substance make [other things] to move, and things that make things live by means of spirit, and things that take unto themselves the things that are worn out.

And rightly so; nay, I would rather say, He doth not have these things; but I speak forth the truth, He is them all Himself. He

[p. 135]

doth not get them from without, but gives them out [from Him].

This is God's sense-and-thought, ever to move all things. And never time shall be when e'en a whit of things that are shall cease; and when I say "a whit of things that are," I mean a whit of God. For things that are, God hath; nor aught [is there] without Him, nor [is] He without aught.

10. These things should seem to thee, Asclepius, if thou dost understand them, true; but if thou dost not understand, things not to be believed.

To understand is to believe, to not believe is not to understand.

My word (logos) doth go before [thee] [*1] to the truth. But mighty is the mind, and when it hath been led by word up to a certain point, it hath the power to come before [thee [*2]] to the truth.

And having thought o'er all these things, and found them consonant with those which have already been translated by the reason, it [*3] hath [e'en now] believed, and found its rest in that Fair Faith.

To those, then, who by God['s good aid] do understand the things that have been said [by

[p. 136]

us] above, they're credible; but unto those who understand them not, incredible.

Let so much, then, suffice on thought-and-sense.

Footnotes

^129:1 Or animals.

^129:2 There is here the usual play on the meanings, reason, word, sermon or sacred discourse.

^130:1 That is to say man, or rather the ego in man. The translators seem to make nonsense of this passage through rejecting the original reading.

^131:1 oi en gnw'sei ontes, lit. they who are in Gnosis.

^131:2 Cf. Plat., Phaedr., 249 D: The wisdom-lover "is admonished, by the many as though he were beside himself."

^131:3 Sc. in some other sermon.

^132:1 Or being made.

^132:2 It is difficult to bring out the full delicacy of wording of the original in translation. First God's ultimate intention is stated to be the making all things like (omoia) Himself; this is the great sameness of union with Him. But meantime while this making, creating or becoming, is going on, these imperfections cannot produce--that is, become creators in their turn; they are unproductive (afora). That which is the instrument of God's making is the cosmic course (fora). We are finally ( section 7) told that it is bodies which are the cause of difference or diversity (en diaforai), the opposite pole, so to speak, to the likeness (omoia) with God.

^134:1 Or adorns.

^135:1 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 11; vii. (viii.) 2; x. (xi.) 21; R. 23, n. 5.

^135:2 That is, presumably, before the pupil of the Gnosis is conscious of it in his physical brain.

^135:3 Sc. the mind.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

COMMENTARY

TITLE AND ORDERING

This treatise bears a double title:--"On Thought and Sense," and "That the Beautiful and Good is in God only." The former heading is clearly taken from the concluding words: "Let so much then suffice on thought-and-sense"; whereas the introductory sentence speaks of the Sermon on Sense only. The latter heading seems to be a thoughtless repetition of the title of C. H., vi. (vii.).

The opening words: "I gave the Perfect Sermon yesterday, Asclepius," inform us not only that we have to do with an Asclepius Dialogue, but also that our sermon followed directly on the "Perfect Sermon," a Latin version of which has fortunately been preserved to us. [*1]

It is, therefore, of very great interest to find that Lactantius, [*2] in quoting a sentence from our treatise ( section 4)--"Devotion is God-gnosis"--continues with the words: "Asclepius, his hearer, has also explained the same idea at greater length in the Perfect Sermon."

[p. 137]

Lactantius had, therefore, a collection before him in which these two sermons stood in close connection.

Reitzenstein (p. 195) thinks that our sermon must be an extract from a longer one, because he cannot bring himself to believe that so short a treatise could have been found in immediate connection (as the opening words suggest) with so lengthy and detailed a tractate as the "Perfect Sermon." This may be so; and yet the formal beginning and ending of our sermon would seem to suggest that we are dealing with a complete tractate and not with an extract.

"SENSE-AND-THOUGHT"

The doctrine that in men "sense-and-thought" together constitutes human "sense" throws some light on the meaning of the term "sense" as used elsewhere in the Trismegistic literature, where we should expect to find "mind" employed, and that, too, in the sense of the higher mind.

Normal human "thought," then, is, so to say, sensible, entirely bound up in sense-impressions; it is the mind alone that can soar beyond the senses, for it alone can be "illumined by God's Light" ( section 3).

The mind is, as it were, a womb or woman, that can be impregnated either by the "Seeds of God" or by the "Daimonial Energy"; she thus conceives and brings forth virtues or vices.

All of this is precisely the same doctrine as Philo preaches, as may be seen by the passages we have quoted in the "Prolegomena" on the subject of the "Sacred Marriage."

THOSE IN GNOSIS

The Seeds of God are Virtue and Self-control and Devotion or Piety; and Devotion in its true sense

[p. 138]

is God-gnosis, or Knowledge of God. The Gnostics, then, "they who are in Gnosis"--a curious expression--because of their natural divorcement from the "world," "please not the many, nor the many them."

"They are thought mad and laughed at; they're hated and despised, and sometimes even put to death."

Mark the impersonal note, the calm laying down of the causes of misunderstanding between the "many" and the "few''; and compare this with the more personal note of the saying underlying the following Synoptic accommodations:

"Blessed are ye when men hate you and excommunicate you, and revile and expel your Name as evil, for the Son of Man's sake" (Luke vi. 22).

"Blessed are ye when men revile you and persecute you and say all evil against you, lying, for My sake" (Matt. v. 11).

It is clear, at least it seems so to me, that "Luke" has kept closer to the original, and that that original was addressed not only to the members of a community, but to those who had been cast forth from some other community "for the sake of the Son of Man"--that is, because of the immediate inspiration of the Logos, which doubtless did not pay sufficient attention to the prejudices of the "many" of that community.

"Matthew," on the contrary, seems to have adapted the Saying for general purposes and the necessities of the Cult of Jesus. [*1]

THE TRUE GNOSTIC

Excellent also is the doctrine that the true "Gnostic," the man who is consciously growing into the stature of

[p. 139]

the Christ, the true "Devotee of God," "will bear with all," for he is beginning to know the Reason of things.

"For such an one all things, e'en though they be for others bad, are for him good; deliberately he doth refer them all unto the Gnosis."

He sees the Good, he sees God, in all things. He is the true Alchemist. For "thing most marvellous, 'tis he alone who maketh bad things good"; by spiritual alchemy he transmutes the evil of the world to good; he drains the "cup of bitterness" unto the dregs, and transmutes it into the pure Water of Life.

In every Man, then, there are two "men," the material (or hylic) and the substantial (or spiritual, oysiw'des).

Evil, however, is not a permanent thing; it is but the process of "becoming good," the productive side of things ( section 5).

THE GOAL OF THE GNOSIS

It is difficult to bring out the delicacy of the wording of the original in translation. First God's ultimate intention is stated to be the making of all things like unto (omoia) Himself; the world-process is to be ultimately consummated in the Great Sameness of Union with Him. But meantime while this making, creating or becoming, or transformation, is going on, the imperfections cannot produce, that is, become creators in their turn; they are unproductive (afora). That which is the instrument or organ of God's making is the Cosmic Course (fora). We are finally ( section 7) told that the differences of bodies are conditioned by the speed of this Cosmic Course; therefore the opposite poles, Other and Same, are both ultimately referable to Cosmos, the Likeness of God.

The end to be achieved is to develop the "sense-and-thought" of the Cosmos, the One Sense, not manifold,

[p. 140]

but simple. This is the deliberate working with the Will of God, the Cosmic Will, the perpetual renewing of all things (ananeusis).

The Cosmos, then, as the Logos of God, is the Good Gardener of Life; it is both the place of Life and its Creator--that is to say, both female and male, both Mother and Father.

THE POSSIBILITY OF KNOWING GOD

But the Cosmos is not apart from God, nor even in God; God does not have Cosmos as a possession, but is Cosmos and all therein ( section 9). Cosmos is Son of God, His Very Self ( section 8).

Therefore we can learn to know somewhat of the nature of God by sense and thought, for, "God is not, as some suppose, beyond the reach of sense and thought" (anaisthetos kai anoetos); that is, God does not entirely transcend sense and thought, for God is all things.

"As some suppose" doubtless refers again to the "blasphemers" of  section 4--that is, the apparently dualistic doctrine set forth in C. H., vi. (vii.). [*1]

And so, finally, we learn that Faith, in the true sense, is a certitude of the mind, or of true manhood. "To understand is to believe" ( section 10). Gnosis and not belief is the Fair Faith.

Compare with this the "Perfect Sermon," x. 1:

"The reason for a thesis such as this, O my Asclepius, I would that thou should'st grasp, not only with the keen attention of thy soul, but also with its living power as well.

"For 'tis a reason that most men cannot believe; the Perfect and the True are to be grasped by the more holy minds."

Footnotes

^136:1 For it would, of course, be absurd to suppose that the "Perfect Sermon" could in any way be thought to indicate C. H., vi. (vii.), the last Asclepius Dialogue in our Corpus; especially when our sermon ( section 4) directly combats the teaching of C. H., vi.

^136:2 Div. Institt., ii. 15 (Ed. Fritz., i. 106); cf. also v. 14.

^138:1 R. (p. 213, 1) brings this passage of our sermon into connection with some assumed persecution of the Poemandres communities in the course of the fourth century; but I cannot myself see the slightest ground for such an assumption.

^140:1 Reitzenstein (p. 171, 2) compares this doctrine of the insensibility and incognizability of God with the Sabaean Gnosis.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 141]

CORPUS HERMETICUM X. (XI.)

 

THE KEY

OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES

(Text: P. 67-84; Pat. 9b-12.)

1. Hermes. My yesterday's discourse (logos) I did devote to thee, Asclepius, and so 'tis [only] right I should devote to-day's to Tat; and this the more because 'tis the abridgment of the General Sermons (Logoi) which he has had addressed to him.

"God, Father and the Good," then, Tat, hath [*1] the same nature, or more exactly, energy.

For nature is a predicate of growth, and used of things that change, both mobile and immobile, that is to say, both human and divine, each one of which He willeth into being.

[p. 142]

But energy consists in something else, as we have shown in treating of the rest, both things divine and human things [*1]; which thing we ought to have in mind when treating of the Good. [*2]

2. God's energy is then His Will; further His essence is to will the being of all things. For what is "God and Father and the Good" but the to be of all that are not yet? Nay, subsistence [*3] self of everything that is;--this, then, is God, this Father, this the Good; to Him is added naught of all the rest.

And though the Cosmos, that is to say the Sun, is also sire himself to them that share in him; yet so far is he not the cause of good unto the lives, he is not even of their living.

So that e'en if he be a sire, he is entirely so by the compulsion of the Good's Good-will, apart from which nor being nor becoming could e'er be.

3. Again, the parent is the children's cause, both on the father's and the mother's side, [*4] only by sharing in [*5] the Good's desire [that doth pour] through the Sun. It is the Good which doeth the creating.

And such a power can be possessed by no one

[p. 143]

else than Him alone who taketh naught, [*1] but wills all things to be; I will not, Tat, say makes.

For that the maker is defective for long periods (in which he sometimes makes, and sometimes doth not make) both in the quality and in the quantity [of what he makes]; in that he sometimes maketh them so many and such like, and sometimes the reverse.

But "God and Father and the Good" is [cause] for all to be. So are at least these things for who can see.

4. For It doth will to be, and It is both Itself and most of all by reason of [*2] Itself. Indeed all other things beside are just because of It; for the distinctive feature of the Good is "that it should be known." Such is the Good, O Tat.

Tat. Thou hast, O father, filled us so full [*3] of this so good and fairest Sight, that thereby my mind's eye hath now become for me almost a thing to worship.

For that the Vision of the Good doth not, like the sun's beam, fire-like blaze on the eyes and make them close; nay, on the contrary, it shineth forth and maketh to increase the seeing [*4] of the eye, as far as e'er a man hath the capacity

[p. 144]

to hold the inflow of the radiance that the mind alone can see.

Not only does it come more swiftly down to us, but it does us no harm, and is instinct with all immortal life.

5. They who are able to drink in a somewhat more than others of this Sight, ofttimes from out the body fall asleep into this fairest Spectacle, as was the case with Uranus and Cronus, our forebears. [*1] May this be our lot too, O father mine!

Her. Yea, may it be, my son! But as it is, we are not yet strung to the Vision, and not as yet have we the power our mind's eye to unfold and gaze upon the Beauty of the Good--Beauty that naught can e'er corrupt or any comprehend.

For [only] then wilt thou upon It gaze when thou canst say no word concerning It. For Gnosis of the Good is holy silence and a giving holiday to every sense.

6. For neither can he who perceiveth It, perceive aught else; nor he who gazeth on It, gaze on aught else; nor hear aught else, nor stir his body any way. Staying his body's every sense and every motion he stayeth still.

And shining then all round his mind, It shines

[p. 145]

through his whole soul, and draws it out of body, transforming all of him to essence.

For it is possible, my son, that a man's soul should be made like to God, e'en while it still is in a body, if it doth contemplate the Beauty of the Good.

7. Tat. Made like to God! What dost thou, father, mean?

Her. Of every soul apart are transformations, son.

Tat. What meanest thou? Apart!

Her. [*1] Didst thou not, in the General Sermons, hear that from One Soul--the All-soul--come all these souls which are made to revolve in all the cosmos, as though divided off?

Of these souls, then, it is that there are many changes, some to a happier lot and some to [just] the contrary of this.

Thus some that were once creeping things change into things that in the water dwell, the souls of water things change to earth-dwellers, those that live on the earth change into things with wings, and souls that live in air change into men, while human souls reach the first step of deathlessness changed into daimones.

And so they circle to the choir of the Inerrant Gods; for of the Gods there are two choirs, the

[p. 146]

one Inerrant, and the other Errant. And this is the most perfect glory of the soul.

8. But if a soul on entering in the body of a man persisteth in its vice, [*1] it neither tasteth deathlessness nor shareth in the Good; but speeding back again it turns into the path that leads to creeping things. This is the sentence of the vicious soul.

And the soul's vice is ignorance. [*2] For that the soul who hath no knowledge of the things that are, or knowledge of their nature, or of Good, is blinded by the body's passions and tossed about.

This wretched soul, not knowing what she is, becomes the slave of bodies of strange form in sorry plight, bearing the body as a load; not as the ruler, but the ruled. This [ignorance] is the soul's vice.

9. But on the other hand the virtue of the soul is Gnosis. For he who knows, he good and pious is, and still while on the earth [*3] divine.

Tat. But who is such an one, O father mine?

Her. He who doth not say much or lend his ear to much. For he who spendeth time in arguing and hearing arguments, doth shadow 

[p. 147]

fight. For "God, the Father and the Good," is not to be obtained by speech or hearing.

And yet though this is so, there are in all the beings senses, in that they cannot without senses be.

But Gnosis is far different from sense. For sense is brought about by that which hath the mastery o'er us, while Gnosis is the end of science, [*1] and science is God's gift.

10. All science is incorporal, the instrument it uses being the mind, just as the mind employs the body.

Both then come into bodies, [I mean] both things that are cognizable by mind alone and things material. [*2] For all things must consist out of antithesis and contrariety; and this can otherwise not be.

Tat. Who then is this material God of whom thou speakest?

Her. Cosmos is beautiful, but is not good [*3]--for that it is material and freely passible [*4]; and though it is the first of all things passible, yet is it in the second rank of being and wanting in itself.

And though it never hath itself its birth in time, but ever is, yet is its being in becoming,

[p. 148]

becoming for all time the genesis of qualities and quantities; for it is mobile and all material motion's genesis. [*1]

11. It is intelligible [*2] rest that moves material motion in this way, [*3] since Cosmos is a sphere--that is to say, a head. And naught of head above's material, as naught of feet below's intelligible, [*4] but all material.

And head itself moved in a sphere-like way--that is to say, as head should move, [*5] is mind.

All then that are united to the "tissue" of this "head" (in which [*6] is soul) are in their nature free from death,--just as when body hath been made in soul, are things that have more soul than body.

Whereas those things which are at greater distance from this "tissue"--there, where are things which have a greater share of body than of soul--are by their nature subject unto death.

The whole, however, is a life; so that the universe consists of both the hylic and of the intelligible. [*7]

12. Again, the Cosmos is the first of living

[p. 149]

things, while man is second after it, though first of things subject to death.

Man hath the same ensouling power in him as all the rest of living things [*1]; yet is he not only not good, but even evil, [*2] for that he's subject unto death. [*3]

For though the Cosmos also is not good in that it suffers motion, it is not evil, in that it is not subject unto death. But man, in that he's subject both to motion and to death, is evil. [*4]

13. Now then the principles [*5] of man are this-wise vehicled: mind in the reason (logos), the reason in the soul, soul in the spirit, [*6] [and] spirit in the body.

Spirit pervading [body] [*7] by means of veins and arteries and blood, bestows upon the living creature motion, and as it were doth bear it in a way.

For this cause some do think the soul is blood, in that they do mistake its nature, not knowing that [at death] it is the spirit that must first

[p. 150]

withdraw into the soul, whereon the blood congeals and veins and arteries are emptied, and then the living creature is withdrawn; and this is body's death.

14. Now from One Source [*1] all things depend; while Source [dependeth] from the One and Only [One]. Source is, moreover, moved to become Source again; whereas the One standeth perpetually and is not moved.

Three then are they: "God, the Father and the Good," Cosmos and man.

God doth contain Cosmos; Cosmos [containeth] man. Cosmos is e'er God's Son, man as it were Cosmos's child.

15. Not that, however, God ignoreth man; nay, right well doth He know him, and willeth to be known.

This is the sole salvation for a man--God's Gnosis. This is the Way Up to the Mount. [*2]

By Him alone the soul becometh good, not whiles is good, whiles evil, but [good] out of necessity.

Tat. What dost thou mean, Thrice-greatest one?

Her. Behold an infant's soul, my son, that is not yet cut off, [*3] because its body is still small and not as yet come unto its full bulk. [*4]

[p. 151]

Tat. How?

Her. A thing of beauty altogether is [such a soul] to see, not yet befouled by body's passions, still all but hanging from the Cosmic Soul!

But when the body grows in bulk and draweth down the soul into its mass, then doth the soul cut off itself and bring upon itself forgetfulness, and no more shareth in the Beautiful and Good. And this forgetfulness becometh vice.

16. It is the same for them who go out from the body.

For when the soul withdraws into itself, the spirit doth contract itself within the blood, and soul within the spirit. [*1] And then the mind, stript of its wrappings, and naturally divine, taking unto itself a fiery body, doth traverse every space, after abandoning the soul unto its judgment and whatever chastisement it hath deserved.

Tat. [*2] What dost thou, father, mean by this? The mind is parted from the soul and soul from

[p. 152]

spirit? Whereas thou said'st the soul was the mind's vesture, and the soul's the spirit.

17. Her. The hearer, son, should think with him who speaks and breathe with him [*1]; nay, he should have a hearing subtler than the voice of him who speaks.

It is, son, in a body made of earth that this arrangement of the vestures comes to pass. For in a body made of earth it is impossible the mind should take its seat itself by its own self in nakedness.

For neither is it possible on the one hand the earthy body should contain such immortality, nor on the other that so great a virtue should endure a body passible in such close contact with it. It taketh, then, the soul for as it were an envelope.

And soul itself, being too a thing divine, doth use the spirit as its envelope, while spirit doth pervade the living creature.

18. When then the mind doth free itself from the earth-body, it straightway putteth on its proper robe of fire, with which it could not dwell in an earth-body.

For earth doth not bear fire; for it is all set in a blaze even by a small spark. And for this cause is water poured round earth, to be a guard and wall, to keep the blazing of the fire away.

But mind, the swiftest thing of all divine out-

[p. 153]

thinkings, and swifter than all elements, hath for its body fire.

For mind being builder [*1] doth use the fire as tool for the construction of all things--the Mind of all [for the construction] of all things, but that of man only for things on earth.

Stript of its fire the mind on earth cannot make things divine, for it is human in its dispensation. [*2]

19. The soul in man, however,--not every soul, but one that pious is--is a daimonic something and divine.

And such a soul when from the body freed, if it have fought the fight of piety--the fight of piety is to know God and to do wrong to no man--such soul becomes entirely mind.

Whereas the impious soul remains in its own essence, chastised by its own self, and seeking for an earthy body where to enter, if only it be human.

For that no other body can contain a human soul; nor is it right that any human soul should fall into the body of a thing that doth possess no reason. For that the law of God is this: to guard the human soul from such tremendous outrage. [*3]

[p. 154]

20. Tat. How father, then, is a man's soul chastised?

Her. What greater chastisement of any human soul can there be, son, than lack of piety? What fire has so fierce flame as lack of piety? What ravenous beast so mauls the body as lack of piety the very soul?

Dost thou not see what hosts of ills the impious soul doth bear?

It shrieks and screams: I burn; I am ablaze; I know not what to cry or do; ah, wretched me, I am devoured by all the ills that compass me about; alack, poor me, I neither see nor hear!

Such are the cries wrung from a soul chastised; not, as the many think, and thou, son, dost suppose, that a [man's] soul, passing from body, is changed into a beast.

Such is a very grave mistake, for that the way a soul doth suffer chastisement is this:

21. When mind becomes a daimon, the law requires that it should take a fiery body to execute the services of God; and entering in the soul most impious it scourgeth it with whips made of its sins.

And then the impious soul, scourged with its sins, is plunged in murders, outrage, blasphemy, in violence of all kinds, and all the other things whereby mankind is wronged. [*1]

[p. 155]

But on the pious soul the mind doth mount and guide it [*1] to the Gnosis' Light. And such a soul doth never tire in songs of praise [to God] and pouring blessing on all men, and doing good in word and deed to all, in imitation of its Sire. [*2]

22. Wherefore, my son, thou shouldst give praise to God and pray that thou mayst have thy mind Good [Mind]. It is, then, to a better state the soul doth pass; it cannot to a worse.

Further [*3] there is an intercourse [*4] of souls; those of the gods have intercourse with those of men, and those of men with souls of creatures which possess no reason.

The higher, further, have in charge the lower; the gods look after men, men after animals irrational, [*5] while God hath charge of all; for He is higher than them all and all are less than He.

Cosmos is subject, then, to God, man to the Cosmos, and irrationals to man. But God is o'er them all, and God contains them all.

God's rays, to use a figure, are His energies; the Cosmos's are natures; the arts and sciences are man's. [*6]

[p. 156]

The energies act through the Cosmos, thence through the nature-rays of Cosmos upon man; the nature-rays [act] through the elements; man [acteth] through the sciences and arts.

23. This is the dispensation [*1] of the universe, depending from the nature of the One, pervading [all things] through the Mind, than which [*2] is naught diviner or of greater energy; and naught a greater means for the at-oning men to gods and gods to men.

He, [Mind,] is the Good Daimon. Blessed the soul that is most filled with Him, and wretched [*3] is the soul that's empty of the Mind.

Tat. Father, what dost thou mean, again?

Her. [*4] Dost think then, son, that every soul hath the Good [Mind]? For 'tis of Him we speak, not of the mind in service [*5] of which we just were speaking, the mind sent down for [the soul's] chastisement.

24. For soul without the mind "can neither speak nor act." [*6] For oftentimes the mind doth leave the soul, and at that time the soul nor sees

[p. 157]

nor understands, but is just like a thing that hath no reason. Such is the power of mind.

Yet doth it not endure a sluggish [*1] soul, but leaveth such a soul tied to the body and bound tight down by it. Such soul, my son, doth not have Mind; and therefore such an one should not be called a man. [*2] For that man is a thing-of-life [*3] divine; man is not measured with the rest of lives of things upon the earth, but with the lives above in heaven, who are called gods.

Nay more, if we must boldly speak the truth, the true "man" is e'en higher than the gods, or at the [very] least the gods and men are every whit in power each with the other equal.

25. For no one of the gods in heaven shall come down on the earth, o'er-stepping heaven's limit; whereas man doth mount up to heaven and measure it; he knows what things of it are high, what things are low, and learns precisely all things else besides. And greater thing than all; without e'en quitting earth, he doth ascend above. So vast a sweep doth he possess of ecstasy. [*4]

[p. 158]

For this cause can a man dare say that man on earth is god subject to death, while god in heaven is man from death immune.

Wherefore the dispensation of all things is brought about by means of [*1] these, the twain--Cosmos and Man [*2]--but by [*3] the One.

Footnotes

^141:1 The three are only different names for one idea; the verb is in the singular in the Greek. Cf. C. H., ii. (iii.) 16 and 17: "Good then is God and God is Good"; and "The other name of God is Father."

^142:1 That is to say, presumably, in the General Sermons.

^142:2 Lit. of this.

^142:3 yparxis. Cf. C. H., xvi. 4.

^142:4 Lit. both with regard to seed and nourishment.

^142:5 Lit. taking.

^143:1 Cf. C. H., ii. (iii.) 16: "The Good is He who gives all things and naught receives."

^143:2 Lit. for.

^143:3 eple'rusas,--reminding us of ple'ruma.

^143:4 Lit. light.

^144:1 See Lact, D. Institt., i. 11; P. S. A., xi. 4, xxxvii. 3; and Ex. i. 4.

^145:1 From here to end of  section 8 is quoted by Stobaeus, Phys., I. xli. 48 (G. i. 429, 430; W. 416, 18 ff.).

^146:1 ean kake meinei.

^146:2 Cf. C. H., xii. (xiii.) 3: "The great ill of the soul is Godlessness"; also below  section 20: "What greater chastisement of any human soul can there be, son, than lack of piety?"

^146:3 Lit. already.

^147:1 episte'mes.

^147:2 Or hylic.

^147:3 But cf. P. S. A., xxvii. 1.

^147:4 That is capable of suffering, or impressionable by agencies other than itself.

^148:1 Genesis and becoming are both genesis in Greek.

^148:2 Noetic as opposed to hylic--the antithesis and contrariety mentioned above.

^148:3 Namely the ever-becoming of genesis.

^148:4 Or mental, in the sense of being of the same nature as the mind.

^148:5 kefalikus.

^148:6 In which "tissue."

^148:7  section section 12, 13 are quoted by Stobaeus, Phys., I. xxxix. 9 (G. i. 307; W. 350, 13 ff.).

^149:1 That is to say, the world-system itself and all the globes in it.

^149:2 Cf. Ex. i. 11 and 15.

^149:3 Whereas the system and its globes are regarded as practically immortal.

^149:4 Reitzenstein (p. 40, 1) gives a revised text of the major part of this utterance of Hermes, from "Cosmos is beautiful" onwards, but unfortunately he omits just the most obscure sentences in it.

^149:5 Lit. a man's soul, where psyxe is used in a general sense, and not in the particular sense applied to it in the category which immediately follows.

^149:6 pneumati.

^149:7 Cf. P. S. A., vi. 4.

^150:1 arxe'.

^150:2 Lit. to Olympus.

^150:3 Sc. from the world-soul.

^150:4 Cf. the instructive exposition of Basilides in F. F. F., pp. 274 f.

^151:1 This is generally translated "the spirit is contracted into the blood, and the soul into the spirit," but such a translation contradicts  section 13, where we are told that "the spirit withdraws into the soul" at death. It seems to mean that the spirit passes within, out of the blood, and the soul is then clothed in a spirit-vesture, or borne in a spirit-vehicle.

^151:2 From here to the end of  section 18 is quoted by Stobaeus, Phys., xl. 3 (G. i. 312, 313; W. 310, 25 ff.); only the dialogue is ascribed in error to Asclepius and Tat and not to Hermes and Tat.

^152:1 Cf. P. S. A., x. i.

^153:1 demioyrgos.

^153:2 tei dioike'sei, i.e. in its economy.

^153:3 This paragraph is quoted by Stobaeus, Phys., xli. 49 (G. i. 430, 431; W. 417, 15 ff.). For the idea, cf. P. S. A., xxxii. 2.

^154:1 Cf. P. S. A., xxv. 4 and xxviii. 1.

^155:1 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 11; vii. (viii.) 11; ix. (x.) 10; R. 23, n. 5.

^155:2 Namely, the Good.

^155:3 From here to the end is quoted by Stobaeus, Phys., I. xxxix. 8 (G. i. 305-307; W. 303, 14 ff.).

^155:4 koinunia. Cf. P. S. A., xxiii. 1.

^155:5 Cf. P. S. A., v. 1.

^155:6 Cf. Ex. viii. 1.

^156:1 dioikesis, compare 19.

^156:2 Sc. the Mind.

^156:3 kakodaimun, as opposed to o agathos daimun. It is impossible to reproduce the original word-play in translation.

^156:4 Stobaeus (Gaisford) here reads "A."--that is, Asclepius.

^156:5 tou yperetikou, compare  section 21, "the services of God" (tas tou theou yperesias); that is to say, Hermes speaks of the Universal Mind and not of the mind in man.

^156:6 A quotation from the ancient gnomic poet Theognis (v. 177). Theognis lived c. 570-490 B.C.

^157:1 nutras,--? nuthras. Everard translates "an idle or lazy soul," in his usual slipshod fashion of inserting doubles; Parthey gives "inertem animam"; Menard, "l'ame vicieuse"; Chambers, "inert." Several of the old editors omit the entire sentence.

^157:2 Cf. Philo, De Som.,  section 20; M. i. 639; P. 584 (Ri. iii. 241): "not for those who are called men, but for those who are truly so."

^157:3 Or animal.

^157:4 ekstaseus, lit. extension, or consciousness.

^158:1 dia.

^158:2 Cf. P. S. A., x. 3.

^158:3 ypo.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

COMMENTARY

THE CONSUMMATION OF THE "GENERAL SERMONS"

What "yesterday's sermon," which Hermes addressed to Asclepius, may have been, we have no means of deciding. The similarity of the phrase with the opening words of C. H., ix. (x.) is noticeable, and points, perhaps, to a collection of Sermons to Asclepius and Tat strung together in some chronological order, as delivered day by day. If this be the fact, however, we must assume that such introductions were prefixed by the editor of that collection.

"The Key of Thrice-greatest Hermes" must have been considered one of the most remarkable documents of the school, for, as we have already mentioned in the case of "The Cup" treatise, the apocryphal "Books of Moses" plagiarize the title. [*4]

That it was an important treatise may also be seen from the fact that Stobaeus reproduces no less than five extracts from it under the title, "From the [Sermons] of Hermes to Tat," or simply "Of Hermes." Strangely enough in two cases (xxxix. 8 and xl. 3) Stobaeus makes

[p. 159]

the persons of the dialogue Asclepius and Tat; this, however, must be a mistake, for it contradicts his own headings, it contradicts the nature of the sermon, it contradicts the supposed introduction of the editor of the collection from whom the redactor of our Corpus has taken his text, and it contradicts Chalcidius, who quotes from our treatise as a treatise of Hermes. [*1]

Nevertheless, in spite of the importance of the treatise, it purports to be an epitome, [*2] an abridgment of the "General Sermons" (oi genikoi logoi) [*3] addressed to Tat.

The sermon itself, however, has by no means the appearance of being an abridgment; on the contrary, it is one of the most complete and fundamental expositions that we have.

I would, therefore, suggest that the general reference in the words, "as we have shown in treating of the rest" ( section 1), and the precise reference to "The General Sermons," in  section 7, have originated this wording of the introduction with the editor of the collection of Asclepius and Tat Sermons which I have previously supposed. It is a gloss of the editor and no part of the original text.

If this argument holds good, "The Key," instead of

[p. 160]

being an epitome, is a further teaching that presupposes a prior instruction already given in "The General Sermons," and so stands out as a more intimate exposition of the inward doctrine of the higher grades of the school.

Reitzenstein (p. 461) would have it that the doctrine of Sermons, ix. (x.) and x. (xi.), is a mediate one between the dualism of vi. (vii.) and the pronounced pantheistic mysticism of v. (vi.) and xi. (xii.); but I should fancy that these labels, even if they are correctly attached, would not represent such overwhelming contradictions to the Trismegistic doctors as they appear to do to their modern critics. There were different points of view; there were different grades of instruction; every doctrine had more truth in it at the proper time and in the right place. In any case this sermon is one of the most beautiful tractates preserved to us.

THE WILL OF GOD

1. Our treatise begins with the statement that the universe and all therein is due to the Energy or Effective Working of God--that is to say, His Will. This Will is immutable and constant--the Law of the universe.

How subtly these philosophers in their most intimate circles used these terms may be seen from the Gnostic Doctor, Basilides, who writes:

"Naught was,--neither matter, nor substance, nor voidness of substance, nor simplicity, nor impossibility of composition, nor inconceptibility, nor imperceptibility, neither man, nor angel [Hermetice, daimon], nor God; in fine, neither anything at all for which man has ever found a name, nor any operation which falls within the range either of his perception or conception.

[p. 161]

"Such, or rather far more removed from the power of man's comprehension, was the state of Non-Being, when the Deity beyond Being, without thinking, or feeling, or determining, or choosing, or being compelled, or desiring, willed to create universality."

"When I use the term will," writes Basilides, "I do so merely to suggest the idea of an operation transcending all volition, thought, or sensible action." [*1]

2. God's Energy, or Self-realization, is, then, His Will (thelesis); His Essence (oysia) or Substance is "to will the being of all things"; in brief, He is the Very Subsistence (yparxis) of all--a term which subsequently came into great prominence in the later Platonic philosophy.

3. In  section 3 we have a clear distinction drawn between the transcendent idea of God as Creator or Willer, and the ordinary conception of God as Maker or Fabricator or Demiurge--a distinction that meets us in almost every Gnostic system. In our treatise, however, there is no setting of the one idea over against the other in any sense of antagonism. It is only stated that the self-operation of Deity transcends all such limited conceptions as that of a Maker or Fabricator.

OF GNOSIS AND ECSTASIS

4. The distinctive feature of God as the Good, or the Desirable, the Supreme Consummation, is "that He should be known" (to gnurizesthai); in other words, the science of all sciences is the Gnosis of God.

5. The Vision Glorious, the One Sight, is next spoken of under the simile of the shining of a Ray of the Light

[p. 162]

and Life of the Spiritual Sun into the mind. This consummation of Ecstasis, [*1] we are told, was a transcending of the limitations of body, and was a faculty possessed by the forebears (progonoi) of the "race" into which Hermes and now Tat are being born; these ancestors are mentioned under symbolic Greek names, evidently a substitute for Egyptian ones, for the reference is clearly to the priesthood of some past civilization of the Nile Land. At the same time, it can be referred to certain grades of super-men, regarded as gods, who had reached to certain stages of celestial dignity. [*2]

To this idea of ancient Masters of the Gnosis in Egypt, Lactantius refers as follows:

"And so it appears that he [Cronus] was not born from Heaven (which is impossible), but from that man who was called Uranus; and that this is so, Trismegistus bears witness, when, in stating that there have been very few in whom the perfect science has been found, he mentioned in their number Uranus, Cronus, and Hermes his kinsfolk." [*3]

Lactantius seems to be somewhat under the fascination of the theory of Euhemerus, and has no credence in the Heaven-born, in spite of the Christ Birth. We, however, learn from him that he knew of a statement by Hermes in this connection in which, besides Uranus and Cronus, an ancient Hermes was mentioned. Now in our treatise this is not the case, and Tat and not Hermes is the speaker; whereas in P. S. A., xxxvii., where Hermes speaks of his progenitor Hermes, no

[p. 163]

mention is made of Uranus and Cronus. Therefore Lactantius refers to a lost treatise of Hermes.

OF APOTHEOSIS

6. The nature of Ecstasy is then further explained; it is the fruit of meditation or contemplation, the consummation of the Theoretic Life.

"The Gnosis of the Good is holy silence and a giving holiday (katargia) to every sense."

The Holy Silence reminds us of the Sige of the Christian Gnostics; here, however, instead of the Mother-Aeon of Cosmos, it is used in the sense of the pure mother-nature of the little cosmos of man, the divine womb that brings to birth the true man.

With this may be compared C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 2:

"Wisdom conceived by mind in silence, such is the matter and the womb from out which man is born, and the true Good the seed."

It is hardly necessary to add that this is the Yoga of the Upanishads. Indeed, the first part of  section 6 might be taken word for word from those sublime treatises of Vaidik theosophy, and shows how identical is the thought of those who have first-hand experience of the higher consciousness.

"For it is possible, my son, that a man's soul should be made like to God (apotheutheinai), e'en while it still is in a body, if it doth contemplate the Beauty of the Good."

This is the "deification" (apotheusis), or "apotheosis" of a man; he becomes like unto God, in that he becomes a god. The Beauty of the Good is the Cosmic Order; and the mode of this meditation was to bring the soul into sympathy with the Cosmic Soul.

THE METAMORPHOSES OF THE SOUL

 

7. The secret of this divine operation (or theurgy) is based upon the fact that the soul can be transformed

[p. 164]

into every likeness. The Great Likeness of God is the Cosmic Order, the making oneself into this Likeness is the supreme transformation or transfiguration of the soul.

The separated or individual soul is in perpetual pilgrimage, revolving on the wheel of transformation. This doctrine was shared in by many other faiths, and it was also Egyptian.

In this connection we may refer instructively to Hippolytus' quotations from the Naassene Document ( section 3 S.):

"And they [*1] say that the soul is very difficult to discover, and hard to understand; for it never remains of the same appearance, or form, or in the same state, so that we can describe it by a general type, or comprehend it by an essential quality."

On this Hippolytus comments:

"These variegated metamorphoses they [*2] have laid down in the Gospel superscribed 'According to the Egyptians.'"

The Gospel according to the Egyptians is lost, with the exception of a few fragments. We, however, here learn that it described the metamorphoses of the soul. It was a Gospel having its origin in Egypt and suited to Egyptian modes of thought. It follows, therefore, that the doctrine of the soul's transformation was Egyptian. [*3]

[p. 165]

THE LADDER OF BEING

The Hermetic doctrine of the evolution of the soul, by means of multitudinous transformations, is characterised by certain main moments, for in the course of it it passes through definite stages of existence designated as animal, human, daimonic, and god-like; there being, further, two grades of being within the choir of gods--the errant and inerrant. The final stage is the most perfect glory (doxa) or power of the soul.

With all of this there is a strikingly exact parallel of ideas in the Pauline Letters.

"But some one will say: How do the dead rise, and with what body do they come [? back]?

"Thou foolish one! That which thou sowest is not made quick unless it die.

"And that which thou sowest--'tis not the body that shall be thou sowest, but a naked grain of wheat or of one of the other seeds. [*1]

"'Tis God that gives to it [*2] a body as he will,--yea to every one of the seeds its proper body.

"Not every flesh is the same flesh; but there is one of men, another flesh of beasts, another flesh of birds, and another of fishes.

"There are also bodies celestial, as well as bodies terrestrial. But the glory of the celestial [bodies] is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another.

"[And of the former] the glory of the sun is one, and the glory of the moon is another, and [yet] another is the glory of the stars; for star differeth from star in glory.

"So also is the resurrection of the dead." [*3]

 

[p. 166]

And by "resurrection of the dead," I believe that Paul meant what all the instructed of the time meant--namely, the "reaching the first step of deathlessness," as Hermes has it in our treatise. The death or vice of the soul is ignorance, the virtue or life of the soul is Gnosis.

"For he who knows, he good and pious is, and still while on the earth, divine."

CONCERNING TRANSMIGRATION

8. With  section 8, however, we are confronted with what appears to be a great difficulty. Hermes here seems to teach distinctly that a vicious (that is, an ignorant) soul, one who has not attained to Gnosis, goes back to attachment to animal bodies, while in  section section 19 ff., he at great length denies that a human soul can possibly do so. Is there any solution of this apparently complete self-contradiction in one and the same treatise?

Far as I am from desiring to play the apologist for any scripture, I am prevented from appending an impatient "No" to this query, for the following considerations:

In the first place, Hermes in  section 8 is speaking of the vicious or ignorant soul, while in  section 19 he is speaking not only of the "human" soul, but of the human soul that hath the Good Mind ( section 23); whereas the ignorant soul "doth not have Mind, and, therefore, such an one should not be called a man" ( section 24). Here, then, we have a fundamental distinction in souls incarnated into the "body of a man" ( section 8); they are of two classes.

The doctrine of  section 8 applies to one class, the doctrine of  section 19 to another.

Metempsychosis, in the sense of continued revolution on the wheel of life and death, is only for him who "persisteth in his vice"--that is to say, is

[p. 167]

still ignorant. Gnosis thus means the freedom from samsara, to use a common Brahmanical and Buddhistic term.

The ignorant soul does not see the Light, being "blinded by the body's passions, and tossed about"; this is the "turmoil" of which Plato speaks in the Timaeus.

And here I must refer the reader to "Plato Concerning Metempsychosis," in the "Prolegomena," a chapter which I have written mainly in elucidation of the problems raised by our treatise.

GNOSIS THE VIRTUE OF THE SOUL

9. So much, then, for the soul which persisteth in its vice or ignorance; but the virtue of the soul is Gnosis.

"For he who knows, he good and pious is, and still while on the earth, divine."

This is precisely the same idea as that of the Jivanmukta in Indian theosophy--namely, the man who has reached Mukti or Liberation while still living in the body.

Hermes thus proceeds to distinguish Gnosis, the end of human science, from sense or opinion. Gnosis is the apotheosis of the mind, its immediate perception of the things-that-are--namely, the Intelligible Cosmos.

11. The Sensible or Hylic Cosmos is then explained, and also the nature of man, and his relationship to the Cosmos and God.

THE VEHICLES OF THE SOUL

13. The vehicles of man's "Soul" are then categorized (psyxe de anthrw'poy oxeitai ton tropon touton), the Soul being here used in the sense of the Self, and as distinguished from the "soul" in the category. They are

[p. 168]

as follows, one within the other, in the sense of being respectively more intimate to the true nature of man:

Mind (nous); reason (logos); soul (psyxe'); spirit (pneuma); body (suma).

The remarkable similarity of this category with the psychology of the Upanishads cannot fail to strike the student of those mother-treatises of Vaidik theosophy. Thus we read in the Kathopanishad, I. iii. 10, 11:

"Beyond the senses are the rudiments [*1]; beyond the rudiments impulsive mind; beyond the mind, the reason; beyond the reason, the Great Self.

"Beyond the Great, the Increate [*2]; beyond the Increate, the Man [*3]; beyond the Man, not any thing; That is the goal; That is the final end."

The analogy is striking. Body = gross elements; spirit = subtle elements; soul = impulsive mind (manas); reason = reason (buddhi [*4]); Mind = the Great (Mahat); Source (axre') = the Increate; the One and Only (to en kai monon) = the Man.

These so-called "vehicles," "envelopes," or "sheaths" (koshas), are elsewhere given in the Upanishads as: anna-maya-kosha--that is, the kosha composed of, or resulting from, food (body); prana-maya-k., of life (spirit); mano-maya-k., of impulse (soul); vijnana-maya-k., of discrimination (reason); ananda-maya-k., of bliss (Mind).

"Spirit" is thus seen to correspond to life (prana); it is that which "bestows upon the living creature motion, and, as it were, doth bear it" (i.e. support it) "in a way" ( section 13). It is not Life, but individualized

[p. 169]

life, and in the Aupanishad literature is differentiated into five modes, which may be almost translated as etheric currents or modes of motion in the body. [*1]

The quotation from Proclus in "Plato Concerning Metempsychosis," will have sufficiently shown that this "life" is of the same nature as the animal life. It is that principle of soul which man shares with the animals.

THE DUAL SOUL

And here we may refer to Jamblichus (De Myst., viii. 6), when referring to the "Hermaic writings" he says:

"Man has two souls, as these writings say. The one is from the first Mind, and partakes also of the power of the Creator, while the other, the soul under constraint, comes from the revolution of the celestial [spheres]; into the latter the former, the soul that is the seer of God, [*2] insinuates itself at a later period.

"This being so, the soul that descends into us from the worlds [or spheres] keeps time with the circuit of these worlds, while the soul from the Mind existing in us in an intelligible fashion is free from the whirl of genesis; by this the bonds of Destiny are burst asunder; by this the Path up to the Gods whom mind alone can see is brought to birth; by such a life as this is that Great Art Divine, which leads us up to That beyond the spheres of genesis, brought to its consummation."

Hermes in our treatise is, however, more precise as to the so-called "vehicles" or "souls," for he writes ( section 17):

"Mind taketh, then, the soul for, as it were, an

[p. 170]

envelope. And soul itself being, too, a thing divine, [*1] doth use the spirit as its envelope, while spirit doth pervade the living creature." [*2]

"HE WHO STANDS"

The Supreme Principle of all, the One and Only One, who "standeth perpetually" ( section 14), is the Intelligible Logos (e noete stasis, cf.  section 11), the o estus of the Christianized Gnosis, as seen especially in the Simonian Great Announcement. He is the Cause of the perpetual motion of the Hylic Cosmos. Compare this with the following passage of Numenius:

"Now there are two modes of life, the first of the First and the second of the Second God. For it is evident that the First God should be standing (estus), and the Second, on the contrary, moved. The First, then, is occupied about things intelligible, and the Second about things intelligible and sensible.

"Marvel not that I say this; for thou shalt hear what is still more marvellous. For I say that it is not the motion that appertains to the Second, but the rest that pertains to the First, which is the innate 'motion' from which both their cosmic order and their eternal community and their preservation [or salvation] is poured forth on things universal." [*3]

[p. 171]

THE OLYMPIAN PATH

15. In  section 15 the Gnosis is again declared to be the only Path of Salvation or Safety. [*1] It is the Way Up to the Mount, [*2] the Olympian Path.

The term Eleusis was also interpreted as Anabasis, or the Way Up. [*3] Compare the Jewish commentator in the Naassene Document ( section 27):

"First is the Mystery called 'Eleusis' and 'Anaktoreion'--Eleusis because we come from Above, [*4] streaming down from Adamas, [*5] . . . and Anaktoreion from 'Returning Above.'"

"WHEN MIND BECOMES A DAIMON"

16. The next main doctrine touched on is one of immense importance, for it gives us the inner teaching which illuminates the "dark saying" in the "Poemandres" ( section 24), when treating of the Way Up (anodos):

"And thou surrenderest thy way of life unto the daimon."

For in our treatise Hermes tells us that at death:

"The mind stript of its wrappings, and naturally divine, taking unto itself a fiery body, doth traverse every space, after abandoning the soul unto its judgment and whatever chastisement it hath deserved."

The key to this is the sentence ( section 21):

"When mind becomes a daimon, the law requires that it should take a fiery body to execute the services of God."

[p. 172]

At death, the mind, of its own nature, perforce becomes a "servant of God," a Therapeut [*1]; the man is his own judge and his own chastizer.

The "fire of hell" is then but the reflection of the light of the mind; it is the burning remorse of a mind that now sees the inevitable results of every selfish action--thought, word, and deed; that each of these comes inevitably back on the sender forth of it.

The soul, thus, lives out (and that too in the most realistic fashion, it realizes the actuality of the law in all its most minute details) the inevitable consequences of its past vicious deeds in body.

Here we have the hint of a psychology and of an inner teaching that persuades us there was a profound wisdom at the back of the intermediate instruction of these schools.

Compare this most reasonable theory of after-death "illumination" with the crudities of the eternal torment idea of popular religion with which we are so familiar, and reflect on what a "falling off" there has been from the Gnosis of the early days.

And what is the "fiery body" of the mind but the ray-like or starry vehicle of the man, the aygoeides e astroeides of Philoponus? [*2]

This is the true "Astral Body" of a man, and not the "watery vesture" which is referred to under the term in modern nomenclature.

This is the true Body of Purification, that burns up all impurities, and in the light of the conflagration burns into man the memory of the Gnosis.

The soul is thus "chastised by its own self"; and if Hermes had taught us nothing else, he would have amply deserved the gratitude of humanity, and the title

[p. 173]

of Thrice-greatest. Yet is "Hermes" no single man, but a mind illuminated by the Mind.

THE "SCOURGE" OF THE CHRIST

21. So then "the impious soul, scourged with its own sins, is plunged in murders, outrage, blasphemy, in violence of all kinds, and all the other things whereby mankind is wronged."

This is the "scourge" by which the Christ drives the unworthy out of His Temple. It does not mean that the soul is driven into doing these things, but that it is made to realize or suffer them--the consequences of its prior misdeeds. Whatever wrong it has done to its fellows, such it suffers, in the realization of its true nature, whereby the Light of Gnosis brings into amazing contrast the darkness or ignorance of its past actions. [*1]

THE DISPENSATION OF THE UNIVERSE

22. And so Hermes explains the nature of "the dispensation of the universe"--the interlinking of the grades of being from God downwards the intercourse or communion of souls.

God, Cosmos and Man are grades of being. Each is a sun, as it were, in their operations, or powers or rays. God's rays are His energies or self-realizing operations; those of Cosmos are the natures of things, those of Man are the arts and sciences.

This communion or intercourse of higher with lower natures is to be realized on the side of man by the consummation of the sacred marriage, whereby man becomes a god, and finally God.

He only is blessed who is filled with God--that is to

[p. 174]

say, the true Gnostic who has received the consecration of the Fullness or Pleroma. [*1]

Whereas the soul that is empty of God is deprived of that Fullness, cut off from it, and so empty of the Mind. This is the state of Emptiness (kenuma) or Insufficiency (ysterema).

24. Such souls, says Hermes, should not be called men. For a true man is not only equal to a god, but even higher than the gods. Such a man we should, in Christian nomenclature, call a Christ--one animated or illuminated by the Mind or Spirit of God.

Footnotes

^158:4 R. 182, 3; 190, 2.

^159:1 Chalcid., Comment. in Timaeum (ed. Fabric.), p. 350.

^159:2 Compare also the introduction to C. H., xvi. (see R. 191, 1); and also Ex. i. 16 and Comment.

^159:3 Cf.  section 7, below; C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 1; and Exs. ix. 1 and xviii. 1. The title must be so translated, I think, in spite of the fact that in the introductory words of the above treatise the term is immediately followed by the antithesis "rebirth" (paliggenesia), as though the Sermons were on birth or genesis (genesis),--which, as we know from the Naassene Document, was the subject of the Lesser Mysteries, whereas Rebirth was that of the Greater. Everard gives "in the general speeches"; Parthey, "in communibus"; Menard, "dans les discours generaux"; Chambers, "in the Generalities."

^161:1 Hipp., Philos., vii. 21 (ed. D. and S., p. 358); F. F. F., pp. 257, 258.

^162:1 Cf.  section 25, where ecstasis is explained as an extension of consciousness,--a certain "greatness" (megethos).

^162:2 See the "Chart of Orphic Cosmogony," facing p. 87 of my Orpheus (London, 1896), where Uranus and Cronus are referred to the two lower of the three Noetic "planes" transcending the Sensible Universe.

^162:3 Div. Institt., i. 11 (ed. Fritz., i. 29, 30).

^164:1 The quotation is from the text of the Hellenistic Commentator, who is referring to the Chaldaeans.

^164:2 The Gnostics Hippolytus calls the Naassenes.

^164:3 Reitzenstein (p. 22, 2) says that it was in error that the Greeks stated the Egyptians believed in metempsychosis; in this I believe that Reitzenstein is himself in error. The Egyptians at any rate demonstrably believed in soul metamorphosis; and when we find people who lived in Egypt teaching this metamorphosis in connection with metempsychosis, it is but natural to conclude that the Greeks, who were in touch with the living tradition of Egypt, knew more about the matter than modern scepticism.

^165:1 The "grain of mustard seed"--"wheat" if a good body comes therefrom, "tares" if an imperfect growth results.

^165:2 Sc. the soul as grain.

^165:3 1 Cor. xv. 35-42.

^168:1 The subtler elements.

^168:2 Avyakta, undifferentiated cosmic substance.

^168:3 Purusha, the True Man.

^168:4 The manas and buddhi of the Upanishads are not to be confounded with these terms as at present employed in modern Theosophical literature.

^169:1 Cf. K. K., 44, 45, Comment.

^169:2 Cf. C. H., ix. (x.) 3: "The daimon who's illumined by God's Light."

^170:1 That is, being logos, as from the Creator or Second Mind.

^170:2 Cf. Exx. iv. 2; xv. 2; xix. 3; and Frag. xviii.

^170:3 Quoted by Eusebius, Praep. Evang., XI. xviii. 20, 21 (539 B), ed. Dindorf (Leipzig, 1867), ii. 41. We do not know Numenius' date, but it was probably about the first half of the first century A.D. Though Numenius is almost invariably designated as a Pythagorean, he was rather a universalist, for his object was not only to trace the doctrines of Plato up to Pythagoras, but to show that they were not at variance with the doctrines and mysteries of the Brahmans, Jews, Magi and Egyptians.

^171:1 Cf. the passage from Jamblichus quoted above.

^171:2 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 1: "The Passing o'er the Mount."

^171:3 Cf. C. H., i. 24.

^171:4 Eleusis meaning Coming, Advent.

^171:5 The Man or Mind.

^172:1 Cf. 23: "The mind in service."

^172:2 See my Orpheus, pp. 292 ff.

^173:1 With this compare the function of the Mind on the soul in incarnation, as described in C. H., xii. (xiii.) 4.

^174:1 Cf. John i. 16: "Of His Fullness have we all received."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 175]

CORPUS HERMETICUM XI. (XII.)

 

MIND UNTO HERMES

(Text: P. 85-99; Pat. 20b-23.)

1. Mind. Master this sermon (logos), [*1] then, Thrice-greatest Hermes, and bear in mind the spoken words; and as it hath come unto Me to speak, I will no more delay.

Hermes. As many men say many things, and these diverse, about the All and Good, I have not learned the truth. Make it, then, clear to me, O Master mine! For I can trust the explanation of these things, which comes from Thee alone.

2. Mind. Hear [then], My son, how standeth God and All.

God; Aeon [*2]; Cosmos; Time; Becoming. [*3]

God maketh Aeon; Aeon, Cosmos; Cosmos, Time; and Time, Becoming.

[p. 176]

The Good,--the Beautiful, Wisdom, Blessedness,--is essence, as it were, [*1] of God; of Aeon, Sameness [*2]; of Cosmos, Order; of Time, Change; and of Becoming, Life and Death.

The energies of God are Mind and Soul; of Aeon, lastingness [*3] and deathlessness; of Cosmos, restoration and the opposite thereof [*4]; of Time, increase and decrease; and of Becoming, quality.

Aeon is, then, in God; Cosmos, in Aeon; in Cosmos, Time; in Time, Becoming.

Aeon stands firm round God; Cosmos is moved in Aeon; Time hath its limits [*5] in the Cosmos; Becoming doth become in Time.

3. The source, [*6] therefore, of all is God; their essence, Aeon; their matter, Cosmos.

God's power is Aeon; Aeon's work is Cosmos--which never hath become, yet ever doth become by Aeon.

Therefore will Cosmos never be destroyed, for Aeon's indestructible; nor doth a whit of things in Cosmos perish, for Cosmos is enwrapped by Aeon round on every side.

Her. But God's Wisdom--what is that?

Mind. The Good and Beautiful, and Blessedness, and Virtue's all, and Aeon.

[p. 177]

Aeon, then, ordereth [*1] [Cosmos], imparting deathlessness and lastingness to matter.

4. For its [*2] becoming doth depend on Aeon, as Aeon doth on God.

Now Genesis [*3] and Time, in Heaven and on the Earth, are of two natures.

In Heaven they are unchangeable and indestructible, but on the Earth they're subject unto change and to destruction.

Further, the Aeon's soul is God; the Cosmos' soul is Aeon; the Earth's soul, Heaven.

And God's in Mind; and Mind, in Soul; and Soul, in Matter; and all of them through Aeon.

But all this Body, [*4] in which are all the bodies, is full of Soul; and Soul is full of Mind, and [Mind] of God.

It [*5] fills it [*6] from within, and from without encircles it, making the All to live.

Without, this vast and perfect Life [*7] [encircles] Cosmos; within, it fills [it with] all lives [*8]; above, in Heaven, continuing in sameness; below, on Earth, changing becoming.

5. And Aeon doth preserve this [Cosmos], or by Necessity, or by Foreknowledge, or by

[p. 178]

[paragraph continues] Nature, or by whatever else a man supposes or shall suppose. And all is this,--God energizing.

The Energy of God is Power that naught can e'er surpass, a Power with which no one can make comparison of any human thing at all, or any thing divine.

Wherefore, O Hermes, never think that aught of things above or things below is like to God, for thou wilt fall from truth. For naught is like to That which hath no like, and is Alone and One.

And do not ever think that any other can possibly possess His power; for what apart from Him is there of life, and deathlessness and change of quality? For what else should He make [*1]?

God's not inactive, [*2] since all things [then] would lack activity; for all are full of God.

But neither in the Cosmos anywhere, nor in aught else, is there inaction. For that "inaction" is a name that cannot be applied to either what doth make or what is made. [*3]

6. But all things must be made; both ever

[p. 179]

made, and also in accordance with the influence of every space. [*1]

For He who makes, is in them all; not stablished in some one of them, nor making one thing only, but making all.

For being Power, He energiseth in the things He makes and is not independent of them,--although the things He makes are subject to Him.

Now gaze through Me [*2] upon the Cosmos that's now subject to thy sight; regard its Beauty carefully--Body in pure perfection, though one than which there's no more ancient one, ever in prime of life, and ever-young, nay, rather, in even fuller and yet fuller prime!

7. Behold, again, the seven subject Worlds [*3]; ordered [*4] by Aeon's order, [*5] and with their varied course full-filling Aeon!

[See how] all things [are] full of light, and nowhere [is there] fire; for 'tis the love and blending of the contraries and the dissimilars

[p. 180]

that doth give birth to light down shining by the energy of God, [*1] the Father of all good, the Leader of all order, and Ruler of the seven world-orderings!

[Behold] the Moon, forerunner of them all, the instrument of nature, and the transmuter of its lower matter!

[Look at] the Earth set in the midst of All, foundation of the Cosmos Beautiful, feeder and nurse of things on Earth!

And contemplate the multitude of deathless lives, how great it is, and that of lives subject to death; and midway, between both, immortal [lives] and mortal, [see thou] the circling Moon.

8. And all are full of Soul, and all are moved by it, each in its proper way; some round the Heaven, others around the Earth; [see] how the right [move] not unto left, nor yet the left unto the right; nor the above below, nor the below above.

And that all these are subject unto Genesis, [*2] My dearest Hermes, thou hast no longer need to learn of Me. For that they bodies are, have souls, and they are moved.

But 'tis impossible for them to come together into one without some one to bring them [all]

[p. 181]

together. It must, then, be that such a one as this must be some one who's wholly One.

9. For as the many motions of them [all] are different, and as their bodies are not like, yet has one speed been ordered for them all, it is impossible that there should be two or more makers for them.

For that one single order is not kept among "the many"; but rivalry will follow of the weaker with the stronger, and they will strive.

And if the maker of the lives that suffer change and death, should be another, [*1] he would desire to make the deathless ones as well; just as the maker of the deathless ones, [to make the lives] that suffer death.

But come! if there be two, [*2]--if Matter's one, and Soul is one, in whose hands would there be the distribution [*3] for the making? Again, if both of them have some of it, in whose hands may there be the greater part?

10. But thus conceive it, then; that every living body doth consist of soul and matter, whether [that body be] of an immortal, or a mortal, or an irrational [life].

For that all living bodies are ensouled; whereas, upon the other hand, those that live not, are matter by itself.

[p. 182]

And, in like fashion, Soul when in its self is, after its own maker, cause of life; but the cause of all life is He who makes the things that cannot die.

Her. How, then, is it that, first, lives subject unto death are other than the deathless ones? And, next, how is it that that Life which knows no death, and maketh deathlessness, doth not make animals immortal?

11. Mind. First, that there is some one who does these things, is clear; and, next, that He is also One, is very manifest. For, also, Soul is one, and Life is one, and Matter one.

Her. But who is He?

Mind. Who may it other be than the One God? Whom else should it beseem to put Soul into lives but God alone? One, then, is God.

It would indeed be most ridiculous, if when thou dost confess the Cosmos to be one, Sun one, Moon one, and Godhead [*1] one, thou shouldst wish God Himself to be some one or other of a number!

12. All things, therefore, He makes, in many [ways]. And what great thing is it for God to make life, soul, and deathlessness, and change, when thou [thyself] dost do [*2] so many things?

For thou dost see, and speak, and hear, and

[p. 183]

smell, and taste, and touch, and walk, and think, and breathe. And it is not one man who smells, a second one who speaks, a third who touches, another one who smells, another one who walks, another one who thinks, and [yet] another one who breathes. But one is he who doth all these.

And yet no one of these could be apart from God. For just as, shouldst thou cease from [*1] these, thou wouldst no longer be a living thing, so also, should God cease from them (a thing not law to say), no longer is He God.

13. For if it hath been shown that no thing can inactive [*2] be, how much less God? For if there's aught He doth not make (if it be law to say), He is imperfect. But if He is not only not inactive, but perfect [God], then He doth make all things.

Give thou thyself to Me, My Hermes, for a little while, [*3] and thou shalt understand more easily how that God's work is one, in order that all things may be--that are being made, or once have been, or that are going to be made. And this [*4] is, My beloved, Life; this is the Beautiful; this is the Good; this, God.

[p. 184]

14. And if them wouldst in practice [*1] understand [this work], behold what taketh place with thee desiring to beget. Yet this is not like unto that, for He doth not enjoy.

For that indeed He hath no other one to share in what He works, for working by Himself, He ever is at work, Himself being what He doth. [*2] For did He separate Himself from it, [*3] all things would [then] collapse, and all must die, Life ceasing.

But if all things are lives, and also Life is one; then, one is God. And, furthermore, if all are lives, both those in Heaven and those on Earth, and One Life in them all is made to be by God, and God is it [*4]--then, all are made by God.

Life is the making-one of Mind and Soul; accordingly Death is not the destruction of those that are at-oned, [*5] but the dissolving of their union.

15. Aeon, moreover, is God's image; Cosmos [is] Aeon's; the Sun, of Cosmos; and Man, [the image] of the Sun.

The people call change death, because the body is dissolved, and life, when it's dissolved, withdraws to the unmanifest. But in this

[p. 185]

sermon (logos), Hermes, my beloved, as thou dost hear, I say the Cosmos also suffers change,--for that a part of it each day is made to be in the unmanifest,--yet it is ne'er dissolved.

These are the passions of the Cosmos--revolvings and concealments; revolving is conversion and concealment renovation.

16. The Cosmos is all-formed,--not having forms external to itself, but changing them itself within itself. Since, then, Cosmos is made to be all-formed, what may its maker be? For that, on the one hand, He should not be void of all form; and, on the other hand, if He's all-formed, He will be like the Cosmos. Whereas, again, has He a single form, He will thereby be less than Cosmos.

What, then, say we He is?--that we may not bring round our sermon (logos) into doubt; for naught that mind conceives of God is doubtful.

He, then, hath one idea, [*1] which is His own alone, which doth not fall beneath the sight, being bodiless, and [yet] by means of bodies manifesteth all [ideas]. [*2] And marvel not that there's a bodiless idea.

17. For it is like the form of reason (logos) [*3]

[p. 186]

and mountain-tops in pictures. [*1] For they appear to stand out strongly from the rest, but really are quite smooth and flat.

And now consider what is said more boldly, but more truly!

Just as man cannot live apart from Life, so neither can God live without [His] doing good. [*2] For this is as it were the life and motion as it were of God--to move all things and make them live.

18. Now some of the things said [*3] should bear a sense peculiar to themselves. So understand, for instance, what I'm going to say.

All are in God, [but] not as lying in a place. For place is both a body and immovable, and things that lie do not have motion.

Now things lie one way in the bodiless, another way in being made manifest.

Think, [then,] of Him who doth contain them all; and think, that than the bodiless naught is more comprehensive, or swifter, or more potent, but it is the most comprehensive, the swiftest, and most potent of them all.

19. And, thus, think from thyself, and bid

[p. 187]

thy soul go unto any land; and there more quickly than thy bidding will it be. And bid it journey oceanwards; and there, again, immediately 'twill be, not as if passing on from place to place, but as if being there.

And bid it also mount to heaven; and it will need no wings, nor will aught hinder it, nor fire of sun, nor aether, nor vortex-swirl, [*1] nor bodies of the other stars; but, cutting through them all, it will soar up to the last Body [of them all]. [*2] And shouldst thou will to break through this as well, and contemplate what is beyond--if there be aught beyond the Cosmos [*3]; it is permitted thee.

20. Behold what power, what swiftness, thou dost have! And canst thou do all of these things, and God not [do them]?

Then, in this way know [*4] God; as having all things in Himself as thoughts, the whole Cosmos itself.

If, then, thou dost not make thyself like unto God, thou canst not know Him. For like is knowable to like [alone].

Make, [then,] thyself to grow to the same stature as the Greatness which transcends all

[p. 188]

measure; leap forth from every body; transcend all Time; become Eternity [*1]; and [thus] shalt thou know God.

Conceiving nothing is impossible unto thyself, think thyself deathless and able to know all,--all arts, all sciences, the way of every life. [*2]

Become more lofty than all height, and lower than all depth. Collect into thyself all senses of [all] creatures,--of fire, [and] water, dry and moist. Think that thou art at the same time in every place,--in earth, in sea, in sky; not yet begotten, in the womb, young, old, [and] dead, in after-death conditions. [*3]

And if thou knowest all these things at once, [*4]--times, places, doings, qualities, and quantities; thou canst know God. [*5]

21. But if thou lockest up thy soul within thy body, and dost debase it, saying: I nothing know; I nothing can; I fear the sea; I cannot scale the sky; I know not who I was, who I shall be;--what is there [then] between [thy] God and thee?

For thou canst know naught of things beautiful and good so long as thou dost love thy body and art bad.

[p. 189]

The greatest bad there is, is not to know God's Good [*1]; but to be able to know [Good], and will, and hope, is a Straight Way, the Good's own [Path], both leading there and easy. [*2]

If thou but sett'st thy foot thereon, 'twill meet thee everywhere, 'twill everywhere be seen, both where and when thou dost expect it not,--waking, sleeping, sailing, journeying, by night, by day, speaking, [and] saying naught. For there is naught that is not image of the Good.

22. Her. Is God unseen?

Mind. Hush! Who is more manifest than He? For this one reason hath He made all things, that through them all thou mayest see Him.

This is the Good of God, this [is] His Virtue,--that He may be made manifest through all. [*3]

For naught's unseen, even of things that are without a body. Mind sees itself [*4] in thinking, God in making. [*5]

So far these things have been made manifest to thee, Thrice-greatest one! Reflect on all the rest in the same way within thyself, and thou shalt not be led astray.

Footnotes

^175:1 Or thy reason.

^175:2 Eternity; the ideal world, beyond time. Cf. P. S. A., xxx., xxxi.

^175:3 Genesis.

^176:1 That is to say, the term "ess-ence" cannot really be applied to God, for He is beyond "be-ing."

^176:2 Or identity.

^176:3 Or duration.

^176:4 antapokatastasis.

^176:5 Or is accomplished.

^176:6 pege'.

^177:1 Or adorneth.

^177:2 Sc. Matter's Becoming or Genesis.

^177:3 Or Becoming.

^177:4 Sc. Cosmos.

^177:5 Sc. Soul.

^177:6 Sc. Body, of Universe or Cosmos.

^177:7 Or Animal; that is, Soul.

^177:8 Or animals.

^178:1 Sc. than those which are Himself.

^178:2 argos. There is a word-play in the terms ergon (work), energun (working in, energizing), energe's (active, energetic), energeia (in-working, activity), and argos (not-working, inactive, idle), argia (inactivity, idleness), which it is impossible to bring out fully in English.

^178:3 Or what becomes.

^179:1 This seems to mean, that all things in the world of genesis (making, creating, or becoming) have their root-activity, first from the sameness of becoming of the one sphere or space, and then their differentiated activity from the seven spheres, spaces, or planes, which are the instruments of God in the differentiation of the Cosmos.

^179:2 Mind--i.e. with the mind's eye, or spiritual sight, or by the help of the Master's illuminating power. Cf. C. H., i. 7 and xiii. (xiv.) 11.

^179:3 kosmoys, cosmoi or world-orders.

^179:4 Or adorned, or made beautiful.

^179:5 The order of the Aeon (Eternity, the Spiritual Space), aeonian or everlasting order.

^180:1 The text from "Now gaze . . ." to here is given in R. 36, n. 1.

^180:2 Or becoming.

^181:1 From the maker of the immortals.

^181:2 Sc. makers.

^181:3 Sc. of matter and life.

^182:1 Or Divinity.

^182:2 Or make; a play on the double meaning of the Greek verb.

^183:1 Lit. become inactive of (katargetheis).

^183:2 A word has here dropped out in the text, which I have supplied by argon (inactive), and not by the usual conjecture "apart from God."

^183:3 Cf. P. S. A., iii. 1: "Now lend to me the whole of thee."

^183:4 Sc. work, doing, making, or creating.

^184:1 ergui, in deed, in work.

^184:2 Or makes.

^184:3 Sc. His work, or creation.

^184:4 Viz., this Life.

^184:5 That is, Mind and Soul, sc. the Logos and World-Soul, or ego and animal soul.

^185:1 The root of form; used also loosely in Greek to denote form.

^185:2 Or forms.

^185:3 Or idea of the sermon.

^186:1 kai en tais grafais akrw'reiai. All the translators talk of "margins" in MSS., and make entire nonsense of the passage. I can find absolutely no authority for translating akrw'reiai margins.

^186:2 Or making the Good; that is, Aeon.

^186:3 Or points of the sermon.

^187:1 e dine, presumably the vortex or "whorl" of the solar system (cf. "Vision of Er").

^187:2 Sc. the body or limit of the whole cosmos.

^187:3 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 5: "And things above the heaven--if there be aught."

^187:4 Or think.

^188:1 Lit. Aeon.

^188:2 pantos zuioy Ethos,--or nature of every animal.

^188:3 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 11.

^188:4 Or art simultaneously conscious of.

^188:5 A critical text from "Make, then, thy self" to here is given by R., p. 238.

^189:1 to theion--lit. the Godly, or Divine.

^189:2 Cf. Ex. i. 4.

^189:3 The preceding question and answer is quoted with very slight verbal variants by Cyril, Contra Julianum, ii. 52.

^189:4 Or is seen.

^189:5 Or doing.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 190]

COMMENTARY

TITLE AND FORM

The title in the MSS. is simply "Mind to Hermes." When, therefore, Cyril, in quoting the first three paragraphs of  section 22 of our treatise, says that Hermes wrote these words "to his own mind," [*1] he is evidently either a very careless reader, [*2] or had not seen at first hand the treatise from which he quotes.

From its contents, moreover, it is very evident that our treatise, as far as its form is concerned, looks back to the "Poemandres" as the type of instruction to Hermes (or to a Hermes).

This highly authoritative form of enunciating doctrine was evidently chosen because it was desired to impart a more intimate instruction than that of the "General Sermons" and the like,--to wit, the inculcation of the Aeon-doctrine, in connection with the marvellous doctrine of At-one-ment with all things which constitutes the Path of the Good. The doctrine is no longer "Become (or make thyself like) Cosmos," but "Become Aeon" ( section 20).

Now it is remarkable that the instruction given in our treatise by the Mind to Hermes is, almost point for point, the "esoteric" teaching of which the Sermon of Hermes to Tat, entitled the "Cup or Monad"--C. H., iv. (v.)--is the "exoteric" form.

That the instruction in these Trismegistic schools of initiation was divided into grades is manifest on all sides; and, therefore, nothing is more natural than to find these two sermons standing in such intimate relations to one another as to doctrine, the one containing

[p. 191]

the more intimate and advanced explanation of the more general instruction of the other.

And that this inner instruction on the "Cup" doctrine must have been thought to be of very great value, is evident when we reflect that "The Cup" sermon was one of the most famous of all the treatises of Hermes, for, as we have seen, its title was worth being plagiarized, and the Baptism of the Cup, of which it treated, constituted the goal of the endeavour of the disciples of the School, as Zosimus tells us.

Mystically, then, the main interest of our treatise centres in the doctrine of the At-one-ment (as the inner consummation of the Baptism in the Cup or Monad), to which the Aeon-idea is but a formal introduction; historically, however, the introduction of the Aeon-idea presents itself as a critical problem, for the term is not found in the ''Poemandres," and, therefore, presumably was not used in the earliest documents of the School.

THE AeON-LORE

When, then, did this Aeon-idea impose itself upon the older form of tradition of the Trismegistic schools? This is a most important question; for if we can in any way answer it, we shall be in a position to assign a terminus ad quem for the earlier forms of Hermetic doctrine.

The answer to the question seems to me to be involved in the supposition that the Aeon-doctrine must have influenced "Hermeticism" at more or less the same date as that at which it influenced "Gnosticism."

Now "Gnosticism," in its Christianized forms, is practically never found without the Aeon-lore.

The earliest forms of Christian Gnosis referred to

[p. 192]

by the later Patristic haeresiologists are bound up with Aeonology. Not only so, but the very earliest reference to Gnosticism by any Christian writer presupposes the Aeon-doctrine, and uses it in illustration of the spiritual state of the writer. [*1]

The widespread influence of the Aeon-doctrine can thus be traced back to at least the origins of Christianity.

Now as the Gnosis existed before any Christian form of it was developed, the question of the date when the Aeon-doctrine was introduced into it must be referred to pre-Christian times.

And, indeed, the very simple character of the Aeon-lore in our treatise, [*2] as compared with the mind-bewildering complexity and transcendency of first and second century Christian Gnosticism, is all in favour of an early date for its introduction into "Hermeticism," which is only another name for "Gnosticism" of a preponderatingly Hellenic form.

If this line of reasoning holds good, we have in it a very strong presumption that the older forms of the Trismegistic treatises were pre-Christian.

And that this is so may be seen by the absolute identity of the teaching of our treatise ( section 2) with that of Philo, when he writes:

"But God is the Artificer of Time as well. For He is Father of its Father; and Time's Father is the Cosmos, which manifests its motion in the genesis of Time. . . .

"This [Cosmos] then, the Younger Son, the Sensible, being set a-moving, has caused Time's nature to appear

[p. 193]

and disappear; so that there nothing is which future is with God, who has the very Bounds of Time subject to Him. For 'tis not Time, but Time's Archetype and Paradigm, Eternity (or Aeon), which is His Life. [*1] But in Eternity naught is past, and naught is future, but all is present only." [*2]

This passage of Philo is of the utmost importance for estimating the date of our treatises; for not only does it prove that the oldest forms of the Trismegistic literature were pre-Christian, but it further persuades us that our treatise, which belongs to a later type of this literature, may be dated as contemporary with Philo.

Chapter xi. in the Prolegomena, "Concerning the Aeon-Doctrine," should be taken in close connection with this treatise, for it is not only introductory to it, but frequently refers directly to it.

For the rest, it is not necessary to attempt any detailed comments, since the instruction of the writer is clear enough for any careful reader to follow with ease after making himself acquainted with the general ideas in the preceding treatises. One or two notes on special points, however, may be attempted.

THE ROOT OF FORM

Thus in  section 16, the sentence: "The Cosmos is all-formed (pantomorfos),--not having forms external to itself, but changing them itself within itself,"--reminds us of P. S. A., xix. 3: "The 'Thirty-six' who have the name of Horoscopes are in the self-same space as the fixed stars; of these the essence-chief, or prince,

[p. 194]

is he whom they call Pantomorph, or Omniform (pantomorfos, vel omniformis),who fashioneth the various forms for various species"; and also of P. S. A., xxxv.: "But they are changed as many times as there are moments in the hour of that revolving circle in which abides that God whom we have called All-form."

Compare also C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 12, where, speaking of the "Circle of the types of life," Hermes says it is "composed of elements, twelve in number, but of one nature, an omniform idea."

With this compare Hermes-Prayer iv., addressed to Thoth as the Logos:

"Thee I invoke alone, thou who alone in all the Cosmos dost impose order on gods and men, who dost transform thyself in holy forms, making to be from things that are not, and from the things that are, making the not to be."

But the main interest of our treatise is not that the Intelligible Cosmos or Logos can create and destroy and transmute all forms at will, but that man as the microcosm has potential in him this great magic power.

"BECOME ALL THINGS"

The daring instruction given to Hermes in  section section 19 and 20 is distinctly a discipline of the Egyptian Wisdom; for though it is here set forth plainly and without circumlocution, as a straightforward intimate instruction, stripped of all mysterious hints or hesitating subterfuges, [*1] it is clearly in the same circle of ideas of which popular Egyptian theurgy had some inkling. But whereas the philosopher-mystic was bidden to do this for himself of his own volition and achievement, the theurgist had to beg some god to do it for him.

[p. 195]

Thus in the same Prayer, to which we have already referred, we read ( section section 2, 3):

"O holy Thoth, the true sight of whose face none of the gods endures! Make me to be in every creature's name [or 'true form'],--wolf, dog, or lion, fire, tree, or vulture, wall, or water, or what thou will'st, for thou art able so to do."

So also in P. S. A., vii., we have the same idea, for certainly the phrasing of the sentences suggests something beyond the ordinary powers of the mind or imagination.

"He mingles with the elements by reason of the swiftness of his mind. He plunges into the sea's depths by means of its profundity. He puts his values on all things.

"Heaven does not seem too high for him; for it is measured by the wisdom of his mind as though it were quite near.

"No darkness of the air obstructs the penetration of his mind. No density of earth impedes his work. No depth of water blunts his sight.

"Though still the same, yet is he all, and everywhere is he the same."

It is indeed a marvellous "yoga" system that is sketched for us in our treatise. There is no question here of abstraction or negation, but a courageous identification or At-one-ment of oneself with all that lives and breathes. This is the Path of the Gnosis, the Way to Know God.

In other words, man is to copy his prototype, the Mind, and just as the Mind or Man, in the "Poemandres" treatise, "had a mind to break right through the Boundary of the spheres" ( section 13), so is our philosopher bidden to "soar up to the Last Body of them all" ( section 19), that Last Body being the One Element of Cosmos itself.

[p. 196]

"And shouldst thou will to break through this as well, and contemplate what is beyond--if there be aught beyond the Cosmos; it is permitted thee."

That the hard and fast distinctions which modern commentators would draw between words, in considering these mystical treatises, would have been laughed at by the writers of them, is amply manifested when the writer with enthusiastic fervour bursts forth:

"Then in this way know God, as having in Himself as thoughts the whole Cosmos itself.

"If, then, thou dost not make thyself like unto God, [*1] thou canst not know Him. [*2] For like is knowable to like [alone]. Make, then, thyself to grow to the same stature as the Greatness which transcends all measure; leap forth from every body; transcend all time; become Eternity; and thus shalt thou know God."

Every body or space must be transcended, even the Body of Cosmos itself; for the man must grow into the "stature of the Greatness that transcends all measure," that is, the intelligible superspatial Pleroma, the Aeon as the Logos and Paradigm of Cosmos. And every time and all Time must also be transcended; for the man must become Eternity--that is, the Aeon as the Paradigm of Time.

THE GOOD'S OWN PATH

In no scripture that I know is this Path more admirably set forth--the Good's own Path. All things, all spaces, and all times have to be realized as being within oneself simultaneously; if this is realized or known, not only imagined, then a man becomes a true Knower of God, a Gnostic.

[p. 197]

Nor has ever a truer sentence been written than the wonderful words concerning this Path to the Supreme:

"If thou but sett'st thy foot thereon, 'twill meet thee everywhere, 'twill everywhere be seen, both where and when thou dost expect it not--waking, sleeping, sailing, journeying, by night, by day, speaking, and saying naught. For there is naught that is not image of the Good."

CONCERNING INDIA

In conclusion, I would only point out that if for the hopeless reading in the first sentence of  section 19 we were to take Patrizzi's emendation, which has been adopted by Parthey, we should have the interesting sentence:

"And, thus, think from thyself, and bid thy soul go unto India."

If this should be the original reading, it is remarkable that India should have been selected of all places. We know, however, from a study of what is known of the life of Apollonius of Tyana, that this "Gnostic" philosopher made an enormous propaganda of Indian ideas among the philosophic and mystic communities and schools of the first century. Apollonius must have known something, perhaps a great deal, concerning the siddhis acquired by yoga-practices. At any rate, we find his biographer Philostratus making him write the following letter to his Eastern hosts on his return from India:

"I came to you by land and ye have given me the sea; nay, rather, by sharing with me your wisdom ye have given me power to travel through heaven. These things will I bring back to the mind of the Greeks, and I will hold converse with you as though ye were

[p. 198]

present, if it be that I have not drunk of the Cup of Tantalus in vain." [*1]

That an intensely great interest was taken in Indian ideas at Alexandria is shown by the fact that we find Plotinus himself in 242 starting off with the expedition of Gordian to the East in the hope of coming in contact with the Indian Wisdom.

But all these considerations, though interesting in themselves, do not immediately concern us, unless we are subjectively persuaded that the emendation of Patrizzi is firmly established. Should, however, this reading in any way be confirmed by objective evidence, we should have to reconsider the question of date by the light of it, though, I fear, with little chance of any definite result. For though the propaganda of Indian ideas by Apollonius could not have begun prior to the middle of the first century, we have in this fact no very sure criterion, for "India" must have been in the air, and strongly in the air, even prior to Apollonius' visit to India, or why should he have been induced to make so long and dangerous a journey? Indeed, "India" had been in the air ever since the expedition of Alexander--that is, from the beginning of the Alexandrian period--the second quarter of the fourth century B.C. onwards.

Footnotes

^190:1 C. Jul., ii. 52; ed. Migne, col. 580 B.

^190:2 Cf. R. 128, i.; 196, 3.

^192:1 Namely, Paul in his Letters, which are the earliest of all Christian documents. See my article, "Some Notes on the Gnostics," in The Nineteenth Century and After (Nov. 1902), pp. 822-835; and D. J. L., pp. 353 ff.

^192:2 Perhaps the clearest exposition is to be found in P. S. A., xxx. and xxxi.

^193:1 Cf. C. H., i. 6; the Union of the Logos and Mind--or First-Born Son and Father--is Life; they are united in Aeon.

^193:2 Quod Deus Im.,  section 6; M. i. 277; P. 298 (Ri. ii. 72, 73).

^194:1 Or, as the writer of the Pistis Sophia would say, en parresiai, "face to face without a parable."

^196:1 Sc. as Cosmos.

^196:2 Sc. as Father of this Only Son.

^198:1 Philos., Vit. Ap., iii. 51. Cf. my Apollonius of Tyana, the Philosopher Reformer of the First Century A.D. (London, 1901), p. 88.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 199]

CORPUS HERMETICUM XII. (XIII.)

 

ABOUT THE COMMON MIND

OF HERMES TO TAT

(Text: P. 99-113; Pat. 23b-25b.)

1. Hermes. The Mind, O Tat, is of God's very essence--(if such a thing as essence of God [*1] there be)--and what that is, it and it only knows precisely.

The Mind, then, is not separated off from God's essentiality, but is united unto it, as light to sun.

This Mind in men is God, and for this cause some of mankind are gods, and their humanity is nigh unto divinity.

For the Good Daimon said: "Gods are immortal men, and men are mortal gods."

2. But in irrational lives Mind is their nature. For where is Soul, there too is Mind; just as where Life, there is there also Soul.

[p. 200]

But in irrational lives their soul is life devoid of mind [*1]; for Mind is the in-worker of the souls of men for good;--He works on them for their own good.

In lives irrational He doth co-operate with each one's nature; but in the souls of men He counteracteth them.

For every soul, when it becomes embodied, is instantly depraved by pleasure and by pain.

For in a compound body, just like juices, pain and pleasure seethe, and into them the soul, on entering in, is plunged. [*2]

3. O'er whatsoever souls the Mind doth, then, preside, to these it showeth its own light, by acting counter to their prepossessions, just as a good physician doth upon the body prepossessed by sickness, pain inflict, burning or lancing it for sake of health.

In just the selfsame way the Mind inflicteth pain upon the soul, to rescue it from pleasure, whence comes its every ill.

The great ill of the soul is godlessness [*3]; then

[p. 201]

followeth fancy [*1] for all evil things and nothing good.

So, then, Mind counteracting it doth work good on the soul, as the physician health upon the body.

4. But whatsoever human souls have not the Mind as pilot, they share in the same fate as souls of lives irrational.

For [Mind] becomes co-worker with them, giving full play to the desires towards which [such souls] are borne,--[desires] that from the rush of lust strain after the irrational; [so that such human souls,] just like irrational animals, cease not irrationally to rage and lust, nor ever are they satiate of ills.

For passions and irrational desires are ills exceeding great; and over these God hath set up the Mind to play the part of judge and executioner.

5. Tat. In that case, father mine, the teaching (logos) as to Fate, [*2] which previously thou didst explain to me, risks to be over-set.

For that if it be absolutely fated for a man to fornicate, or commit sacrilege, or do some other evil deed, why is he punished,--when he hath done the deed from Fate's necessity?

Her. All works, my son, are Fate's; and without Fate naught of things corporal--or good, or ill--can come to pass.

[p. 202]

But it is fated too, that he who doeth ill, shall suffer. And for this cause he doth it--that he may suffer what he suffereth, because he did it.

6. But for the moment, [Tat,] let be the teaching (logos) as to vice and Fate, for we have spoken of these things in other [of our sermons]; but now our teaching (logos) is about the Mind:--what Mind can do, and how it is [so] different,--in men being such and such, and in irrational lives [so] changed; and [then] again that in irrational lives it is not of a beneficial nature, while that in men it quencheth out the wrathful and the lustful elements.

Of men, again, we must class some as led by reason, and others as unreasoning.

7. But all men are subject to Fate, and genesis and change, for these [*1] are the beginning and the end of Fate.

And though all men do suffer fated things, those led by reason (those whom we said the Mind doth guide) do not endure like suffering with the rest; but, since they've freed themselves from viciousness, not being bad, they do not suffer bad.

Tat. How meanest thou again, my father? Is not the fornicator bad; the murderer bad; and [so with] all the rest?

Her. [I meant not that;] but that the

[p. 203]

[paragraph continues] Mind-led man, my son, though not a fornicator, will suffer just as though he had committed fornication, and though he be no murderer, as though he had committed murder.

The quality of change he can no more escape than that of genesis.

But it is possible for one who hath the Mind, to free himself from vice.

8. Wherefore I've ever heard, my son, Good Daimon also say--(and had He set it down in written words, He would have greatly helped the race of men; for He alone, my son, doth truly, as the First-born God, gazing upon all things, give voice to words (logoi) divine)--yea, once I heard Him say:

"All things are one, and most of all the bodies which the mind alone perceives. Our life is owing to [God's] Energy and Power and Aeon. His Mind is Good, so is His Soul as well. And this being so, intelligible things know naught of separation. So, then, Mind, being Ruler of all things, and being Soul of God, can do whate'er it wills."

9. So do thou understand, and carry back this word (logos) unto the question thou didst ask before,--I mean about Mind's Fate.

For if thou dost with accuracy, son, eliminate [all] captious arguments (logoi), thou wilt discover that of very truth the Mind, the Soul

[p. 204]

of God, doth rule o'er all--o'er Fate, and Law, and all things else; and nothing is impossible to it,--neither o'er Fate to set a human soul, [*1] nor under Fate to set [a soul] neglectful of what comes to pass. Let this so far suffice from the Good Daimon's most good [words]. [*2]

Tat. Yea, [words] divinely spoken, father mine, truly and helpfully. But further still explain me this.

10. Thou said'st that Mind in lives irrational worked in them as [their] nature, co-working with their impulses.

But impulses of lives irrational, as I do think, are passions.

Now if the Mind co-worketh with [these] impulses, and if the impulses of [lives] irrational be passions, then is Mind also passion, taking its colour from the passions.

Her. Well put, my son! Thou questionest right nobly, and it is just that I as well should answer [nobly].

11. All things incorporal when in a body are subject unto passion, and in the proper sense they are [themselves] all passions.

For every thing that moves [another] is incorporal; while every thing that's moved is body.

[p. 205]

Incorporals are further moved by Mind, and movement's passion.

Both, then, are subject unto passion--both mover and the moved, the former being ruler and the latter ruled.

But when a man hath freed himself from body, then is he also freed from passion.

But, more precisely, son, naught is impassible, but all are passible.

Yet passion differeth from passibility; for that the one is active, while the other's passive.

Incorporals [*1] moreover act upon themselves, for either they are motionless [*2] or they are moved; but whichsoe'er it be, it's passion.

But bodies are invariably acted on, and therefore are they passible.

Do not, then, let terms trouble thee; action and passion are both the selfsame thing. To use the fairer sounding term, however, does no harm.

12. Tat. Most clearly hast thou, father mine, set forth the teaching (logos).

Her. Consider this as well, my son; that these two things God hath bestowed on man beyond all mortal lives--both mind and speech

[p. 206]

[paragraph continues] (logos) equal to immortality. He hath the mind for knowing God and uttered speech (logos) for eulogy of Him. [*1]

And if one useth these for what he ought, he'll differ not a whit from the immortals. [*2] Nay, rather, on departing from the body, he will be guided by the twain unto the Choir of Gods and Blessed Ones.

13. Tat. Why, father mine!--do not the other lives make use of speech (logos)?

Her. Nay, son; but use of voice; speech is far different from voice. For speech is general among all men, while voice doth differ in each class of living thing.

Tat. But with men also, father mine, according to each race, speech differs.

Her. Yea, son, but man is one; so also speech is one and is interpreted, and it is found the same in Egypt, and in Persia, and in Greece.

Thou seemest, son, to be in ignorance of Reason's (Logos) [*3] worth and greatness. For that the Blessed God, Good Daimon, hath declared:

"Soul is in Body, Mind in Soul; but Reason (Logos) is in Mind, and Mind in God; and God is Father of [all] these."

[p. 207]

14. The Reason, then, is the Mind's image, and Mind God's [image]; while Body is [the image] of the Form; and Form [the image] of the Soul.

The subtlest part of Matter is, then, Air; of Air, Soul; of Soul, Mind; and of Mind, God. [*1]

And God surroundeth all and permeateth all [*2]; while Mind surroundeth Soul, Soul Air, Air Matter.

Necessity [*3] and Providence and Nature are instruments of Cosmos and of Matter's ordering; while of intelligible things each is Essence, and Sameness is their Essence.

But of the Bodies [*4] of the Cosmos each is many; for through possessing Sameness, [these] composed Bodies, though they do change from one into another of themselves, do natheless ever keep the incorruption of their Sameness.

15. Whereas in all the rest of composed bodies, of each there is a certain number; for without number structure cannot be, or composition, or decomposition.

Now it is units that give birth to number and increase it, and, being decomposed, are taken back again into themselves.

[p. 208]

Matter is one; and this whole Cosmos--the mighty God and image of the mightier One, both with Him unified, and the conserver of the Will and Order of the Father--is filled full of Life. [*1]

Naught is there in it throughout the whole of Aeon, the Father's [everlasting] Re-establishment, [*2]--nor of the whole, nor of its parts,--which doth not live.

For not a single thing that's dead, hath been, or is, or shall be in [this] Cosmos.

For that the Father willed it should have Life as long as it should be. Wherefore it needs must be a God.

16. How, then, O son, could there be in the God, the image of the Father, [*3] in the plenitude [*4] of Life--dead things [*5]?

For that death is corruption, and corruption is destruction.

How then could any part of that which knoweth no corruption be corrupted, or any whit of him the God destroyed?

Tat. Do they not, then, my father, die--the lives in it, that are its parts?

Her. Hush, son!--led into error by the term in use for what takes place.

[p. 209]

They do not die, my son, but are dissolved as compound bodies.

Now dissolution is not death, but dissolution of a compound; it is dissolved not so that it may be destroyed, but that it may become renewed.

For what is the activity of life? Is it not motion? What then in Cosmos is there that hath no motion? Naught is there, son!

17. Tat. Doth not Earth even, father, seem to thee to have no motion?

Her. Nay, son; but rather that she is the only thing which, though in very rapid motion, is also stable.

For how would it not be a thing to laugh at, that the Nurse of all should have no motion, when she engenders and brings forth all things?

For 'tis impossible that without motion one who doth engender, should do so.

That thou shouldst ask if the fourth part [*1] is not inert, is most ridiculous; for that the body which doth have no motion, gives sign of nothing but inertia.

18. Know, therefore, generally, my son, that all that is in Cosmos is being moved for decrease or for increase.

Now that which is kept moving, also lives; but there is no necessity that that which lives, should be all same.

[p. 210]

For being simultaneous, the Cosmos, as a whole, is not subject to change, my son, but all its parts are subject unto it; yet naught [of it] is subject to corruption, or destroyed.

It is the terms employed that confuse men. For 'tis not genesis that constituteth life, but 'tis sensation; it is not change that constituteth death, but 'tis forgetfulness.

Since, then, these things are so, they are immortal all,--Matter, [and] Life, [and] Spirit, Mind [and] Soul, of which whatever liveth, is composed.

19. Whatever then doth live, oweth its immortality unto the Mind, and most of all doth man, he who is both recipient of God, and co-essential with Him.

For with this life alone doth God consort; by visions in the night, by tokens in the day, and by all things doth He foretell the future unto him,--by birds, by inward parts, by wind, by tree.

Wherefore doth man lay claim to know things past, things present and to come.

20. Observe this, too, my son; that each one of the other lives inhabiteth one portion of the Cosmos,--aquatic creatures water, terrene earth, and aery creatures air; while man doth use all these,--earth, water, air, [and] fire; he seeth heaven, too, and doth contact it with [his] sense.

[p. 211]

But God surroundeth all, and permeateth all, [*1] for He is energy and power; and it is nothing difficult, my son, to conceive God.

21. But if thou wouldst Him also contemplate, behold the ordering of the Cosmos, and [see] the orderly behaviour of its ordering; behold thou the Necessity of things made manifest, and [see] the Providence of things become and things becoming; behold how Matter is all-full of Life; [behold] this so great God in movement, with all the good and noble [ones]--gods, daimones and men!

Tat. But these are purely energies, O father mine!

Her. If, then, they're purely energies, my son,--by whom, then, are they energized except by God?

Or art thou ignorant, that just as Heaven, Earth, Water, Air, are parts of Cosmos, in just the selfsame way God's parts are Life and Immortality, [and] Energy, and Spirit, and Necessity, and Providence, and Nature, Soul, and Mind, and the Duration [*2] of all these that is called Good?

And there is naught of things that have become, or are becoming, in which God is not.

22. Tat. Is He in Matter, father, then? 

Her. Matter, my son, is separate from God,

[p. 212]

in order that thou may'st attribute unto it the quality of space. But what thing else than mass [*1] think'st thou it is, if it's not energized? Whereas if it be energized, by whom is it made so? For energies, we said, are parts of God.

By whom are, then, all lives enlivened? By whom are things immortal made immortal? By whom changed things made changeable?

And whether thou dost speak of Matter, or of Body, or of Essence, know that these too are energies of God; and that materiality is Matter's energy, that corporality is Bodies' energy, and that essentiality doth constitute the energy of Essence; and this is God--the All.

23. And in the All is naught that is not God. Wherefore nor size, nor space, nor quality, nor form, nor time, surroundeth God; for He is All, and All surroundeth all, and permeateth all.

Unto this Reason (Logos), son, thy adoration and thy worship pay. There is one way alone to worship God; [it is] not to be bad. [*2]

Footnotes

^199:1 That is, if we can use such a term with respect to God.

^200:1 That is, of the mind manifested in man as distinguished from the general Mind.

^200:2 baptizetai.

^200:3 atheotes. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 8, 9: "And the soul's vice is ignorance"; and  section 20: "What greater chastisement of any human soul, can there be, son, than lack of piety?" The only way of salvation from the bonds of Fate is thus "piety" or "godliness." See R. 102, 1, for references.

^201:1 doxa.

^201:2 Heimarmene.

^202:1 Sc. genesis and change.

^204:1 Cf. Lact., D. I., ii. 15.

^204:2 The critical text of this paragraph is given R. 78.

^205:1 Reading asw'mata for sw'mata.

^205:2 The words I have translated by "act," "active" and "action," may be more literally rendered by "energize," "energic" and "energy." The "motionless" has "energy" because it is the cause of motion to that which it moves.

^206:1 Following the emendation of R.

^206:2 The critical text of the above paragraphs is given R. 156, n. 6.

^206:3 It is impossible to bring out the word-play of the original in English; and so the double meaning is lost.

^207:1 This sentence is tagged on to the end of C. H., v. (vi.) by some scribe.

^207:2 Cf.  section 20 below.

^207:3 Reading anagke for anagkei; see  section 21 below.

^207:4 Sc. the elements.

^208:1 Lit. a Pleroma of Life.

^208:2 apokatastasis.

^208:3 Reading patros for pantos.

^208:4 Pleroma.

^208:5 A critical text of the last five paragraphs is given R. 25, n. 1.

^209:1 Sc. element.

^211:1 Cf.  section 14 above.

^211:2 Sc. Aeon.

^212:1 Probably in the sense of "quantity."

^212:2 Lactantius, D. I., vi. 25, translates the last two sentences into Latin, with the strange remark that Hermes so spake in treating "About Justice." See the following Commentary on  section 6, and Ex. xi.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 213]

COMMENTARY

THE SAYINGS OF THE GOOD DAIMON

This Sermon has as its subject the Common or General Mind--Great Mind, Good Mind, Good Daimon. For Mind, as we are told ( section 2), is the Benefactor of men (eyergetes anthrw'pun); He is the Good Shepherd, the Good Husbandman, the Good Physician, as He is called in different tractates.

From a critical standpoint, the point of greatest interest is that our Hermes in no less than three places ( section section 1, 8, 13) quotes certain Sayings of the Good Daimon.

Now the first of these quotations ( section 1)--"Gods are immortal men, and men are mortal Gods"--is one of the most cited Sayings of Heracleitus. [*1] Hermes, however, does not mean to say that Heracleitus was Agothodaimon, but that Heracleitus was the mouthpiece of the Good Mind when he uttered this "word" (logos).

Nor was this the opinion of Hermes only; it was the belief apparently of Heracleitus himself when he declared:

"Not because you hear me say so, but because you hear the Reason (Logos) so declare, is it wise to confess that All are One." [*2]

At any rate the term Logos, as used by Heracleitus, in connection with such a declaration, is taken by Hippolytus [*3] to mean the All-pervading Reason, and not the normal reason of man.

What, then, is our surprise to find the second of

[p. 214]

[paragraph continues] Hermes' quotations of a Saying of the Good Daimon qualified by the words ( section 8): "And had He set it down in written words" or "in writing," when that quotation begins with the words: "All are One" [*1]--the root-formula of Heracleitus.

Such Sayings of Heracleitus must have been the common property of all the philosophers of the time and of their pupils. But the quotation of Hermes does not end with the formula of Heracleitus; it continues, how far exactly it is difficult to determine. Reitzenstein (p. 127) would apparently make it end with the word "Aeon," but I am inclined to think it goes to the end of  section 8. In either case it includes the term "Aeon."

If, now, we turn to the third quotation from the Sayings of the Good Daimon ( section 13), we are at once struck with its remarkable resemblance to the form of teaching in C. H., xi. (xii.) 4. Though there is no precise verbal agreement, there is a striking identity of style of formula.

In our treatise, however, the Saying is used in authoritative illustration of the meaning of the Reason (Logos), whereas in the "Mind to Hermes,"--that is, in the Sermon of the Good Daimon Himself to Hermes--Reason is omitted, Mind and Reason being there transcended by Aeon and Mind.

Moreover, the whole style of what follows this quotation in our treatise is exactly the same as the style of instruction in C. H., xi. (xii.)--short categorical formulae; and, further, the previous quotation ( section 8) contains the key-word Aeon, which characterizes the teaching of the "Mind to Hermes."

I therefore conclude that our Hermes is using a more

[p. 215]

intimate instruction, known only to the Hermes-grade, and not published for the Tat-degree; and that this is the meaning of his saying that it has not been written down. He means simply that it has not yet been allowed to be published for those in the Tat-stage.

There were, then, other treatises now lost of the same type as that of the "Mind to Hermes"; in them there were quotations from the Sayings of Heracleitus; the "Obscure Philosopher" being regarded as one who had come into direct contact with the Logos or Mind, and as one, therefore, who spoke with the authority of direct revelation.

HERMES AND BASILIDES

The next point of critical interest is the sentence in  section 7:

"I meant not that, but that the Mind-led man, my son, though not a fornicator, will suffer just as though he had committed fornication, and though he be no murderer, as though he had committed murder."

If we now turn to the quotation which Clement of Alexandria [*1] gives us from Book XXIII. of the Exegetica, of Basilides, we read:

"For just as the babe, who, although it hath done no wrong previously, or actively committed any sin, yet hath the capacity of sin in it,--whenever it is subjected to suffering, is advantaged and reaps many benefits, which otherwise are difficult to gain; in just the selfsame way is it, that although a perfect man may not have sinned in act, and yet doth suffer pains, he suffereth them in just the selfsame fashion as a babe; having within himself the tendency to sin, but refusing to embrace the opportunity to sin, he doth not

[p. 216]

sin. So that even for such a man as this we ought not to suppose the incapacity for sin.

"For just as it is the will to commit fornication that constitutes the fornicator, even though he does not find the opportunity of actually committing fornication, and the will to commit murder that constitutes the murderer, although he may not be actually able to effect his purpose; so also in the case of the 'sinless' man I mean, if I see him suffering, even if he has actually done no sin, I shall say he is evil by his will to sin. For I will say anything rather than that Providence is evil." [*1]

Providence, as in our treatise, is here the instrument of the Good ( section 14), of the Will of God; it is the will of man that is the source of evil, as we learn from C. H., iv. (v.) 8: "For 'tis not God, 'tis we who are the cause of evil things, preferring them to good."

In our treatise, then, the very same problem is treated as in the Exegetica of Basilides. Hermes speaks of the "Mind-led man," the "man who has the Logos in him"; Basilides speaks of the "perfect man." So also in C. H., iv. (v.) 4, the "perfect man" is he who has "received the Mind."

The ideas of Hermes and of Basilides are practically identical; the words of both are strikingly similar when they cite fornication and murder as typical sins, and these and no others.

Compare again with this idea of the babe in Basilides the words of Hermes in C. H., x. (xi.) 15:

"Behold an infant's soul, my son, that is not yet cut off, because its body is still small and not as yet come unto its full bulk. . . . A thing of beauty altogether is such a soul to see, not yet befouled with body's passions, still all but hanging from the Cosmic Soul."

[p. 217]

And with this compare what Hippolytus [*1] tells us of Valentinus:

"Valentinus says that he once saw a babe that had only just been born, and that he proceeded to question it to find out who it was. And the babe replied and said it was the Logos."

And also the Psalm of Valentinus quoted by the same heresiologist [*2]:

All things depending from Spirit I see;
All things supported by Spirit I view;
Flesh from Soul depending;
Soul by Air supported;
Air from Aether hanging;
Fruits borne of the Deep;
Babe borne of the Womb.

Here, then, as in other instances, we have intimate points of contact between the Hermetic and Christian Gnosis. Is there, however, any question of direct plagiarism? I think not; but that the Christian doctors and the Hermetic philosophers were both in contact with the same body of inner teaching.

4. With the action of the Mind on the soul in incarnation ( section 4) compare C. H., x. (xi.), 18, 19, where the office of the Mind in respect to the soul out of incarnation is graphically described.

THE SERMONS ON FATE

6. In  section 6 Hermes tells us that he has already spoken about Fate in others of his Sermons; while in  section section 14 and 21 he three times refers to Necessity and Providence.

In this connection it is to be noticed that Lactantius (D. I., vi. 25), in quoting the last two sentences of our

[p. 218]

treatise, says that he takes them from a Sermon by Hermes "On Justice."

Now, Stobaeus has preserved for us an Extract (xi.) from a Sermon dealing with Justice, Providence, Necessity and Fate; also an Extract (x.) from a Sermon of Hermes to Tat dealing with Fate, and ending with the words: "Such is the Sermon on the rule of Providence, Necessity and Fate." We have also an Extract (xiii.) "Of Hermes from the Books to Ammon," entitled "Of the General Economy," which deals with Providence, Necessity and Fate.

There were, then, according to Hermes, already existing not one but several Sermons on Fate, and, as we learn from Stobaeus, not only in the Tat-literature but also in the Ammon-literature. It seems, then, probable that in the collection used by Lactantius the Tat-Sermons on Fate immediately preceded our treatise, and that one of these sermons (the one immediately preceding our treatise, presumably) was entitled "On Justice," thus confirming the title I have prefixed to the Stobaeus Extract xi.

MATERIALITY AND CORPORALITY ARE ENERGIES OF GOD

22. Finally, in  section 22 it has to be noticed that with the express teaching that Matter and Body are so far from being evil that they are Energies of God--His materiality and corporality--the charge of dualism against our philosophers must for ever be abandoned. Their doctrine was that of pan-monism; and, therefore, wherever we find signs of dualism, or even distinct statements of an indubitably dualistic nature, we must understand that this was a formal convenience for the better insistence upon the need of strenuous exertion to solve the mystery of the opposites, rather than an essential doctrine of the Gnosis.

Footnotes

^213:1 Diels, 62; Bywater, 67; Fairbanks, 67 (p. 40), which see for references to ancient authors who quote it.

^213:2 Diels, 50; Bywater, 1; Fairbanks, 1 (p. 24).

^213:3 Philos., ix. 9.

^214:1 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 25, and xvi. ("Definitions of Asclepius") 3; for references to the Magical and Alchemical literature, see R. 39, 1; 106, 5; 127, 3.

^215:1 Strom., IV. xii.,  section 82 (P. 600; S. 217): Dindorf., ii. 363.

^216:1 See F. F. F., 274, 275.

^217:1 Philos., vi. 42 (D. and S., 302); F. F. F., p. 306.

^217:2 Philos., vi. 37 (D. and S., 290); see emended text in Hilgenfeld (A.), Die Ketzergeschichte des Urchristenthums (Leipzig, 1884), p. 304; F. F. F., p. 307.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 219]

CORPUS HERMETICUM XIII. (XIV.)

 

THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN

CONCERNING REBIRTH AND THE PROMISE OF SILENCE

OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES UNTO TAT HIS SON

(Text: R. 339-348; P. 114-128; Pat. 15b-17b.)

1. Tat. [Now] in the General Sermons, [*1] father, thou didst speak in riddles most unclear, conversing on Divinity; and when thou saidst no man could e'er be saved before Rebirth, [*2] thy meaning thou didst hide.

Further, when I became thy Suppliant, in Wending up the Mount, [*3] after thou hadst conversed with me, and when I longed to learn the Sermon (Logos) on Rebirth (for this beyond all

[p. 220]

other things is just the thing I know not), thou saidst, that thou wouldst give it me--"when thou shalt have become a stranger to the world." [*1]

Wherefore I got me ready and made the thought in me a stranger [*2] to the world-illusion.

And now do thou fill up the things that fall short [*3] in me with what thou saidst would give me the tradition [*4] of Rebirth, setting it forth in speech or in the secret way.

I know not, O Thrice-greatest one, from out what matter and what womb Man comes to birth, or of what seed. [*5]

2. Hermes. Wisdom that understands [*6] in silence [*7] [such is the matter and the womb from out which Man is born], and the True Good the seed.

Tat. Who is the sower, father? For I am altogether at a loss.

Her. It is the Will of God, my son.

Tat. And of what kind is he that is begotten, father? For I have no share of that essence in

[p. 221]

me, which doth transcend the senses. [*1] The one that is begot will be another one from God, God's Son?

Her. All in all, out of all powers composed.

Tat. Thou tellest me a riddle, father, and dost not speak as father unto son.

Her. This Race, [*2] my son, is never taught; but when He willeth it, its memory is restored by God.

3. Tat. Thou sayest things impossible, O father, things that are forced. Hence answers would I have direct unto these things. Am I a son strange to my father's race?

Keep it not, father, back from me. I am a true-born son; explain to me the manner of Rebirth.

Her. What may I say, my son? I can but tell thee this. Whene'er I see within myself the Simple Vision [*3] brought to birth out of God's mercy, [*4] I have passed through myself into a Body that can never die. And now I am not what I was before; but I am born in Mind.

The way to do this is not taught, and it cannot be seen by the compounded [*5] element by means of which thou seest.

 

[p. 222]

Yea, I have had my former composed form dismembered for me. I am no longer touched, yet have I touch; I have dimension too; and [yet] am I a stranger to them now.

Thou seest me with eyes, my son; but what I am thou dost not understand [even] with fullest strain of body and of sight.

4. Tat. Into fierce frenzy and mind-fury hast thou plunged me, father, for now no longer do I see myself.

Her. I would, my son, that thou hadst e'en passed right through thyself, as they who dream in sleep yet sleepless.

Tat. Tell me this too! Who is the author [*1] of Rebirth?

Her. The Son of God, the One Man, by God's Will.

5. Tat. Now hast thou brought me, father, unto pure stupefaction.

Arrested from the senses which I had before, . . . . [*2]; for [now] I see thy Greatness identical with thy distinctive form.

Her. Even in this thou art untrue [*3]; the mortal form doth change with every day. 'Tis turned by time to growth and waning, as being an untrue thing. [*4]

6. Tat. What then is true, Thrice-greatest One?

[p. 223]

Her. That which is never troubled, son, which cannot be defined; that which no colour hath, nor any figure, which is not turned, which hath no garment, which giveth light; that which is comprehensible unto itself [alone], which doth not suffer change; that which no body can contain. [*1]

Tat. In very truth I lose my reason, father. Just when I thought to be made wise by thee, I find the senses of this mind of mine blocked up.

Her. Thus is it, son: That which is upward borne like fire, yet is borne down like earth, that which is moist like water, yet blows like air, [*2] how shalt thou this perceive with sense--the that which is not solid nor yet moist, which naught can bind or loose, of which in power and energy alone can man have any notion,--and even then it wants a man who can [*3] perceive the Way of Birth in God [*4]?

7. Tat. I am incapable of this, O father, then?

Her. Nay, God forbid, my son! Withdraw into thyself, and it will come; will, and it comes to pass; throw out of work the body's senses, and thy Divinity shall come to birth; purge from thyself the brutish torments--things of matter.

Tat. I have tormentors then in me, O father?

[p. 224]

Her. Ay, no few, my son; nay, fearful ones and manifold.

Tat. I do not know them, father.

Her. Torment the first is this Not-knowing, [*1] son; the second one is Grief; the third, Intemperance; the fourth, Concupiscence; the fifth, Unrighteousness; the sixth is Avarice; the seventh, Error [*2]; the eighth is Envy; the ninth, Guile [*3]; the tenth is Anger; eleventh, Rashness; the twelfth is Malice.

These are in number twelve; but under them are many more, my son; and creeping through the prison of the body [*4] they force the man that's placed within [*5] to suffer in his senses. But they depart (although not all at once) from him who hath been taken pity on by God [*6]; and this it is which constitutes the manner of Rebirth. And . . . . [*7] the Reason (Logos).

8. And now, my son, be still and solemn silence keep! Thus shall the mercy that flows on us from God not cease.

 Henceforth rejoice, O son, for by the Powers of God thou art being purified for the articulation of the Reason (Logos).

[p. 225]

Gnosis of God hath come to us, and when this comes, my son, Not-knowing is cast out.

Gnosis of Joy hath come to us, and on its coming, son, Sorrow will flee away to them who give it room. The Power that follows Joy do I invoke, thy Self-control. O Power most sweet! Let us most gladly bid it welcome, son! How with its coming doth it chase Intemperance away!

9. Now fourth, on Continence I call, the Power against Desire.

. . . . [*1] This step, my son, is Righteousness' firm seat. For without judgment [*2] see how she hath chased Unrighteousness away. We are made righteous, son, by the departure of Unrighteousness.

Power sixth I call to us,--that against Avarice, Sharing-with-all. [*3]

And now that Avarice is gone, I call on Truth. And Error flees, and Truth is with us.

See how [the measure of] the Good is full, my

[p. 226]

son, upon Truth's coming. For Envy hath gone from us; and unto Truth is joined the Good as well, with Life and Light.

And now no more doth any torment of the Darkness venture nigh, but vanquished [all] have fled with whirring wings.

10. Thou knowest [now], my son, the manner of Rebirth. And when the Ten is come, my son, that driveth out the Twelve, the Birth in understanding [*1] is complete, and by this Birth we are made into Gods.

Who then doth by His mercy gain this Birth in God, abandoning the body's senses, knows himself [to be of Light and Life [*2]] and that he doth consist of these, and [thus] is filled with Bliss.

11. Tat. By God made steadfast, father, no longer with the sight my eyes afford I look on things, but with the energy the Mind doth give me through the Powers. [*3]

In heaven am I, in earth, in water, air; I am in animals, in plants; I'm in the womb, before the womb, after the womb; I'm everywhere!

But further tell me this: How are the torments of the Darkness, when they are twelve in number, driven out by the ten Powers? What is the way of it, Thrice-greatest one?

[p. 227]

12. Her. This dwelling-place [*1] through which we have just passed, my son, is constituted from the circle of the types-of-life, this being composed of elements, twelve in number, but of one nature, an omniform [*2] idea. For man's delusion there are disunions [*3] in them, son, while in their action they are one. Not only can we never part Rashness from Wrath; they cannot even be distinguished.

According to right reason (logos), then, they [*4] naturally withdraw once and for all, in as much as they are chased out by no less than ten powers, that is, the Ten.

For, son, the Ten is that which giveth birth to souls. And Life and Light are unified there, where the One hath being from the Spirit. According then to reason (logos) the One contains the Ten, the Ten the One.

13. Tat. Father, I see the All, I see myself in Mind.

Her. This is, my son, Rebirth--no more to look on things from body's view-point (a thing three ways in space extended), [*5] . . . [*6] though this Sermon (Logos) on Rebirth, on which I did not

[p. 228]

comment [*1];--in order that we may not be calumniators [*2] of the All unto the multitude, to whom indeed the God Himself doth will we should not.

14. Tat. Tell me, O father: This Body which is made up of the Powers, is it at any time dissolved?

Her. Hush, [son]! Speak not of things impossible, else wilt thou sin and thy Mind's eye be quenched.

The natural body which our sense perceives is far removed from this essential birth.

The first must be dissolved, the last can never be; the first must die, the last death cannot touch.

Dost thou not know thou hast been born a God, Son of the One, even as I myself?

15. Tat. I would, O father, hear the Praise-giving with hymn which thou didst say thou heardest then when thou wert at the Eight [the Ogdoad] of Powers.

Her. Just as the Shepherd did foretell [I should], my son, [when I came to] the Eight. [*3]

Well dost thou haste to "strike thy tent," [*4] for thou hast been made pure.

[p. 229]

The Shepherd, Mind of all masterhood, [*1] hath not passed on to me more than hath been writ down, for full well did He know that I should of myself be able to learn all, and hear what I should wish, and see all things.

He left to me the making of fair things [*2]; wherefore the Powers within me, e'en as they are in all, [*3] break into song.

16. Tat. Father, I wish to hear; I long to know these things.

Her. Be still, my son; hear the Praise-giving now that keeps [the soul] in tune, Hymn of Re-birth--a hymn I would not have thought fit so readily to tell, had'st thou not reached the end of all.

Wherefore this is not taught, but is kept hid in silence.

Thus then, my son, stand in a place uncovered to the sky, facing the southern wind, [*4] about the sinking of the setting sun, and make thy worship; so in like manner too when he doth rise, with face to the east wind.

Now, son, be still!

[p. 230]

THE SECRET HYMNODY

17. Let every nature of the World receive the utterance of my hymn!

Open thou Earth! Let every bolt of the Abyss be drawn for me. Stir not, ye Trees!

I am about to hymn creation's Lord, both All and One.

Ye Heavens open, and ye Winds stay still; [and] let God's deathless Sphere receive my word (logos)!

For I will sing the praise of Him who founded all; who fixed the Earth, and hung up Heaven, and gave command that Ocean should afford sweet water [to the Earth], to both those parts that are inhabited and those that are not, for the support and use of every man; who made the Fire to shine for gods and men for every act.

Let us together all give praise to Him, sublime above the Heavens, of every nature Lord!

'Tis He who is the Eye of Mind; may He accept the praise of these my Powers!

18. Ye Powers that are within me, hymn the One and All; sing with my Will, Powers all that are within me!

O blessed Gnosis, by thee illumined, hymning through thee the Light that mind alone can see, [*1] I joy in Joy of Mind.

[p. 231]

Sing with me praises all ye Powers!

Sing praise, my Self-control; sing thou through me, my Righteousness, the praises of the Righteous; sing thou, my Sharing-all, the praises of the All; through me sing, Truth, Truth's praises!

Sing thou, O Good, the Good! O Life and Light, from us to you our praises flow!

Father, I give Thee thanks, to Thee Thou Energy of all my Powers; I give Thee thanks, O God, Thou Power of all my Energies!

19. Thy Reason (Logos) sings through me Thy praises. Take back through me the All into [Thy] Reason--[my] reasonable oblation [*1]!

Thus cry the Powers in me. They sing Thy praise, Thou All; they do Thy Will.

From Thee Thy Will [*2]; to Thee the All. Receive from all their reasonable oblation. The All that is in us, O Life, preserve; O Light illumine it; O God in-spirit it. [*3]

It is Thy Mind that plays the Shepherd [*4] to Thy Word, [*5] O Thou Creator, Bestower of the Spirit [upon all]. [*6]

[p. 232]

20. [For] Thou art God; Thy Man [*1] thus cries to Thee through Fire, through Air, through Earth, through Water, [and] through Spirit, through Thy creatures.

'Tis from Thy Aeon I have found Praise-giving; and in Thy Will, [*2] the object of my search, have I found rest.

 Tat. By thy good pleasure [*3] have I seen this Praise-giving being sung, [*4] O father; I have set it in my Cosmos too.

Her. Say in the Cosmos that thy mind alone can see, my son.

Tat. Yea, father, in the Cosmos that the mind alone can see; for I have been made able by thy Hymn, and by thy Praise-giving my mind hath been illumined. But further I myself as well would from my natural mind send praise-giving to God.

21. Her. But not unheedfully, my son.

Tat. Ay. What I behold in mind, that do I say.

To thee, thou Parent of my Bringing into Birth, as unto God I, Tat, send reasonable offerings. [*5] O God and Father, thou art the Lord, thou art the Mind. Receive from me oblations

[p. 233]

reasonable as thou would'st wish; for by thy Will all things have been perfected.

Her. Send thou oblation, son, acceptable to God, the Sire of all; but add, my son, too, "through the Word" (Logos).

Tat. I give thee, father, thanks for showing me to sing such hymns.

22. Her. Happy am I, my son, that thou hast brought the good fruits forth of Truth, products that cannot die.

And now that thou hast learnt this lesson from me, make promise to keep silence [*1] on thy virtue, and to no soul, my son, make known the handing on to thee the manner of Rebirth, that we may not be thought to be calumniators. [*2]

And now we both of us have given heed sufficiently, both I the speaker and the hearer thou.

In Mind [*3] hast thou become a Knower of thyself and of our [common] Sire.

Footnotes

^219:1 en tois genikois. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 1 and 7.

^219:2 paliggenesia.

^219:3 Reading epi teis tou oroys metabaseus with P., and not kata-baseus with R. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 15; Jamb., D. M., viii. 6.

^220:1 kosmoy.

^220:2 Reading apellotriusa with the majority of the editors, and not the ape'drisa of R.

^220:3 ta ystere'mata anaple'ruson.

^220:4 paradounai, the word used for the giving of this lesson or inner instruction is the technical term for the "handing on" of a doctrine or being initiated into it.

^220:5 R.'s reading would make this refer to Hermes: "I know not from what womb thou com'st to birth." But the whole instruction seems to favour the usually accepted reading.

^220:6 sofia noera.

^220:7 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 5.

^221:1 teis en emoi oysias teis noeteis.

^221:2 Cf. Ex. i. 3.

^221:3 aplaston, that is to say, not made up, non-fictitious, not compounded; that is, simple--the opposite of compounded.

^221:4 Cf. below,  section 7: the man "who hath been taken pity on by God"; and also  section10.

^221:5 plaston.

^222:1 genesioyrgos.

^222:2 A lacuna unfortunately follows.

^222:3 pseudei.

^222:4 us pseudos.

^223:1 Cf. P. S. A., xxxi..3.

^223:2 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 1.

^223:3 Retaining the reading deomenoy de tou dynamenoy.

^223:4 ten en theui genesin--cf.  section 10.

^224:1 agnoia.

^224:2 apate.

^224:3 dolos.

^224:4 Cf. C. H., xvi. 15.

^224:5 endiatheton.

^224:6 Cf. above,  section 3: "brought to birth out of God's mercy"; and also  section 10.

^224:7 A lacuna in the text.

^225:1 Something has here evidently fallen out in the text.

^225:2 xuris kriseus. If, however, we must read ktiseus with the majority of the editors, I cannot understand the various translations. Everard gives "without labour"; Parthey, "nulla contentione"; Menard, "sans combat"; Chambers, "without contention." I would, therefore, render it: "See how she hath chased out Unrighteousness without a home"; for it seems to me that in xuris ktiseus we have the exact antithesis of edrasma. Righteousness has here her firm seat or abode, and Unrighteousness is thus naturally without a home.

^225:3 koinunian.

^226:1 noera genesis, lit., intellectual birth.

^226:2 Completed from C. H., i. 22.

^226:3 tei dia dinameun noetikei energeiai.

^227:1 skeinos,--tent or tabernacle of the human soul. Cf. below,  section 15.

^227:2 Cf. commentary on C. H., xi. (xii.) 16.

^227:3 diazygai--the opposite of syzygiai.

^227:4 That is, the Twelve.

^227:5 As opposed to some other dimension, presumably.

^227:6 Some words are evidently missing.

^228:1 See  section 1.

^228:2 diaboloi, compare  section 22. The lacuna probably contained some reference to keeping silence.

^228:3 Cf. C. H., i. 26.

^228:4 lusai to skeinos. Cf. above,  section 12. The meaning is generally to free oneself from the trammels of the body. Compare the Pythian Oracle concerning Plotinus: "But now since thou hast struck thy tent and left the tomb of thy daimonic soul" (nun d' ote de skeinos men elusao, seima d' eleipsas psyxeis daimonis). Porphyry, Plotini Vita, xxii.; cf. Ex. vii. 3; Ex. iii. 1.

^229:1 Cf. C. H., i. 2.

^229:2 Sc. psalms and praise-giving.

^229:3 Sc. prophets.

^229:4 Also used of the south-west quarter. The "south wind" is thought to have extended from SSE. to W.

^230:1 to noeton fus.

^231:1 Cf. below, 21.

^231:2 Cf. P. S. A., Comment, and R. 39, n. 1.

^231:3 The Spirit being Light and Life.

^231:4 poimainei, acts as a shepherd or feeds; Poemandres is thus the Shepherd of men or the feeder of men, He who gives them the heavenly food.

^231:5 The Word or Reason or true Man in man.

^231:6 pneymatofore demioyrge.

^232:1 Cf. C. H., i. 32.

^232:2 boyle'.

^232:3 thelema.

^232:4 Cf., for instance, The Ascension of Isaiah, i. 6: "In the twentieth year of the reign of Hezekiah, Isaiah had seen the words of this prophecy."--Charles' Trans. (London, 1900), p. 5.

^232:5 Cf. above,  section 18.

^233:1 Cf. P. S. A., xxxii. 4.

^233:2 diaboloi, slanderers, calumniators; compare  section 13; also Ex. i. 16.

^233:3 noerus.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 234]

COMMENTARY

CONCERNING THE TITLE

"The Secret Sermon on the Mountain" is the main title given in all the MSS., with the exception of A; the subsidiary contents-title is evidently derived from the same edition to which we owe the other contents-titles preserved in our Corpus. Reitzenstein (p. 193), however, thinks that the main title has arisen by mistake. What the mistake is he does not tell us; perhaps he means that in our Sermon there is no mention of "On a Mountain," but rather, as in  section 1, if we accept his reading, of "Down a Mountain." But in this we cannot follow him; for the whole teaching is precisely "On the Mount"--to the top of which Tat has now come. For the "Mountain" was symbolic of stages of inner development, and in  section 9 we are told precisely: "This step (the fifth) is Righteousness' firm seat,"--showing that the Mountain was conceived as an ascent or stair of steps as is so often seen in Egyptian frescoes.

THE TERM APOCRYPHON

Again, with regard to the title, the term "Secret" (apokryfos--apocryphal) is used in its original sense of hidden away, meaning esoteric or not put into circulation, as applied to a logos or sermon, or a collection of logoi or sayings.

A logos in this sense had very much the same meaning for our Ancients as the Sanskrit maha-vakyam ("great saying") has to-day for an Indian theosophist who applies the term to the great mystical utterances of the Upanishads; such as: "That art thou" (Tat tvam asi), etc.

In classical antiquity these logoi or logia were

[p. 235]

regarded as words of wisdom, and were the most sacred legacies of the sages to humanity. These oracular utterances were frequently collected together, and even prior to the days of syncretism formed the most sacred "deposits" (diatheikai) of various nations; the same term being subsequently given to the Christian Bible.

Thus Herodotus calls Onomacritus, the first collector of the archaic Orphic Hymns, a "depository of oracles" (diatheten xresmun),--the word carrying the meaning of "one who arranges," corresponding exactly to the term Vyasa in Sanskrit, the supposed "author" of the Mahabharata.

Such collections of logoi or logia were then generally called "deposits," the word also sometimes bearing the meaning of "testaments" as containing the expression of the Divine will or dispensation. The same term is used by Strabo (x. 482) of the Laws of Lycurgus; it was also applied by the Orphics and Pythagoreans to such sacred laws [*1]; while Ecclesiastical writers subsequently used it in reference to the Canonical Books. [*2]

The Orphics and Pythagoreans also called these collections "sacred utterances" (ieroi logoi); and even Clement of Alexandria refers to such a saying of Orpheus as "that truly sacred utterance" (ton ontus ieron logon).

That such collections were kept secret is not surprising; indeed, such must have been the case from time immemorial. But even on the ground of purely Greek and Roman history, we are not without information of collections of oracles carefully guarded as the secret scriptures or bibles of nations.

Cicero [*3] speaks of such a bible of the Veii. The Athenians, in the time of the Kings, possessed a similar

[p. 236]

bible of logia [*1]; and Dinarchus [*2] tells us that the safety of the State depended on this secret scripture (aporre'toys diatheikas) These occult sayings (apothenta epe) are further called by Suidas (s.v.) "withdrawn volumes" (biblia anakexurekota)--that is to say, books withdrawn from public perusal, or, in other words, apocryphal, hidden or secret (apokryfa).

And not only was this the case with the ancient writings themselves, but also with the commentaries upon them, and by degrees with everything referring to them, until finally we find Themistius the rhetorician, in the fourth century, speaking of that "mass of Archaic wisdom not open to the public or in general circulation, but scarce and occult." [*3]

We have, therefore, translated the term by "secret" as conveying the proper meaning of the epithet in the title, and not by "apocryphal," a word that nowadays connotes the judgment of a theological canon.

THE THREE STAGES OF PROBATION

1. In the first paragraph Tat definitely refers to three Stages of Probation, before he is deemed fit to hear the Sermon on Rebirth.

(i) First there is the General or Preliminary Instruction contained in a collection of discourses called the General Sermons (Genikoi Logoi).

(ii) Next is the Stage where Tat becomes the Suppliant of Hermes, a stage characterized by Conversation or Dialogue (dialextheinai); that is to say, Tat was allowed to ask questions. This is further

[p. 237]

symbolically described by a phrase, epi teis tou oroys metabaseus, which is difficult to translate, but which seems to mean either Passing up, or Wending up, the Mountain, or Wending over the Mountain. That is to say, that Hermes was gradually leading Tat to the top of the Mountain, in plain words, as far as his normal intellect could carry him; the Top of the Mountain representing the highest point of unaided mental faculty.

This stage was, I believe, represented by the collection of Sermons to Tat, or Dialogues with Tat, known as the Diexodikoi Logoi--a term somewhat difficult to translate precisely.

The fundamental meaning of diexodos is a "way through and out," a "pathway" or "passage," or "means of escape." It thus comes to mean the course of a narrative, or a detailed narrative, exposition, discussion. Hence also a "passage" of Scripture. As set over against genikos (General), therefore, diexodikos would mean Detailed or Expository; but at the same time it would to the Greek ear suggest the meaning of the Means of Escape or the Way out of Ignorance.

(iii) The third Stage is that of Moral and Mental Purification. "Wherefore I got me ready and made the thought (to fronema) in me a stranger to the world-illusion" (teis tou kosmoy apates)--the Error that in  section 7 sums up the first six vices, and is in  section 9 driven out by Truth.

Stage ii. may have been technically known as that of the Suppliant, though, of course, of this we cannot be sure. In any case the term must be considered in close connection with Philo's treatise On the Contemplative Life, which, as Conybeare tells us, most probably formed Book IV. of Philo's voluminous work, or rather apology, De Legatione. The alternative title of this

[p. 238]

work was The Suppliants. By "Suppliant" Philo tells us he means "one who has fled to God and taken refuge with Him." [*1]

Here, however, the term is used in a narrower sense, as adapted to the personal relationship of disciple to master, who, during the time of probation, stands to him as the representative of God. The master is his spiritual father, the image of God the Father. [*2]

THE HOLY MOUNT OF INITIATION

As to the symbolic use of the term Mountain, I need hardly remind my readers that it was perhaps the most common figure employed in the apocalypses of the time. Instances come immediately crowding into the mind, such as the "Mount of Galilee" in the Askew and Bruce Gnostic Codices, on which all the great initiations and rites are performed by the Risen Lord; or the Mount Tabor [*3] of The Gospel according to the Hebrews, "My Mother the Holy Spirit took me by one of the hairs of the head and carried me unto Mount Tabor"; or in the Acts of John, where the Vision of the Spiritual Crucifixion is shown to John on the Mount; or in The Gospel of Eve, where the Vision of the Great and Little Man is seen on the Mount; or in The Shepherd of Hermas, where the Angel of Repentance bears off Hermas to the Mount of Arcadia, etc. In every case the Mountain is no physical mountain, but the height of contemplation, an interior state of spiritual consciousness.

Stage iii., again, is of interest because of the terms in

[p. 239]

which it is described; they may be compared with the same teaching in the Behnesa logos:

Jesus saith: "Except ye fast to the world, ye shall in nowise find the Kingdom of God."

Again, in Tat's prayer for the consummation of his probation: "And now do thou fill up the things that fall short in me" (ta ystere'mata anaple'ruson), it should be noticed that we have the well-known technical terms of the Christianized Gnosis, the Pleroma and Hysterema, or Fullness and Insufficiency.

THE BIRTH FROM ABOVE

The time has come for Tat to receive, through his master, the touch of the true Mind-consciousness, the Christ is to be born in his heart, the light of the Pleroma is to shine into his inmost being. It is to be a New Birth, a Regeneration (paliggenesis), or Re-birth (anagennesis), in the sense of being born from Above (anuthen).

Compare John iii. 3: "Amen, Amen, I say unto thee; Except a man be born from Above, he cannot see the Kingdom of God." And also 7: "Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye (pl.) must be born from Above,"--where the comment on a prior saying, "Ye must be born from Above," formally unsuited to the scheme of a dialogue between Jeschu and Rabbi Nakdimon, reveals the work of the Haggadist.

So also in 1 Pet. i. 22, 23: "Having made your souls holy by hearkening to the Truth [*1] . . . being Re-born (anagegennemenoi) not from the seed of destruction, but from the Seed that cannot be destroyed, through the Word [*2] (Logos) of God, who lives and endures." [*3]

[p. 240]

These passages from the New Testament Scriptures are not, of course, cited to show any dependence of our Hermetic authors on the New Testament writers; but simply to show how they mutually explain one another. For indeed the doctrine of the New Birth and of the Sacred Marriage was beyond all else the crowning mystery of the Spiritual Way for all the mystic schools of the time. [*1]

THE VIRGIN BIRTH

2. The secret that Tat would learn is the Mystery of the Birth from the Virgin Womb--the Birth of Man, the Great Mystery of Regeneration. Many illustrations of the meaning of this pivot-doctrine of the Christian teaching might be quoted from Gnostic writings, but it will be sufficient to remind the reader of what the Jewish Commentator in the Naassene Document ( section 28) has written in contrasting the Great Mysteries (or the heavenly ones) with the Little Mysteries (those of fleshly generation). Speaking of the Mysteries of Regeneration, he writes:

"For this is the Gate of Heaven, and this is the House of God, where the Good God dwells alone; into which no impure [man] shall come, but it is kept under guard for the spiritual alone,--where when they come, they must cast away their garments, and all become bridegrooms, obtaining their true manhood, through the Virginal Spirit. For this is the Virgin big with child, conceiving and bearing a Son."

And to this the Christian Commentator adds:--"not psychic, not fleshly, but a blessed Aeon of Aeons."

[p. 241]

The Jewish Commentator uses the language of Philo, who, as we have shown, centred his ideas round the conception of the Sacred Marriage and the Virginal Spirit.

So, too, does our treatise. The Womb is Silence, the silence of contemplation, the image of the Great Silence the Mother of the Aeons in many a Christianized Gnostic System; the Matter is Wisdom; the Aeon's coming to consciousness in man is the Birth of Man the Son of God; and the Seed is the Good or Logos sown by the Will of the Father. This is the Birth of the Christ in man, the Great Mystery that awaits us when we have made ourselves strangers to the world-illusion.

Is this Son then, asks Tat, other than God? No, answers Hermes; it is the Mystery of Sameness, not of Difference; it is the Pleroma, not the Insufficiency,--"All in all, out of all powers composed," the Common Fruit of the Pleroma, as the Valentinians would have expressed it.

THE RACE OF THE LOGOS

It is a Race, not an individual; it is We and no longer I. [*1] This is the Race of the Logos; the Self-taught Race of Philo; or, as Hermes says: "This Race, my son, is never taught, but when He willeth it, its memory is restored by God."

This is the anamnesis of Pythagoras and Plato,--the regaining of the consciousness of the Divine State; it must be self-perceived. And so Philo tells us:

"But as for the Race of Devotees who are taught ever more and more to see, let them strive for the intuition of That-which-is; let them transcend the sun which men perceive [and gaze upon the Light beyond, the

[p. 242]

[paragraph continues] True Sun or Logos], nor ever leave this rank which leads to Perfect Blessedness. Now they who betake themselves to the [Divine] Service, [do so] not because of any custom, or some one's advice or appeal, but are carried away by Heavenly Love." [*1]

They are of the Race of Elxai, the Hidden Power or Holy Spirit, the Spouse of Iexai, the Hidden Lord or Logos. [*2]

THE SELF-TAUGHT

3. Hermes cannot teach to Tat this Birth in words, even as Isis is not permitted to declare it openly to Horus (K. K., 36):

"I may not tell the story of this Birth; for it is not permitted to describe the origin of thy descent, O Horus, son of mighty power, lest afterward the Way-of-Birth of the immortal Gods should be known unto men"--that is, the Mystery of the Birth of Horus.

Hermes can only guide Tat towards the realisation of the Blessed Sight, by putting himself into that sublime state of consciousness, so that Tat, so to speak, bathes, or is baptized in, his master's spiritual presence, the Cup of the Mind. This, as we have seen already from several treatises, was the way of transmission of the Power of the powers, the true Laying-on of Hands.

Hermes describes the change that takes place in himself when he passes into the higher spiritual consciousness. He seems to "pass through himself"--to "involve" himself, as it is said somewhere in the Mahabharata of the Rishis--"into a Body that can never die," that is, into a, or rather the, Essential or Cosmic Body, [*3] that embraces the cosmos within it. The

[p. 243]

way to do this is not taught, for it cannot be understood from any sensible experience, the outer physical form of the adept remaining as it was before. It is an inner change. The Birth of a Christ is the striking of a new keynote; everything remains apparently as it was before, but all things receive a new interpretation.

No physical sight, even of the greatest intensity, can penetrate the Veil of this Mystery.

"Thou seest me with eyes, my son; but what I am thou dost not understand."

With this compare the marvellous Ritual of Initiation in The Acts of John:

"Who I am thou shalt know when I depart. [*1] What I am seen to be, that am I not; but what I am, thou shalt see when thou comest." [*2]

None but those who have reached the Christ-state can know it; no teaching will avail to explain its manner and its mysteries. It must be realized.

THE NEW CREATION

4. But Tat, who has "made himself ready," is becoming quickened by the power of his master. His spiritual senses are being born; already he is losing touch with the physical; he no longer sees himself. But this is not enough; he must not only be able to lose consciousness of his physical body, and see and hear as though with the mind alone, but he must "invert" himself, pass right through himself, and no longer see things as without him, but all things as within him.

All this is a New Creation to be accomplished in the man himself. The Author or Genesiurge of Re-birth, as

[p. 244]

contrasted with the Maker or Demiurge of Birth, is the One Man, the Logos, the Energic Reason and Will of God; the one is the Creator of the Immortal Body, the other is the Maker of the mortal frame.

THE WAY OF BIRTH IN GOD

5. The reading of the next sentence is faulty, and it is impossible to extract the correct meaning. The "Greatness" (to megethos) and "distinctive form" (xarakte'r) are terms familiar enough to us in Christian Gnostic writings. [*1] Greatness connotes the same idea as Aeon; "character" or "distinctive form" or "rank" is generally the impression from a typical original, and here stands for the form by which a man is recognised.

6. Hermes then proceeds to describe the nature of this Greatness or Aeon, or Sameness, manifested in difference. It is, alchemically speaking, the One Element, which can only be comprehended by one Born in God--that is, by a God.

7. The way of this Birth is then described as a de-energizing, or throwing out of work of the body's senses, with a corresponding energizing of the One Sense, the Aeonic Consciousness; or as a purging out of

[p. 245]

the tendencies of the lower nature, and replacing them by the energies of the Divine Powers.

This is the Mystery of Repentance (metanoia), not a change of mind only, but a change throughout the whole nature; all things in the man turn towards God.

The forces or energies of the soul have no direction in themselves; it is the will of man that can turn them "downwards" or "upwards," so that they become vices or virtues.

OF THE TEN AND THE TWELVE

8., But not only does Hermes set forth a formal exposition of this Repentance in terms of the conquest and driving out of the Horde of Vices by the Company of Virtues, but at the same time he performs an efficacious theurgic rite of invocation whereby he enables Tat to realize the instruction in immediate experience.

The Virtues that Hermes invokes are not abstractions, but definite substantial powers; they are, in fact, the "filling up" of Tat's "insufficiency"; in other words, they are what the Christian Gnostics would have called the Aeons of the Pleroma.

Behind all there is a definite scheme of numbering. There is a Twelve and a Ten and a Seven and a Three and a One.

The Torments of the Darkness are the Twelve; they are not torments in themselves, but only for him who is in Error. They are Twelve yet are they one, for though they are "pantomorph" or "omniform," yet are they of one nature; the Twelve are thus conditioned by the main irrational "types of life," or animal natures,--the so-called zodiac.

These divisions are not, however, fundamental, they are solely for man's delusion or error; in action they

[p. 246]

are one--that is, they keep man in Error or Ignorance. Thus they can be regarded as one, or two, or three, or four, or six; and so combined and recombined.

Twelve, then, is the nature of the "animal soul" in man--the number of his going-forth into externality. This out-going is arrested when man repents, and turns himself to return, to go within; the cosmogonical is transformed by the soteriological; the "enformation according to substance" gives place to the "enformation according to gnosis." As Ignorance characterized the Twelve, so does Gnosis characterize the Ten, the Perfect Number or Number of Perfection.

The Going-forth was that of the multiplication of species--Twelve (3 * 4 or 2 * 6); the Return is Ten, that is the Seven and the Three; and Seven is addition (3 + 4) and not multiplication.

Multiplication seems here to mean the generation, by two parents, of things of the same kind and power; while addition signifies the intensification of the same nature to a higher power.

The Ten is "that which giveth birth to souls"--that is, human souls; and not only human souls, but, in its consummation, to divine souls.

It may, perhaps, be of interest here to set down simple lists of the vices and virtues as given in our treatise, and to append to them the list of vices in C. H., i. 24 and 26.

 1. Not-knowing.

 1. Gnosis.

 2. Grief. 

 2. Joy.

 3. Intemperance. 

 3. Self-control.

 4. Concupiscence. 

 4. Continence.

 5. Unrighteousness. 

 5. Righteousness.

 6. Avarice. 

 6. Sharing-with-all.

 7. Error. 

 7. Truth.

 8. Envy.

[p. 247]

 9. Guile.

 8. The Good.

 10. Anger.

 9. Life.

 11. Rashness.

 10. Light.

 12. Malice.

  

 1. Growth and Waning. 

 First Zone.

 2. Device of Evils. 

 Second Zone.

 3. Guile of the Desires. 

 Third Zone.

 4. Arrogance. 

 Fourth Zone.

 5. Daring and Rashness. 

 Fifth Zone.

 6. Getting Wealth. 

 Sixth Zone.

 7. Falsehood. 

 Seventh Zone.

  

 8. Those-that-are. 

 Eighth.

 9. The Powers in a band. 

 Ninth. 

 10. The Father. 

 Tenth.

It is at once seen that the first seven virtues are arranged so as to be the direct antitheses of the first seven vices. The root of the Twelve is Ignorance; indeed, all the Twelve are permutations of Ignorance. They seem to be twelve, whereas they are but one in nature; again, not only are they twelve, but manifold ( section 12).

Thus, for instance, Rashness and Wrath or Anger are but one, and so of the rest; the permutations are infinite. This may be seen from the septenary classification in "The Shepherd" treatise, where we have: Guile of the Desires (3), a combination of Guile (9) and Desire or Concupiscence (4); Device of Evils (2), a combination of Guile (9) and Malice (12); Unholy Daring and Rashness (5), a combination of Unrighteousness (5) and Rashness (11); Getting Wealth by evil means (6), a combination of Guile (9) and Avarice (6). So also just as Anger (10) and Rashness (11) are one, so are Envy (8) and Avarice (6) but aspects of the same

[p. 248]

thing; and so again Intemperance (3) and Concupiscence or Desire (4), Grief (2) and Ignorance (1), etc.

All are summed up in Ignorance, or Error, just as the seven virtues are summed up in Gnosis or Truth. [*1] And just as Ignorance is the source of vice, so is Knowledge or Gnosis the beginning of Truth. Gnosis is not the end but the beginning of the Path, the end of it is God or the Good.

The difference between the "Poemandres" arrangement and the categories of our treatise is conditioned by the fact that in the former the process of transformation in the case of a good man after death is described, whereas in the latter the Way of Rebirth in a living man is set forth.

That the Virtues (and Vices, therefore) were categorized according to the fundamental numbers of the Gnosis may be seen in most systems of Christian Gnostic aeonology; indeed, it was a common plan of the general Gnostic theosophy of the time. In our treatise we have set forth the manner of the immediate practical ethical realization of what might be taken by a superficial student of Gnostic aeonology as an empty schematology of purely metaphysical abstractions. [*2] These things, however, meant everything to the Gnostic; they were fullnesses--no abstractions, but transcendent realities.

So also in the Shepherd of Hermas (Vis. iii. 8, 7), just as in our treatise, we are presented with the Vision of a Band of seven Women, each the mother of the next, seven Virtues, called: Faith, Continence, Simplicity, Freedom-from-malice, Seriousness, Gnosis (episte'me), Love.

And not only do we have the Seven, but also the

[p. 249]

[paragraph continues] Twelve, twelve Maidens (Sim. xv. 1-3): Faith, Continence, Power, Long-suffering, Simplicity, Freedom-from-malice, Chastity, Joyfulness, Truth, Understanding, Concord, Love.

To these are opposed twelve Women in dark robes: Infidelity, Incontinence, Disobedience, Error, Grief, Depravity, Wantonness, Quickness-to-wrath, Falsehood, Folly, Slander, Hate.

Zosimus also speaks of the Twelve Fates (Moirai) of Death, and associates them with the Passions. [*1]

But, indeed, the subject is infinite, for it is the consummation of all right endeavour and all true progress in humanity. We must, then, leave it for the present, to avoid running to too great length in these comments. Sufficient for the moment to point to the fact that the Ten is not only the Wedding Garment of Purity, but also the Robe of Power or Glory. In its consummation also it is the Garment of the Christ, the One Robe without seam throughout, for the Ten contains the One, and the One contains the Ten.

THE DAWN OF COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS

13. The result of this Potent Invocation of the Powers,--that is to say, the realization of the full meaning of the sacred rite which consummates itself in the consciousness of Hermes, and so communicates itself in some measure to Tat, [*2]--is that Tat begins to "see"; "I see the All, I see myself in Mind."

"In heaven am I, in earth, in water, air; I am in animals, in plants; I'm in the womb, before the womb, after the womb,--I'm everywhere" ( section 11).

Compare this with C. H., xi. (xii.) 22, where Hermes is himself being taught by Mind:

"Collect into thyself all senses of all creatures,--of

[p. 250]

fire, and water, dry and moist. Think that thou art at the same time in every place, in earth, in sea, in sky; not yet begotten, in the womb, young, old and dead, in after-death conditions."

This is, as we have seen, a pure Egyptian formula, and connotes the opening of the "cosmic consciousness."

This consciousness, whatever else it may be, is a transcending of our three-dimensional limitation of consciousness,--that of the "body's view-point,--a thing three ways in space extended."

THE VOW OF SILENCE

The mystery of this New Birth in consciousness is to be kept secret; therefore Hermes has not commented on it, presumably in the Expository Sermons; moreover, it must even now be kept secret ( section 22), and therefore is the treatise a Secret Sermon. The reason for this is given both here and in  section 22: "That we may not be thought to be calumniators" (diaboloi), by the Many or Unknowing. What may be the precise meaning of this phrase I do not know, and can only speculate.

Those who had reached the full grade of Hermes are to keep silence on their "virtue" or power ( section 22); they were never to boast of their Gnosis. If they did, it would only bring the Gnosis into contempt; for they would still appear as ordinary men, would probably often say and do things, when they were not in the higher state of consciousness, which fell below the standard of their high ideals, and so they would be slanderers or calumniators of the Gnosis before the world.

14. The New Birth is further characterized as the Essential Birth (e oysiw'des genesis); it was the birth of

[p. 251]

the Essential Man, the God, Son of the One, to which other treatises refer. [*1]

OF THE OGDOAD

15. Tat now desires to hear the Praise-giving of the Powers, which only those can sing who have reached the stage called Eighth, or the Ogdoad; this is the state above the Harmony or the Hebdomad of Fate (C. H., i. 26). The man is now free and no longer a slave. It is the power of prophetic hymnody, for the man now hears the True Harmony of things and is above the Concatenation of Difference; it is the state "that keeps the soul in tune." He who has reached this height can ever sing in tune; it is the state of the Hearer of the Eternal Praise-giving, and those who reach it can express it infinitely, each in his own fashion.

The idea of the Ogdoad is represented in many a Christian Gnostic system, especially in the Valentinian tradition, which has many Egyptian elements in it.

So we read in the Excerpts from Theodotus appended to the writings of Clement of Alexandria:

"Him whom the Mother [*2] brings to birth, she leadeth unto Death and to the world; but him whom Christ brings to rebirth, He changeth into Life, unto the Ogdoad." [*3]

Many were the names given to the Ogdoad by the Christian Gnostics,--such as the Jerusalem Above, Wisdom, the Land flowing with milk and honey, the Holy Spirit, the Land of the Lord, the Mesotes.

These terms were, however, with the exception of the last, Jewish synonyms; the term Ogdoad itself

[p. 252]

was in all probability Egyptian. Thus in one of the Magic Papyri we read:

"Having known the power of the book, thou shalt hide it, my son. For in it there is stored the Authentic Name, which is the Name Ogdoad,--He who doth order and doth regulate all things." [*1]

A HYMN FOR MORNING AND FOR EVENING PRAYER

16. The Hymn that follows is to be kept secret--that is to say, it is to be taken by Tat as an example of the form of prayer he is now to use in his private devotions, and is therefore probably intended to replace some other form of prayer which he had hitherto been using, as was the custom in such communities.

The instruction to use it at sunset and sunrise, in the open air, reminds us of the appended passages to "The Shepherd" treatise, where we read ( section 29):

"And when even was come and all sun's beams began to set, I bade them all give thanks to God." [*2]

Compare also what Philo tells us of the Therapeuts:

"Twice a day, at dawn and even, they are accustomed to offer up prayers; as the sun rises praying for the sunshine, the real Sunshine, that their minds may be filled with Heavenly Light, and as it sets praying that their soul, completely lightened of the lust of the senses and sensations, may withdraw to its own Congregation and Council-chamber, there to track out Truth." [*3]

So also Apollonius of Tyana is said to have prayed and meditated three times a day: at daybreak (Phil., V. A., vi. 10, 18; vii. 31), at mid-day (vii. 10), and at

[p. 253]

sundown (viii. 13); and with regard to "keeping silence on their virtue," we are told of the Later Pythagoreans, of whom he was so conspicuous an example:

"In particular they kept the rule of silence regarding the Divine Service [that is, the Gnosis]. For they heard within them many Divine and unspeakable things on which it would have been difficult for them to keep silence, had they not first learned that it was just this Silence which spoke to them" (i. 1). [*1]

And so the Hymn has to be heard in silence; all earthly sounds must be stilled for the Heavenly Harmony to be heard.

17. It is to be noticed that in four out of the five MSS. the title "Secret Hymnody" is followed by the indication "Logos IV."

Reitzenstein (p. 345, n. 21) thinks that the three prior "Logoi" were:

I. "Holy art Thou, O God"--C. H., i. 31, 32.

II. "The Glory of all things is God"--C. H., iii. (iv.).

III. "Whither stumble ye, sots?"--C. H., vii. (viii.).

The latter two, however, are not hymns; the only other hymn in our Corpus being:

"Who then may sing Thee praise of Thee?"--C. H., v. (vi.) 10, 11.

Our Hymn is a Hymn to the Sun, it is true, but to the Spiritual Sun, not the physical orb of day. It is to the Eye of Mind that these orisons are addressed--to the All-seeing Light.

Nor is this Eulogy a formal Te Deum, but a potent theurgic Praise-giving. All nature is to thrill with the joy of this thankfulness.

Most beautiful is this Song of Praise, all of it, but we would specially call attention to the words: 

[p. 254]

"Thy Reason sings through me Thy praises. Take back through me the All into Thy Reason--my reasonable oblation [*1]! From Thee Thy Will; to Thee the All!"

The Outbreathing of the Universe through the Reason or Logos [*2] is the manifestation or realisation of the Will of God. The Logos is Son, Will is Mother and God Father.

The Inbreathing of the Universe is through Man ("Thy Man thus cries to Thee,"  section 20): "Take back through Me the All." This is accomplished in the first instance by the sacrifice of the reason, of man's small limited reason, to the Great Reason of things.

And yet the All, the Universe itself, is not something other than God; it is all God.

"From Thee Thy Will"; Thou art the Source of all. "To Thee the All"; Thou art the End of all, the Desirable One, The Good.

Compare with this the Hymn in the Jewish deposit of the Naassene Document:

"From Thee is Father, and Through Thee Mother,--the two Immortal Names, Parents of Aeons, O Thou who hast the Heaven for thy City, O Man of Mighty Names!"

Also notice: "The All that is in us, O Life, preserve; O Light, illumine it; O God, in-spirit it!" And compare it with  section 12, where we are told: "While Life and Light are unified there, where the One hath being from the Spirit."

[p. 255]

The Prayer is for the Baptism of Light--Illumination by the Gnosis [*1]; this was the Dowsing in the Mind of "The Cup" treatise, even as true Baptism in primitive Christianity was called Illumination or futismos.

"THROUGH THE WORD"

21. Tat now feels himself impelled to utter praises himself. He says what he feels. His master has given him the impulse, has made the conditions for him whereby he is conceived as a Child of God, a Prophet. But as yet he is not grown into the stature of a true Seer. His higher nature has received the germ, but this must have time to develop, and only gradually will its power descend into his lower mind.

At present his thankfulness is poured forth to his master, who has performed the theurgic rite of initiation ("All things have been perfected") for him.

But Hermes restrains him; it is not to the master that his thanks are due, but to God. And if he cannot as yet give thanks direct to God, then let him send those thanks--"acceptable oblations"--to God "Through the Word."

And that this was and is the practice of universal Christendom requires no pointing out;--the most striking parallel to the wording of our treatise being 1 Pet. ii. 5: "Spiritual oblations acceptable to God through Jesus Christ."

Tat has now passed from the rank of Hearer to that of Knower; he is now a true Gnostic: "Thou hast become a Knower of thyself, and of our Sire."

Compare logos 2 of the latest found Sayings at Oxyrhynchus:

[p. 256]

"(Strive therefore?) to know yourselves, and ye shall know ye are Sons of the (almighty?) Father; (and?) ye shall know that ye are in (the City of God? [*1]), and ye are (the City? [*2])."

Footnotes

^235:1 Grotius, ap. Jablonski, ii. 397; Lobeck, Aglaoph., p. 714.

^235:2 Euseb., Chron., 99 A.

^235:3 De Div., i. 44.

^236:1 Herod., v. 90.

^236:2 Or. c. Demos., 91, 20.

^236:3 Or., IV. 60: "stifos arxaias sofias, oy koineis oyde en mesui kylindoymenes alla spanioy kai apothetoy."

^238:1 De Sac. Ab. et C., i. 186, 33.

^238:2 See the praise-giving of Tat,  section 21.

^238:3 "The Mountain of Light," the traditional scene of the Transfiguration.

^239:1 Precisely as did Tat.

^239:2 Cf. precisely the same formula in our treatise,  section 21.

^239:3 That is, of God as Aeon and God as Life, which is the union of God as Mind and Logos.

^240:1 The antiquity of the ideas connected with this spiritual mystery may be seen from what Reitzenstein (pp. 227 ff.) has to say concerning mystic synoysia or congress; of it, as perhaps of nothing so much in the world, may it be said corruptio optimi pessima.

^241:1 Compare the Song of the Powers in Pistis Sophia (pp. 16, 17), where the "We" alternates with the "I."

^242:1 D. V. C., M. 473, 10; P. 891.

^242:2 See D. J. L., pp. 374, 375.

^242:3 Cf. R. 52. But compare especially  section 6, and C. H., iv. (v.) 1.

^243:1 That is, when the Presence is withdrawn,--by contrast.

^243:2 Texts and Studies, V. i. 14.

^244:1 The term "Greatness," however, is probably of Egyptian derivation. In the Papyrus Insinger, written somewhere during the last half of the first century B.C. and first half of the first century A.D., according to Spiegelberg, God's Wisdom and Providence are praised (coll. xxxv., xxxvi.). The superscription of this section runs: "The Four-and-Twentieth Teaching: The Instruction: Learn the Greatness of God, that thou mayest let it come into thine heart" (xxxv. 17); and later on: "He knoweth the Blasphemer who thinketh wickedness, He knoweth the Pious with the Greatness of God in his heart. The tongue, before even it is questioned--its words God knoweth" (xxxvi. 3-5). This is further explained by the sentence: "Thoth is heart and tongue of the Pious; lo! his house is God!" (xxxv. 19). R. 237.

^248:1 Cf. P. S. A., xxix. 2.

^248:2 The usual way, indeed, in which it is taken.

^249:1 Berthelot, 244; R. 214.

^249:2 Cf. C. H., i. 7; xi. (ixi.) 6.

^251:1 Cf. P. S. A., vii. 2.

^251:2 Sc. the Lower Mother, Nature.

^251:3 Exx. ex Theodot.,  section 80 (ed. Dindorf, iii. 453).

^252:1 Leyden Papyrus W. S., 139, 45 (Leemans); cf. also ibid., 141, 5; R. 54. For further comments on the Ogdoad, see Commentary on C. H., i. 26.

^252:2 Cf. also P. S. A., xli. 1.

^252:3 D. V. C., M. ii. 475; P. 893.

^253:1 See my Apollonius of Tyana, pp. 123 and 120.

^254:1 Cf. 1 Pet. ii. 5: "Ye also as living stones are built up, a spiritual house for holy service, to offer up spiritual oblations acceptable to God through Jesus Christ," And also Rom. xii. 1: "I beseech you, therefore, brethren, to present your bodies as a living oblation, holy, well-pleasing unto God,--your reasonable service."

^254:2 Hesychius in his Lexicon defines Logos as the "Cause of Activity," or that which underlies action,--e tou dramatos ypothesis.

^255:1 Compare gnusis agia, futistheis apo sou ( section 18); futize fw's ( section 19); epifw'tistai moy o nous ( section 21).

^256:1 Sc. the Ogdoad.

^256:2 Cf. 1. Pet. ii. 5: "Ye are built up as living stones, a spiritual house for service."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 257]

CORPUS HERMETICUM XIV. (XV.)

 

[A LETTER] OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES TO ASCLEPIUS

UNTO ASCLEPIUS GOOD HEALTH OF SOUL! [*1]

(Text: P. 128-134; Pat. 49, 50.)

1. SINCE in thy absence my son Tat desired to learn the nature of the things that are, and would not let me hold it over, as [natural to] a younger son fresh come to gnosis of the [teachings] on each single point,--I was compelled to tell [him] more, in order that the contemplation [*2] [of them] might be the easier for him to follow.

[p. 258]

I would, then, choosing out the chiefest heads of what was said, write them in brief to thee, explaining them more mystic-ly, [*1] as unto one of greater age and one well versed in Nature.

2. If all things manifest have been and are being made, and made things are not made by their own selves but by another; [if] made things are the many,--nay more, are all things manifest and all things different and not alike; and things that are being made are being made by other [than themselves];--there is some one who makes these things; and He cannot be made, but is more ancient than the things that can.

For things that can be made, I say, are made by other [than themselves]; but of the things that owe their being to their being made, it is impossible that anything should be more ancient than them all, save only That which is not able to be made.

3. So He is both Supreme, and One, and Only, the truly wise in all, as having naught more ancient [than Himself].

For He doth rule o'er both the number, size and difference of things that are being made, and o'er the continuity of their making [too].

Again, things makeable are seeable; but He cannot be seen.

[p. 259]

For for this cause He maketh,--that He may not be able to be seen.

He, therefore, ever maketh [*1]; and therefore can He ne'er be seen.

To comprehend Him thus is meet; and comprehending, [it is meet] to marvel; and marvelling, to count oneself as blessed, as having learnt to know one's Sire.

4. For what is sweeter than one's own true Sire? Who, then, is He; and how shall we learn how to know Him?

Is it not right to dedicate to Him alone the name of God, or that of Maker, or of Father, or rather [all] the three;--God for His Power, and Maker for His Energy, and Father for His Good?

Now Power doth differ from the things which are being made; while Energy consisteth in all things being made.

Wherefore we ought to put away verbosity and foolish talk, and understand these two--the made and Maker. For that of them there is no middle [term]; there is no third.

5. Wherefore in all that thou conceivest, in all thou nearest, these two recall to mind; and think all things are they, reckoning as doubtful naught, nor of the things above, nor of the things below, neither of things divine, nor things

[p. 260]

that suffer change or things that are in obscuration. [*1]

For all things are [these] twain, Maker and made, and 'tis impossible that one should be without the other; for neither is it possible that "Maker" should exist without the "made," for each of them is one and the same thing.

Wherefore 'tis no more possible for one from other to be parted, than self from self.

6. Now if the Maker is naught else but That which makes, Alone, Simple, Uncompound, it needs must do this [making] to Itself,--to Which its Maker's making is "its being made." [*2]

And as to all that's being made,--it cannot be

[p. 261]

[paragraph continues] [so made] by being made by its own self; but it must needs be made by being made by other. Without the "Maker" "made" is neither made nor is; for that the one without the other doth lose its proper nature by deprivation of that other.

If, [*1] then, all things have been admitted to be two,--the "that which is being made" and "that which makes,"--[all then] are one in union of these,--the "that which leadeth" and the "that which followeth."

The making God is "that which leadeth"; the "that which is being made," whatever it be, the "that which followeth."

7. And do not thou be chary of things made because of their variety, from fear of attribution of a low estate and lack of glory unto God.

For that His Glory's one,--to make all things; and this is as it were God's Body, the making [of them]. [*2]

But by the Maker's self naught is there thought or bad or base.

These things are passions which accompany the making process, as rust doth brass and filth doth body; but neither doth the brass-smith

[p. 262]

make the rust, nor the begetters of the body filth, nor God [make] evil.

It is continuance in the state of being made [*1] that makes them lose, as though it were, their bloom; and 'tis because of this God hath made change, as though it were the making clean of genesis.

8. Is it, then, possible for one and the same painter man to make both heaven, and gods, and earth, and sea, and men, and all the animals, and lifeless things, and trees, and yet impossible for God to make all things?

What monstraus lack of understanding; what want of knowledge as to God! [*1]

For such the strangest lot of all do suffer; for though they say they worship piously and sing the praise of God, yet by their not ascribing unto Him the making of all things, they know not God; and, added unto this not-knowing, they're guilty even of the worst impiety to Him--passions to Him attributing, or arrogance, or impotency.

For if He doth not make all things, from arrogance He doth not make, or not being able,--which is impiety [to think].

9. One Passion hath God only--Good; and He who's Good, is neither arrogant nor impotent.

For this is God--the Good, which hath all power of making all.

[p. 263]

And all that can be made is made by God,--that is, by [Him who is] the Good and who can make all things. [*1]

But would'st thou learn how He doth make, and how things made are made, thou may'st do so.

10. Behold a very fair and most resemblant image--a husbandman casting the seed into the ground; here wheat, there barley, and there [again] some other of the seeds!

Behold one and the same man planting the vine, the apple, and [all] other trees!

In just the selfsame way doth God sow Immortality in Heaven, and Change on Earth, and Life and Motion in the universe.

These are not many, but few and easy to be numbered; for four in all are they,--and God Himself and Genesis, in whom are all that are.

Footnotes

^257:1 ey fronein. I do not know the exact meaning of this expression. Everard translates "to be truly wise"; Parthey, "recte sapere" following Patrizzi; Menard, "sagesse"; Chambers, "to be rightly wise." I would suggest that ey fronein was the form used among these disciples of the Inner Way for the usual xairein. Instead of wishing one another happiness, they wished each other wisdom, good thought, right thinking, good health of soul.

^257:2 theuria.

^258:1 That is to say, more fully and profoundly, as to one more advanced in the mystic science.

^259:1 Cf. C. H., xvi. 18.

^260:1 tun en myxui. I do not know what is the exact meaning of this expression. Everard translates "things that are in darkness or secret"; Parthey, "quae sunt in abdito"; Menard, "dans les profondeurs"; Chambers, "those in secrecy." I suggest that the technical term myxos, signifying generally a shut-in or locked-up place (conclave, as Damascius translates it), is to be referred, along the line of Platonic and Pythagorean tradition, to Pherecydes. Porphyry (De Antro Nymph., C. 31) tells us that the synonyms "myxoi (chambers?), recesses (or pits), caverns, doors, gates" were used by Pherecydes as symbolical expressions to signify "the geneses and apogeneses of souls," whatever these terms may mean exactly. The "birth" and "decease" of a soul, in this connection, presumably mean its coming into the world of genesis out of the womb of the World-soul, and its reception back again into the bosom of the great Mother. If this be so, our text would seem to indicate that things are in two states,--in a state of change (that is, in the active condition), and again in a passive condition, in the state which Indian philosophers call laya or pralaya. See for the myxoi of Pherecydes Sturz's Pherecydis Fragmenta, pp. 43 ff. (Leipzig, 1824).

^260:2 Or genesis.

^261:1 From here to the end of the sermon, with the exception of the final sentences of  section 7 and  section 10, and the third sentence of  section 9, and with a few very slight verbal variants, is quoted by Cyril, Contra Julianum, ii. 64 (Migne, col. 598 D).

^261:2 Cf. C. H., xvi. 18.

^262:1 Or genesis.

^263:1 This sentence, which appears to be very tautological, is omitted by Cyril.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

COMMENTARY

ASCLEPIUS AND TAT

Fabricius, in his Bibliotheca Graeca, [*2] says that the title should be "On the Nature of the All," and that he has recovered it from Cyril, C. Jul., ii., but I cannot verify this statement.

The form of this treatise is different from any of the

[p. 264]

preceding, being that of a letter. It evidently belongs to the Asclepius-Tat type of tradition, as in C. H., x. (xi.): "My yesterday's discourse I did devote to thee, Asclepius, and so 'tis only right I should devote to-day's to Tat."

The distinction drawn between Tat and Asclepius is of interest; Tat is the younger,--who has only "just come to Gnosis of the teaching on each single point." Can this mean that he has only just been permitted to share in the "Expository Sermons" or "Detailed Discourses"? It is probable, for C. H., x. (xi.) 1, continues: "And this the more because 'tis the abridgment (epitome) of the General Sermons which he has had addressed to him."

Asclepius is older, and already episte'mun teis fuseus--well-versed in the study of Nature.

What may be the exact significance underlying these personifications it is very difficult to say; but the same facts, whatever they may have been, are clearly referred to in K K. (Stob., Ecl., i. 49; p. 386, 24 W.); especially the later accession of "Asclepius" to the School, and the fact that "Tat," because of his too great "youth," could not have handed on to him the tradition of the complete or all-perfect contemplation (oloteles theuria)--that is, of the mathesis or gnosis, or, in other words, the "learning of the things that are, the contemplating of their nature and the knowing God" (C. H., i. 3); or the "being taught the nature of the all and the Supreme Vision" (ibid., 27).

This view of the tradition of the School seems to clash entirely with the other view set forth in C. H., xiii. (xiv.), where Tat has handed on to him the "manner of Rebirth," but a probable explanation has already been attempted in the "Prolegomena," chap, xvi.: "The Disciples of Thrice-greatest Hermes."

[p. 265]

COMPARE WITH "MIND UNTO HERMES"

The treatise itself requires little commentary; the similarity of its doctrine, however, with that of the "Mind unto Hermes" is remarkable. For instance, compare the last sentence of  section 7 of our treatise with C. H., xi. (xii.) 14: "For that indeed He hath no other one to share in what He works, for working by Himself, He ever is at work, Himself being what He doth."

Compare also the first sentence of  section 8 with C. H., xi. (xii.) 20: "Behold what power, what swiftness thou dost have! And canst thou do all of these things, and God not do them?"

THE GOOD HUSBANDMAN

With the Good Husbandman "image" ( section 10) compare:

"Come unto me, Good Husbandman, Good Daimon, Harpocrates, Chnouphis . . . who rollest down the stream of Nilus, [*1] and minglest with the Sea . . . as man with woman." [*2]

And in the Alchemical literature:

"[Come then], and coming contemplate, enquire of Acharantus (?), the Husbandman, and learn of Him, what is it that is sown, and what that which is reaped; and thou shalt learn that he who soweth corn shall reap corn also, and he who soweth barley shall in like manner reap barley." [*3]

So also Zosimus in the "Book Concerning the Logos":

"And that I tell thee truth, I call to witness Hermes, when he says: Go unto Achaab (?), the Husbandman, and thou shalt learn that he who soweth corn gives birth to corn." [*4]

Footnotes

^263:2 Ed. Harles (4th ed.), vol. i. lib. i. cap. vii.

^265:1 The Heavenly River of fructifying essence.

^265:2 Abhandl. d. Berl. Akad. (1865), p. 120, 26; R. 143.

^265:3 Berthelot, p. 30.

^265:4 Berthelot, p. 89.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 266]

CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVI.)

 

THE DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS UNTO KING AMMON

THE PERFECT SERMON OF ASCLEPIUS UNTO THE KING

(Text: R. 348-354; Pat. at end. [*1])

1. GREAT is the sermon (logos) which I send to thee, O King--the summing up and digest, as it were, of all the rest.

For it is not composed to suit the many's prejudice, since it contains much that refuteth them.

Nay, it will seem to thee as well to contradict sometimes my sermons too.

Hermes, my master, in many a conversation, both when alone, and sometimes, too, when Tat was there, has said, that unto those who come across my books, their composition will seem most simple and [most] clear; but, on the contrary, as 'tis unclear, and has the [inner]

[p. 267]

meaning of its words concealed, it will be still unclearer, when, afterwards, the Greeks will want to turn our tongue into their own,--for this will be a very great distorting and obscuring of [even] what has been [already] written.

2. Turned into our own native tongue, [*1] the sermon (logos) keepeth clear the meaning [*2] of the words (logoi) [at any rate].

For that its very quality of sound, the [very] power of the Egyptian names, have in themselves the bringing into act of what is said.

As far as, then, thou canst, O King--(and thou canst [do] all things)--keep [this] our sermon from translation; in order that such mighty mysteries may not come to the Greeks, and the disdainful speech of Greece, with [all] its looseness, and its surface beauty, [*3] so to speak, take all the strength out of [*4] the solemn and the strong--the energetic [*5] speech of Names.

The Greeks, O King, have novel words, energic of "argumentation" [only]; and thus is the philosophizing of the Greeks--the noise of words.

But we do not use words; but we use sounds full-filled with deeds.

[p. 268]

3. Thus, then, will I begin the sermon by invocation unto God, the universals' Lord and Maker, [their] Sire, and [their] Encompasser; who though being All is One, [*1] and though being One is All; for that the Fullness of all things is One, and [is] in One, this latter One not coming as a second [One], but both being One.

And this is the idea [*2] that I would have thee keep, through the whole study of our sermon, Sire!

For should one try to separate what seems to be both All and One and Same from One,--he will be found to take [*3] his epithet of "All" from [the idea of] multitude, and not from [that of) fullness [*4]--which is impossible; for if he part All from the One, he will destroy the All. [*5]

For all things must be One--if they indeed are One. Yea, they are One; and they shall never cease being One--in order that the Fullness may not be destroyed.

*          *          *          *          *

4. See then in Earth a host of founts of Water and of Fire forth-spirting in its midmost parts; in one and the same [space all] the three

[p. 269]

natures visible--of Fire, and Water, and of Earth, depending from one Root. [*1]

Whence, too, it [*2] is believed to be the Treasury [*3] of every matter. It sendeth forth of its [*4] abundance, and in the place [of what it sendeth forth] receiveth the subsistence from above. [*5]

For thus the Demiurge [*6]--I mean the Sun--eternally doth order Heaven and Earth, pouring down Essence, [*7] and taking Matter up, drawing both round Himself and to Himself all things, and from Himself giving all things to all.

For He it is whose goodly energies extend not only through the Heaven and the Air, but also onto Earth, right down unto the lowest Depth and the Abyss.

6. And if there be an Essence which the mind alone can grasp, [*8] this is his Substance, [*9] the reservoir [*10] of which would be His Light.

[p. 270]

But whence this [Substance] doth arise, or floweth forth, He, [and He] only, knows.

*          *          *          *          *

Or rather, in space and nature, He is near unto Himself . . . though as He is not seen by us, . . . understand [Him] by conjecture. [*1]

7. The spectacle of Him, however, is not left unto conjecture; nay [for] His very rays, [*2] in greatest splendour, shine all round on all the Cosmos that doth lie above and lie below.

For He is stablished in the midst, wreathed with the Cosmos, [*3] and just as a good charioteer, He safely drives the cosmic team, [*4] and holds them in unto Himself, [*5] lest they should run away in dire disorder.

The reins are Life, and Soul, and Spirit, Deathlessness, and Genesis.

[p. 271]

He lets it, then, drive [round] not far off from Himself--nay, if the truth be said, together with Himself.

8. And in this way He operates [*1] all things. To the immortals He distributeth perpetual permanence; and with the upper hemisphere of His own Light--all that he sends above from out His other side, [*2] [the side of him] which looks to Heaven--He nourisheth the deathless parts of Cosmos.

But with that side that sendeth down [its Light], and shineth round all of the hemisphere [*3] of Water, and of Earth, and Air, He vivifieth, and by births and changes keepeth in movement to and fro the animals [*4] in these [the lower] parts of Cosmos. . . .

9. He changes them in spiral fashion, and doth transform them into one another, genus to genus, species into species, their mutual changes into one another being balanced--just as He does when He doth deal with the Great Bodies.

For in the case of every body, [its] permanence [consists in] transformation.

In case of an immortal one, there is no

[p. 272]

dissolution; but when it is a mortal one, it is accompanied with dissolution. [*1]

And this is how the deathless body doth differ from the mortal, and how the mortal one doth differ from the deathless.

10. Moreover, as His Light's continuous, so is His Power of giving Life to lives continuous, and not to be brought to an end in space or in abundance.

For there are many choirs of daimons round Him, like unto hosts of very various kinds; who though they dwell with mortals, yet are not far from the immortals; but having as their lot from here unto the spaces of the Gods, [*2] they watch o'er the affairs of men, and work out things appointed by the Gods--by means of storms, whirlwinds and hurricanes, by transmutations wrought by fire and shakings of the earth, [*3] with famines also and with wars requiting [man's] impiety,--for this is in man's case the greatest ill against the Gods.

11. For that the duty of the Gods is to give benefits; the duty of mankind is to give worship [*4]; the duty of the daimons is to give requital.

For as to all the other things men do, through

[p. 273]

error, or foolhardiness, or by necessity, which they call Fate, [*1] or ignorance--these are not held requitable among the Gods; impiety alone is guilty at their bar.

12. The Sun is the preserver [*2] and the nurse of every class. [*3]

And just as the Intelligible World, [*4] holding the Sensible in its embrace, fills it [all] full, distending it with forms of every kind and every shape--so, too, the Sun distendeth all in Cosmos, affording births to all, and strengtheneth them.

When they are weary or they fail, He takes them in His arms again.

13. And under Him is ranged the choir of daimons--or, rather, choirs; for these are multitudinous and very varied, ranked underneath the groups of Stars, [*5] in equal number with each one of them.

So, marshalled in their ranks, they are the ministers of each one of the Stars, being in their natures good, and bad, that is, in their activities (for that a daimon's essence is activity); while

[p. 274]

some of them are [of] mixed [natures], good and bad.

14. To all of these has been allotted the authority o'er things upon the Earth; and it is they who bring about the multifold confusion of the turmoils on the Earth--for states and nations generally, and for each individual separately.

For they do shape our souls like to themselves, and set them moving with them,--obsessing nerves, and marrow, veins and arteries, the brain itself, down to the very heart. [*1]

15. For on each one of us being born and made alive, the daimons take hold on us--those [daimones] who are in service at that moment [of the wheel] of Genesis, who are ranged under each one of the Stars. [*2]

For that these change at every moment; they do not stay the same, but circle back again.

These, then, descending through the body [*3] to the two parts [*4] of the soul, set it [*5] awhirling, each one towards its own activity.

But the soul's rational part is set above the lordship of the daimons--designed to be receptacle of God.

[p. 275]

16. Who then doth have a Ray shining upon him through the Sun within his rational part--and these in all are few on them the daimons do not act; for no one of the daimons or of Gods has any power against one Ray of God.

As for the rest, they are all led and driven, soul and body, by the daimons--loving and hating the activities of these.

The reason (logos), [then,] is not the love that is deceived and that deceives. [*1]

The daimons, therefore, exercise the whole of this terrene economy, [*2] using our bodies as [their] instruments.

And this economy Hermes has called Heimarmene. [*3]

17. The World Intelligible, [*4] then, depends from God; the Sensible from the Intelligible [World].

The Sun, through the Intelligible and the Sensible Cosmos, pours forth abundantly the stream from God of Good,--that is, the demiurgic operation.

And round the Sun are the Eight Spheres, dependent from Him--the [Sphere] of the

[p. 276]

[paragraph continues] Non-wandering Ones, the Six [Spheres] of the Wanderers, and one Circumterrene.

And from the Spheres depend the daimones; and from these, men.

And thus all things and all [of them] depend from God. [*1]

18. Wherefore God is the Sire of all; the Sun's [their] Demiurge; the Cosmos is the instrument of demiurgic operation.

Intelligible Essence regulateth Heaven; and Heaven, the Gods; the daimones, ranked underneath the Gods, regulate men.

This is the host [*2] of Gods and daimones. [*3]

Through these God makes all things for His own self.

And all [of them] are parts of God; and if they all [are] parts--then, God is all.

Thus, making all, He makes Himself; nor ever can He cease [His making], for He Himself is ceaseless. [*4]

Just, then, as God doth have no end and no beginning, so doth His making have no end and no beginning. [*5]

*          *          *          *          *

Footnotes

^266:1 At the end after P. S. A., but the pages are unnumbered.

^267:1 This presumably means from the hieroglyphic into the demotic--tei patruiai dialektui ermeneyomenos.

^267:2 Lit. the mind.

^267:3 Or, perhaps, smartness.

^267:4 Make jejune, so to say--exitelon poie'sei.

^267:5 That is, "words of power," words that do things.

^268:1 Cf. R. 127, 3; and P. S. A., i. 1.

^268:2 Lit. mind.

^268:3 The construction is very elliptical; ekdexamenos simply.

^268:4 That is, completeness, perfection,--plerw'matos.

^268:5 Cf. Plato, Soph., 259 D, E.

^269:1 Cf. P. S. A., iv. 1.

^269:2 Sc. Earth.

^269:3 A magazine, a store-house,--tamieion. The term "treasure" (thesayros) is found in most lavish use in the Greek-Coptic Gnostic works, and also in Christian Gnostic literature and Jewish Apocalyptic.

^269:4 Sc. matter's.

^269:5 ten anuthen yparxin,--hyparxis, substance or subsistence, a word of frequent use and highly technical meaning with the last of the Neo-Platonists, especially with Proclus. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 2.

^269:6 Cf. P. S. A., xxix. 4.

^269:7 Lit. bringing or drawing down; katagein = deducere, elicere--used frequently of magic arts.

^269:8 noete oysia = intelligibilis essentia.

^269:9 ogkos = moles, mass, bulk, volume; in later philosophy it means "atom," and may mean so here, of course in the philosophical and mystic and not in the physical sense.

^269:10 ypodoxe' = receptaculum.

^270:1 The text is very corrupt. Patrizzi translates: "Vel quia ipso loco, et natura prope se ipsum existens, non a nobis conspicitur cogit nos per conjecturas intelligere"--which certainly does not represent the Greek. Menard conjectures brilliantly but in entire emancipation from the text: "Pour comprendre par induction ce qui se derobe a notre vue, il faudrait etre pres de lui et analogue a sa nature." Reitzenstein discovers two lacunas in the text, but does not attempt to fill them. As the text stands, then, all attempt at translation seems hopeless.

^270:2 Lit. his very sight,--ayte e opsis, that is, his rays, opsis being used of the visual rays which were supposed by the science of the time to proceed from the eyes. Cf. Ex. vii. 4.

^270:3 Wearing the Cosmos as a wreath or crown; the visible sun being regarded as a "head." See "The Perfect Sermon."

^270:4 Lit. car or chariot--arma.

^270:5 Lit. binds it to himself--anade'sas eis eayton.

^271:1 demioyrgei.

^271:2 Lit. part.

^271:3 kutos = a, hollow, vase, or vessel.

^271:4 That is, those lives subject to death, as opposed to the immortals.

^272:1 Compare "Sermon to Tat," I. (Menard). Cf. Stob., Ecl, i. 61; 274, 24 W.

^272:2 Lit. "the land of these"--that is, of the immortals.

^272:3 Cf. Ex. ix. 5.

^272:4 Or, to be pious. Cf. P. S. A., ix. 1.

^273:1 eimarmenen.

^273:2 sute'r.

^273:3 Or genus.

^273:4 Or Cosmos.

^273:5 ypo tas tun asterun plinthidas. plinthis = plinthion, and is used of any rectangular figure, and also of groups of stars as in Eratosth. apud Strab., II. i. 35; v. 36 (Lex. Sophocles); compare ai tun plinthiun ypografai, the fields, or spaces, into which the Augurs divided the heavens, templa, or regiones coeli (Lex. Liddell and Scott).

^274:1 Lit. viscera.

^274:2 Cf. P. S. A., xxxv. 2.

^274:3 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 7.

^274:4 The two irrational parts, "passion" and "desire" (thymos and epithymia).

^274:5 The soul.

^275:1 This Eros is the lower love (cf. C. H., i. 18: "love, the cause of death"), not the Divine Love who inspires Hermes in "The Perfect Sermon" and who is mentioned C. H., xviii. 14.

^275:2 dioikesin.

^275:3 Or, Fate; cf. C. H., i. 9; and P. S. A., xix.

^275:4 Or, Intelligible Cosmos.

^276:1 Cf. P. S. A., iv. 1 n.; and xix.

^276:2 Or army, or hierarchy. Compare the "soldier" degree of the Mithriaca.

^276:3 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 22; and P. S. A., v. 1.

^276:4 Cf. C. H., xiv. (xv.), 7 and 5.

^276:5 See Commentary to Frag. iv. (Lact., D. I., ii. 15).

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 277]

COMMENTARY

CONCERNING THE TlTLE

Patrizzi has run (xvi.) and (xvii.) together, under the title "Definitions of Asclepius--Book I.," though he clearly saw that (xvii.) did not belong to (xvi.) by his remark, "videntur sequentia ex alio libro sumpta." He also heads (xvii.) 1-10 "Definitions of Asclepius--Book II.," and 11-16 "D. of A.--Book III.," though the contents have evidently nothing to do with such a title.

In the MSS. a later hand has added to the general title a catalogue of contents as follows:

"Of God; Matter; Evil; Fate; the Sun; Intelligible Essence; Divine Essence; Man; the Economy of the Pleroma; the Seven Stars; the Man after the Likeness" [*1]--for which largely irrelevant list Patrizzi substitutes the title: "Of the Sun and Daimons."

Reitzenstein (p. 192) is of opinion that this contents-list, and also the similar headings in (xviii.), are due to some Byzantine scribe, who also foolishly interpolated (xvii.).

But even to (xvi.) the title "Definitions of Asclepius" seems very inappropriate; while, on the other hand, we find Lactantius (D. I., ii. 5), in referring to the "incursions of daimones," claiming that it was a doctrine also of Hermes, and adding:

"Asclepius, his hearer, has also explained the same idea at greater length in that 'Perfect Sermon' which he wrote to the King."

This is quite definite, and the authority of Lactantius should perhaps be preferred to that of the MSS., but as the title would clash with "The Perfect Sermon" of Hermes to Asclepius, and as Lactantius may just

[p. 278]

possibly mean "in that initiatory sermon,"--the term perfectus being used in a general and not in an appellative sense,--I have kept the traditional title and placed that of Lactantius second.

A TRADITION CONCERNING THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE

1. Like "The Key"--C. H., x. (xi.)--of Hermes, our treatise is an Epitome [*1]; Asclepius has previously written a number of Sermons to the King.

The reference to the "Conversations" between Hermes and Asclepius and Tat, sometimes when both the latter were present and sometimes with Asclepius alone, presupposes the existence of this class of Dialogue, and indicates that the Correspondence of Asclepius with the King is a later deposit of our literature. [*2]

This literary activity of Asclepius is claimed in the introduction to be authorized by Hermes, and, moreover, purports to have been originally written in Demotic Egyptian. In other words, the writer would have us believe that the Greek is a translation from Egyptian. This it clearly is not; and we can only conclude that the "prophecy" as to direct translation is a literary fiction of our author.

2. On the other hand, it is highly probable that our author was in contact with a living tradition, to the effect that the Hermes-teaching was originally Egyptian, and that this was "interpreted" into Greek--that is, into Greek modes of thought, rather than "translated" in the ordinary sense into Greek.

In any case, the contempt shown by our author for the Greek language and "philosophizing," and his

[p. 279]

admiration for Hieroglyphic Egyptian as a "language of the Gods"--a magical tongue, that by its mantric power compelled the understanding of the hearer, by putting him in sympathy with the ideas pictured by the ideograms, or sounded forth by the "names of power" [*1]--show that he was not only not a Greek, but also no lover of Greek Philosophy.

This is exceedingly puzzling, seeing not only that the majority of the writers of our tractates are plainly deep students and lovers of Plato, but also that the author of our tractate himself also writes very much in the same style as they do.

All of this seems to indicate that in his introduction he was using for his own purposes some tradition about the ancient Thoth-literature that was current in his time. A form of this tradition was also made use of by Philo of Byblus in the first century, when he makes the Phoenician priest Sanchuniathon discover the origin of the Phoenician cosmogony and mystery-teaching in the Books of Taautos, "whom the Egyptian called Thoyth, the Alexandrians Thoth, and the Greeks changed into Hermes."

Sanchuniathon, he says, "having come across the secret writings that had been discovered and brought from the shrines of the Temples of Ammon,--compositions which were not known to all,--practised by himself the science (tein mathesin) of all things." [*2]

Philo also professes to quote from one of the earliest priests of Phoenicia, a certain Thabion, who is said apparently to have got his information from a writing of the Seven Kabiri, and of Asclepius, the pupil of Taautos. This Thabion asserted that Taautos was made King of Egypt by Kronos--that is, Ammon. [*3]

[p. 280]

Here we are evidently in contact with certain traditions with regard to Thoth-Hermes, his ancestors and pupils, and secret writings. Presumably many such traditions were floating about, and were used according to the fancy and taste of Hellenistic writers for their own purposes.

But there was also another tradition concerning a certain King Ammon, used in one form by Jamblichus, when he writes:

"It was Hermes who first taught this Path [sc. the Way up to God]. And Bitys, [*1] the Prophet, translated [his teachings concerning it] for King Ammon, discovering them in the inner temple in an inscription in the sacred characters at Sais in Egypt." [*2]

What our author and Jamblichus have in common is that there were certain secret teachings of Hermes in the Sacred Language of Ancient Egypt hidden away in the inner shrines of the temples, and that these were translated into the current Egyptian language of the time for a certain King Ammon.

It must, then, have been some tradition of this kind that our author or writer had in mind; he would have it believed that he was writing in the style or according to the model of a certain literature.

Who this King Ammon was can only be guessed at; but to my mind it is probable that the "translations" of Bitys were made in connection with the translation activity of Manetho for King Ptolemy, and this translation was into Greek. Our author, however, would refer it to some Egyptian King, and so seek to invoke the authority of a high antiquity for the treatise he was putting into circulation.

[p. 281]

A SPECULATION AS TO DATE

5. What seems to differentiate our treatise from the rest of the tractates, is the prominence its author gives to the doctrine of the Sun as Demiurgic Orderer of all things. This so to speak pantheistic form of Sun-worship is peculiarly Egyptian. [*1]

Now if we remember the disdainful way in which Greek "philosophizing" is spoken of in the introduction, we may be tempted to take the sentence, "And if there be any essence which the mind alone can grasp" ( section 6), as a somewhat patronizing reference to the Intelligible World of Greek Philosophy, as also the analogy in  section 12; but when we turn to  section section 17 and 18 the exposition fully adopts the doctrine of the Intelligible and Sensible Worlds. This is so irreconcilable a contradiction that one is almost compelled to believe that the introduction is by another hand altogether, and that our sermon proper begins with  section 3.

But even so, the sermon is addressed to some King or other--"The Perfect Sermon to the King" of Lactantius--without any further qualification. Who, however, this King may have been historically must remain a matter of pure conjecture.

7. When, then, Reitzenstein, pointing to  section 7, says that the symbolism of the Sun as a charioteer wearing a crown of rays corresponds with that of the pictures of the Aurelian Sun-god, and adds further it is the Roman Empire-god of the third century, we are quite prepared to acknowledge a similarity of symbolism. But if it is intended to suggest that, therefore, we are to date our document by this similarity, it must be admitted that the indications are far too vague; for the symbolism of the Sun as the ray-crowned charioteer

[p. 282]

is fundamental with the cult of Mithras, and is found in Greece long before the Aurelian period.

THE DELINEATION OF THE SUN

It is interesting, however, here to notice that the Sun is "wreathed with cosmos," and to compare this with the passage concerning the Macro-prosopus in the Untitled Apocalypse of the Coptic Gnostic Codex Brucianus, and especially with the sentence:

"The Hair of His Head is the number of the Hidden Worlds, and the Outline of His Face is the Type of the Aeons." [*1]

In this Untitled Apocalypse there is a strong Egyptian under-colouring; that, however, the idea of a crown of powers was pre-eminently Egyptian may be seen from many a passage in the Pistis Sophia.

8. It is also of interest to notice that the delineation of the Sun in  section 8 reminds us of the Orphic Phanes, especially the reference to the two hemispheres above and below,--the two parts of the Egg in Orphic symbolism.

9. The hint that the sun-life runs in some sort of spiral or serpentine fashion in animals, and that this also is the case with the Great Bodies or Celestial Animals, is of interest.

CONCERNING THE DAIMONES

10. Our author then proceeds to set forth his doctrine of the daimones or ministers of the Gods, who are assigned to the lower hemisphere of operation, from the Earth to the Sun, the Gods presumably occupying the higher hemisphere of activity. These daimones are what a Hindu or Buddhist would call karmic agents, for they are all connected with what is called the Fate-

[p. 283]

[paragraph continues] Sphere, the Instrument or the Wheel of Genesis, or Samsara.

15. These daimones rule over the lower energies of the soul; the higher energy or rational part of the soul is set above them, and is designed to be the "receptacle of God,"--or rather of His Ray,--the Mind proper.

16. With  section 16 compare the remarkable passage in one of the Letters of Valentinus:

"One [alone] is Good, whose free utterance is His manifestation through His Son; it is by Him alone that the heart can become pure, when every evil essence has been expelled from it.

"Now its purity is prevented by the many essences which take up their abode in it, for each of them accomplishes its own deeds, outraging it in divers fashions with unseemly lusts.

"As far as I can see, the heart seems to receive somewhat the same treatment as an inn [or caravanserai], which has holes and gaps made in its walls, and is frequently filled with dung, men living filthily in it and taking no care of the place as being someone else's property. Thus is it with the heart so long as it has no care taken of it, ever unclean and the abode of many daimons.

"But when the Alone Good Father hath regard unto it, it is sanctified and shineth with light; and he who possesseth such a heart is so blessed that 'he shall see God.'" [*1]

The language of Valentinus is remarkably like that of our treatises; Valentinus himself was an Egyptian.

[p. 284]

17. Entirely Egyptian also is the Scheme of Dependency given in  section 17, as we have already pointed out on several occasions, quoting from a Hymn of Valentinus.

The sentence: "Wherefore God is the Sire of all; the Sun's [their] Demiurge"--distinctly contradicts Reitzenstein's (p. 198, 1) statement that the Sun in our treatise is worshipped as the All-god. The Sun is He "by whom all things are made,"--the Creative Logos of God. [*1]

19. The treatise is evidently incomplete; if, however, we turn to the contents-title given at the beginning of these comments we can gain but little information as to what is missing, for the contents there given do not in any but the vaguest fashion correspond to the substance of our treatise, nor do the subjects treated of come in the same order as in the contents-heading. The Divine Essence, Man, the Economy of the Pleroma and the Man after the Likeness, which are clearly not treated of in our text, may then have been treated in the missing portion of our tractate; but this is all we can say.

Footnotes

^277:1 R. 348 n.

^278:1 Cf. also Ex. i. 16, and Comment.

^278:2 This deduction, however, has to be modified by the view we hold as to the authorship of the introduction. See Comment.,  section 5.

^279:1 Cf. R. 269.

^279:2 Ap. Euseb., Praep. Ev., I. ix. 29.

^279:3 Ibid., I. x. 38, 39.

^280:1 Cf. Zosimus ( section 8).

^280:2 De Myst., viii. 5.

^281:1 Cf. R. 198, 1; and also Comment on  section 17 below.

^282:1 F. F. F., 549.

^283:1 Quoted by Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom., II. xx. 114; P. 489 (ed. Dindorf, ii. 219). See for further critical text, Hilgenfeld (A.), Ketzergesch. d. Urchrist., p. 296; F. F. F., 300, 301.

^284:1 Cf. P. S. A., xxix. 5.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 285]

CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVII.)

 

[OF ASCLEPIUS TO THE KING]

(Text: R. 354; Pat. at end of last piece.)

*          *          *          *          *

*          *          *          *          *

*          *          *          *          *

*          *          *          *          *

*          *          *          *          *

*          *          *          *          *

Asclepius. If thou dost think [of it], O King, even of bodies there are things bodiless. [*1]

The King. What [are they]?--(asked the King.)

Asc. The bodies that appear in mirrors--do they not seem then to have no body?

The King. It is so, O Asclepius [*2]; thou thinkest like a God [*3]!--(the King replied.)

[p. 286]

Asc. There are things bodiless as well as these; for instance, forms [*1]--do not they seem to thee to have no body, but to appear in bodies not only of the things which are ensouled, but also of those which are not ensouled?

The King. Thou sayest well, Asclepius.

Asc. Thus, [then,] there are reflexions of things bodiless on bodies, and of bodies too upon things bodiless--that is to say, [reflexions] of the Sensible on the Intelligible World, and of the [World] Intelligible on the Sensible.

Wherefore, pay worship to the images, O King, since they too have their forms as from the World Intelligible.

(Thereon His Majesty arose and said:)

The King. It is the hour, [*2] O Prophet, to see about the comfort of our guests. To-morrow, [then,] will we resume our sacred converse. [*3]

Footnotes

^285:1 Cf. Plat., Soph., 229 D, 240 A, 246 B.

^285:2 The corrector of B has changed the name Asclepius into Tat, as he has everywhere in C. H., ii. (iii.); R. 193, 1.

^285:3 theius.

^286:1 Or ideas.

^286:2 Cf. Plat., Soph., 241 B.

^286:3 theologeisomen.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

COMMENTARY

ON THE ADORATION OF IMAGES

The loss of the end of the previous sermon, and also the loss of almost the whole of (xvii.), is to be accounted for by the falling out of one or more quires from the original MS. of our Corpus, [*4] a phenomenon similar to that already remarked in the case of C. H., ii. (iii).

[p. 287]

And that this is the fact is brought out interestingly by the note of Reitzenstein (p. 193, 1)--namely, that one of the correctors of one of the copies (Paris MS.) of this faulty original has precisely in these two places changed the name Asclepius into Tat. He was puzzled, and thought that his "correction" would set matters right; as a matter of fact, however, it only adds to the confusion.

What the main subject of our treatise may have been we can hardly conjecture; part of it, however, must have been devoted to an explanation of the rationale of image-adoration,--"Wherefore pay worship to the images, O King,"--of which we hear so much in P. S. A.

These symbolic images of the Gods are said to have their "forms" (ideas) in sympathetic relation with the Intelligible World. These are mutual "reflections," the one of the other.

Now as the Ka of the God was thought to have immediate relation with the image-symbol of the God, and the Gods were of the Intelligible World,--the statues of the Gods were thought to be images of the Image in some special way; they were regarded as providing a straight path or line of connection between Earth and Heaven, just as a man who made himself like to the Man after the Likeness became in himself a Way Up.

Footnotes

^286:4 R. 198.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 288]

CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVIII.)

 

[THE ENCOMIUM OF KINGS]

(ABOUT THE SOUL'S BEING HINDERED BY THE PASSION OF THE BODY)

(Text: R. 355-360; Pat. at end.)

1. [NOW] in the case of those professing the harmonious art of muse-like melody--if, when the piece is played, the discord of the instruments doth hinder their intent, its rendering becomes ridiculous.

For when his instruments are quite too weak for what's required of them, the music-artist needs must be laughed at by the audience.

For He, with all good will, gives of His art unweariedly; they blame the [artist's] weakness.

He then who is the Natural Musician-God, not only in His making of the harmony of His [celestial] songs, but also in His sending forth the rhythm of the melody of His own song[s]

[p. 289]

right down unto the separate instruments, [*1] is, as God, never wearied.

For that with God there is no growing weary.

2. So, then, if ever a musician desires to enter into the highest contest of his art he can--when now the trumpeters have rendered the same phrase of the [composer's] skill, and afterwards the flautists played the sweet notes of the melody upon their instruments, [*2] and they complete the music of the piece with pipe and plectrum--[if any thing goes wrong,] one [*3] does not lay the blame upon the inspiration [*4] of the music-maker.

Nay, [by no means,]--to him one renders the respect that is his due; one blames the falseness of the instrument, in that it has become a hindrance to those who are most excellent--embarrassing the maker of the music in [the execution of] his melody, and robbing those who listen of the sweetness of the song.

3. In like way also, in our case, let no one of

[p. 290]

our audience for the weakness that inheres in body, blame impiously our Race. [*1]

Nay, let him know God is Unwearied Spirit [*2]--for ever in the self-same way possessed of His own science, unceasing in His joyous gifts, the self-same benefits bestowing everywhere.

4. And if the Pheidias--the Demiurge--is not responded to, by lack of matter to perfect His skilfulness, although for His own part the Artist has done all he can, let us not lay the blame on Him.

But let us, [rather,] blame the weakness of the string, [*3] in that, because it is too slack or is too tight, it mars the rhythm of the harmony.

5. So when it is that the mischance occurs by reason of the instrument, no one doth blame the Artist.

Nay, [more;] the worse the instrument doth chance to be, the more the Artist gains in reputation by the frequency with which his hand doth strike the proper note, [*4] and more the love the listeners pour upon that Music-

[p. 291]

maker, without [*1] the slightest thought of blaming him.

So will we too, most noble [Sirs], set our own lyre in tune again, within, with the Musician!

6. Nay, I have seen one of the artist-folk [*2]--although he had no power of playing on the lyre--when once he had been trained for the right noble theme, make frequent use of his own self as instrument, and tune the service of his string by means of mysteries, so that the listeners were amazed at how he turned necessitude into magnificence. [*3]

Of course you know the story of the harper who won the favour of the God who is the president of music-work.

[One day,] when he was playing for a prize, and when the breaking of a string became a hindrance to him in the contest, the favour of the Better One supplied him with another string, and placed within his grasp the boon of fame.

A grasshopper was made to settle on his lyre, through the foreknowledge of the Better One,

[p. 292]

and [so] fill in the melody in substitution of the [broken] string. [*1]

And so by mending of his string the harper's grief was stayed, and fame of victory was won.

7. And this I feel is my own case, most noble [Sirs]!

For but just now I seemed to make confession of my want of strength, and play the weakling for a little while; but now, by virtue of the strength of [that] Superior One, as though my song about the King had been perfected [by Him, I seem] to wake my muse.

For, you must know, the end of [this] our duty will be the glorious fame of Kings, and the good-will of our discourse (logos) [will occupy itself] about the triumphs which they win.

Come then, let us make haste! For that the singer willeth it, and hath attuned his lyre [*2] for this; nay more, more sweetly will he play, more fitly will he sing, as he has for his song the greater subjects of his theme.

8. Since, then, he [*3] has the [stringing] of his lyre tuned specially to Kings, and has the key

[p. 293]

of laudatory songs, and as his goal the Royal praises, let him first raise himself unto the highest King--the God of wholes.

Beginning, [then,] his song from the above, he, [thus,] in second place, descends to those after His likeness who hold the sceptre's power [*1]; since Kings themselves, indeed, prefer the [topics] of the song should step by step descend from the above, and where they have their [gifts of] victory presided o'er for them, thence should their hopes be led in orderly succession.

9. Let, then, the singer start with God, the greatest King of wholes, who is for ever free from death, both everlasting and possessed of [all] the might of everlastingness, the Glorious Victor, the very first, from whom all victories descend to those who in succession do succeed to victory. [*2]

10. Our sermon (logos) then, doth hasten to descend to [Kingly] praises and to the Presidents of common weal and peace, the Kings--whose lordship in most ancient times was placed upon the highest pinnacle by God Supreme; for whom the prizes have already been prepared even before their prowess in the war; of whom the trophies have been raised even before the shock of conflict.

For whom it is appointed not only to be Kings but also to be best.

[p. 294]

At whom, before they even stir, the foreign land [*1] doth quake.

*          *          *          *          *

(ABOUT THE BLESSING OF THE BETTER [ONE] AND PRAISING OF THE KING)

11. But now our theme (logos) doth hasten on to blend its end with its beginnings--with blessing of the Better [One] [*2]; and then to make a final end of its discourse (logos) on those divinest Kings who give us the [great] prize of peace.

For just as we began [by treating] of the Better [One] and of the Power Above, so let us make the end bend round again unto the same--the Better [One].

Just as the Sun, the nurse of all the things that grow, on his first rising, gathers unto himself the first-fruits of their yield with his most mighty hands, using his rays as though it were for plucking off their fruits--yea, [for] his rays are [truly] hands for him who plucketh first the most ambrosial [essences] of plants--so, too, should we, beginning from the Better [One], and [thus] recipient of His wisdom's stream, and turning it upon the garden of our souls above

[p. 295]

the heavens, [*1]--we should [direct and] train these [streams] of blessing back again unto their source, [blessing] whose entire power of germination [in us] He hath Himself poured into us.

12. 'Tis fit ten thousand tongues and voices should be used to send His blessings back again unto the all-pure God, who is the Father of our souls; and though we cannot utter what is fit--for we are [far] unequal to the task--[yet will we say what best we can].

For Babes just born have not the strength to sing their Father's glory as it should be sung; but they give proper thanks for them, according to their strength, and meet with pardon for their feebleness. [*2]

Nay, it is rather that God's glory doth consist in this [one] very thing--that He is greater than His children; and that the prelude and the source, the middle and the end, of blessings, is to confess the Father to be infinitely puissant and never knowing what a limit means.

13. So is it, too, in the King's case.

For that we men, as though we were the children of the King, feel it our natural duty to give praise to him. Still must we ask for pardon [for our insufficiency], e'en though 'tis granted by our Sire before we [even] ask.

[p. 296]

And as it cannot be the Sire will turn from Babes new-born because they are so weak, but rather will rejoice when they begin to recognise [his love] [*1]--so also will the Gnosis of the all [rejoice], which doth distribute life to all, and power of giving blessing back to God, which He hath given [us].

14. For God, being Good, and having in Himself eternally the limit of His own eternal fitness, and being deathless, and containing in Himself that lot of that inheritance that cannot come unto an end, and [thus] for ever ever-flowing from out that energy of His, He doth send tidings to this world down here [to urge us] to the rendering of praise that brings us home again. [*2]

With Him, [*3] therefore, is there no difference with one another; there is no partiality [*4] with Him.

But they are one in Thought. One is the Prescience [*5] of all. They have one Mind--their Father.

One is the Sense that's active through them--

[p. 297]

their passion for each other. [*1] 'Tis Love [*2] Himself who worketh the one harmony of all.

15. Thus, therefore, let us sing the praise of God.

Nay, rather, let us [first] descend to those who have received their sceptres from Him.

For that we ought to make beginning with our Kings, and so by practising ourselves on them, accustom us to songs of praise, and train ourselves in pious service to the Better [One].

[We ought] to make the very first beginnings of our exercise of praise begin from him, [*3] and through him exercise the practice [of our praise], that so there may be in us both the exercising of our piety towards God, and of our praise to Kings.

16. For that we ought to make return to them, in that they have extended the prosperity of such great peace to us.

It is the virtue of the King, nay, 'tis his name alone, that doth establish peace.

He has his name of King because he levelleth the summits of dissension with his smooth tread, [*4] and is the lord of reason (logos) that [makes] for peace.

And in as much, in sooth, as he hath made

[p. 298]

himself the natural protector of the kingdom which is not his native land, [*1] his very name [is made] the sign of peace.

For that, indeed, you know, the appellation of the King has frequently at once restrained the foe.

Nay, more, the very statues of the King are peaceful harbours for those most tempest-tossed.

The likeness of the King alone has to appear to win the victory, and to assure to all the citizens freedom from hurt and fear.

*          *          *          *          *

Footnotes

^289:1 axri tun kata meros organun,--that is, to "parts" as opposed to "wholes"; "wholes" signifying generally noumenal or celestial essences, "parts" meaning the separate existences of the phenomenal or sensible world.

^289:2 arti de kai ayletun tois melikois to teis meluidias ligyron ergasamenun.--I do not know what this means exactly. Menard translates: quand les joueurs de flute ont exprime les finesses de la melodie; Patrizzi gives: melicis organis melodiae dulcedinem.

^289:3 Or perhaps "he," meaning the judge of the contest.

^289:4 tui pneumati.

^290:1 The Race of the Prophets, or Gnostics--the Race of the Logos.

^290:2 Referring to the "inspiration" or "breath" above,--us akamaton men esti pneuma o theos. Compare John iv. 24: pneuma o theos--God is Spirit.

^290:3 The metaphor has become somewhat mixed by the introduction of Pheidias, who was a "musician" in marble and ivory and gold, and not on strings and pipes.

^290:4 teis krouseus pollakis pros ton tonon empesouses.

^291:1 Reading exontes for esxon.

^291:2 Meaning presumably prophets.

^291:3 It is difficult to follow the exact meaning of some of the writer's rhetorical sentences, even if our text is sound; here, however, the text, even after passing through Reitzenstein's hands, is still very halting, and so I venture on this translation with all hesitation.

^292:1 The song of the cicala was so pleasant to the ear of the Ancients, that we frequently find it used in poetry as a simile for sweet sounds. Plato calls the grasshoppers the "prophets of the Muses."

^292:2 For the idea of the prophet being the lyre of God, cf. Montanus (ap. Epiphan., Haer., xlviii. 4). See also the references to Philo given by R. 204, n. 1.

^292:3 Sc. the singer.

^293:1 Cf. K. K., 39 ff.

^293:2 But see Plasberg's reading. R. 370.

^294:1 to barbaron.

^294:2 tou kreittonos,--that is God, or the inner God, as in the last section.

^295:1 eis ta emetera tun psyxun yperoyrania fyta.

^295:2 Lit. "in this."

^296:1 Lit. "at their recognition,"--epi teis epignw'seus--a play on epignosis and gnosis, and a parallel between the wisdom of God and the royal knowledge of the King.

^296:2 eis tonde ton kosmon parexun ten apaggelian eis diasustiken eyfemian,--where it may be possible to connect apaggelia with the familiar eyaggelion.

^296:3 ekeise.

^296:4 to alloprosallon.

^296:5 prognusis.

^297:1 to eis alle'loys filtron.

^297:2 o erus,--the Higher Love.

^297:3 Sc. the King.

^297:4 The word-play between basileus and basei leiai is unreproducible in English.

^298:1 teis basileias teis barbarikeis.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

COMMENTARY

THE APOLOGY OF A POeMANDRIST

This, the last piece in our Corpus, differs so greatly both in style and form of contents from the rest of our sermons, that we are plainly dealing with a different order of endeavour.

The style is for the most part so very artificial and forced, that we are conscious of labour and effort, and sometimes of such obscurity as to make a clear rendering almost impossible. The contents are of the nature of an elaborate set Eulogy of Kings.

Whether or not this concluding piece ever bore a proper title it is impossible to say, for the existing headings are plainly added by a later redactor, [*2]--as we

[p. 299]

have already seen in a number of other instances. I have therefore ventured to superscribe as the main title "The Encomium of Kings," [*1] and have placed the contents-headings in parentheses.

Reitzenstein, in his analysis of the Corpus, concludes (p. 207) that this Eulogy was appended to the collection of treatises by the original redactor, or collector.

He was an Egyptian Rhetor, who was a follower of the Trismegistic tradition, and his object in making the collection was mainly to show the Rulers of the Empire that not only was there nothing in the Hermes religion that could excite their suspicion, but that, on the contrary, it was in its most fundamental teachings admirably calculated to inculcate Loyalty to the Rulers of the Empire's destinies.

It is, indeed, to this "Apology," so to speak, that we owe the good fortune of the preservation of our Corpus.

SPECULATIONS AS TO DATE

Who the "most noble [Sirs]" of  section section 5 and 7, to whom the Eulogy is immediately addressed, may be, is difficult to determine, for though the subject is the "Encomium of Kings" in general, some actual King was evidently in the mind of the writer when he penned  section 16. Perhaps the "most noble" may have been the high officials of Egypt.

The lost conclusion of our Encomium, for our actual text is evidently incomplete, may have given clearer indications of the Emperor for whose ultimate perusal the Eulogy was intended. As it is, the indications are of the vaguest.

Reitzenstein, however, is of opinion (pp. 207, 208) that the indications in  section 16 best suit the reign of

[p. 300]

[paragraph continues] Diocletian (imp. 285-305 A.D.); but he is aware that, as far as these are concerned, an earlier date is not excluded (p. 208). It is only when he has treated, in his Addenda (pp. 371-374), the Encomium as an example of later Greek "art-prose," or rhythmic prose, the scheme of the accentuation of which has been of late years carefully studied, especially by Meyer and Wilamowitz, that he comes definitely to the conclusion that the external form of our Rhetor's effort fits precisely the time of Diocletian's Triumph, 302 A.D. I cannot, however, say that I am convinced by his arguments.

The strained and elaborate introduction ( section section 1-5) needs no further comment; no doubt it is very "fine writing," but it is difficult to pin some of it down to any precise meaning in translation.

THE STORY OF THE PYTHIC GRASSHOPPER

6. With  section 6, however, our interest is awakened, for it reminds us of the famous Introduction to the Protrepticus, or Exhortation to the Greeks, of Clement of Alexandria, when he says:

"I could tell thee also of another--brother to these [*1]--story and singer, of Eunomus the Locrian and the Pythic grasshopper.

"At Pytho there was gathered together a solemn assembly of Greeks to celebrate the Death of the Serpent, with Eunomus to sing the funeral song of the beast.

"Whether his song was a hymn or a dirge I cannot say; anyhow, there was a contest, and Eunomus had to harp it in the heat of the day, when the grasshoppers, warmed by the sun, were singing underneath the leaves along the hills.

[p. 301]

"They were singing not to the Serpent, the dead thing, but to God the All-wise, a song of unrestrained mode far better than the modes of Eunomus.

"A cord breaks for the Locrian; the grasshopper flies on to the yoke; it chirped on the harp as on a branch; and the minstrel, modulating to the song of the grasshopper, filled up the missing string.

"It was not that the grasshopper was attracted by the song of Eunomus, as the story would have it, setting up a brazen statue at Pytho of Eunomus, harp and all, and his helper in the contest; it flew on naturally and sung naturally. The Greeks, however, thought it played the music." [*1]

This passage shows that the story referred to by our author was well known, so well known indeed that Clement takes it as a text for a naturalistic explanation of Hellenic miracle. No literary dependence, however, of one or the other can be entertained, for the similarity of the "ten neyran aneple'rusen aytui" of our text and the "o uidos ten leipoysan aneple'ruse xorden" of Clement is far too slight a link to bear the weight of any argument of this nature. [*2]

11. There is evidently a lacuna after  section 10, and, judging by the opening words of  section 11, it must be of some length, for the Praise of Kings so far is of a very brief description.

It is also of interest to notice how much easier the style of our author is when he treats of the Praises of God; his words seem to come far more easily, as though he had a subject to deal with with which he was more familiar, as, indeed, he ought to have been if he had studied the treatises he has collected together.

[p. 302]

THE TRUE KING

13. The idea that all his subjects are the children of the King is Egyptian; or, rather, it is the tradition of all nations who believed in Divine Kings. The true King was he who, so to speak, contained all his subjects within himself; they were all "members," or, as we should say, cells, of his true Body. The nation was the King; the victory of the nation was ascribed to the virtue of the King. [*1]

THE FELLOW-RULERS OF THE HEIGHT

14. The last three sentences of  section 14 Reitzenstein (p. 208) would take as referring to the Kings under the suzerainty of the Emperor, who were bound to him by a common bond of love, in order that he may the more insist on the Diocletian date. [*2] I would, however, refer the idea to the ideal of harmony and unity of the Beings of the Intelligible World, as described, for instance, by Plotinus, when he writes:

"They see themselves in others. For all things are transparent, and there is nothing dark or resisting, and everyone is manifest to everyone internally, and all things are made manifest; for light is manifest to light. For everyone has all things in himself, and again sees in another all things, so that all things are everywhere, and all in all, and each in all, and infinite the glory. For each of them is great, since the small also is great. And the sun there is all the stars, and, again, each and all are the sun. In each, one thing is pre-eminent above the rest, but it also shows forth all." [*3]

[p. 303]

Compare this also with the intuition of the seer in The Untitled Apocalypse of the Codex Brucianus:

"Their Crowns send forth Rays; the Brilliancy of their Bodies is as the life of the Space into which they are come; the Word (Logos) that comes out of their mouth is Eternal Life, and the Light that comes forth from their Eyes is Rest for them; the Movement of their Hands is their Flight to the Space out of which they are come, and their Gazing on their own Faces is Knowledge of themselves; their Giving to themselves is a repeated Return, and the Stretching out of their Hands establishes them; the Hearing of their Ears is the Perception in their Heart; and the Union of their Limbs is the Ingathering of Israel; their Holding to one another is their Fortification in the Logos." [*1]

This is the Egyptian counterpart of the Plotinian Ecstasis; and Plotinus was by birth an Egyptian.

Footnotes

^298:2 In fact, are due to the first hand in B C D M. See R. 355, 1; 358, 12.

^299:1 See  section 15--e pros tous basileas eyfemia--and compare note to Clem. Alex., iii., in "Fragments from the Fathers."

^300:1 Amphion, Arion and Orpheus.

^301:1 Clem. Al., Prot., i. 1; P. 2 (ed. Dindorf, i. 2).

^301:2 Cf. R. 205, 206.

^302:1 This belief, indeed, is the power of the Japanese in our own day.

^302:2 He thus, apparently, would take the ekeise as referring to these subject kings and rulers.

^302:3 En., V. viii. 4.

^303:1 F. F. F., 557.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 304]

[p. 305]

II

The Perfect Sermon

[p. 306]

[p. 307]

THE PERFECT SERMON

OR THE ASCLEPIUS

(Text: The Greek original is lost, and only a Latin version remains to us. I use the text of Hildebrand (G. F.), L. Apuleii Opera Omnia ex Fide Optimorum Codicum (Leipzig, 1842), Pars II., pp. 279-334; but have very occasionally preferred the text in Patrizzi's Nova de Universis Philosophia (Venice, 1593), or of the Bipontine edition of Appuleius, Lucii Apuleji Madaurensis Platonici Philosophi Opera (Biponti, 1788), pp. 285-325.)

I

1. [*1] [I. M. [*2]] [Trismegistus.] God, O Asclepius, hath brought thee unto us that thou mayest hear a Godly sermon, [*3] a sermon such as well may seem of all the previous ones we've [either] uttered, or with which we've been inspired by the Divine, more Godly than the piety of [ordinary] faith.

[p. 308]

If thou with eye of intellect [*1] shalt see this Word [*2] thou shalt in thy whole mind be filled quite full of all things good.

If that, indeed, the "many" be the "good," and not the "one," in which are "all." Indeed the difference between the two is found in their agreement,--"All" is of "One" [*3] or "One" is "All." So closely bound is each to other, that neither can be parted from its mate.

But this with diligent attention shalt thou learn from out the sermon that shall follow [this].

But do thou, O Asclepius, go forth a moment and call in the one who is to hear. [*4]

(And when he had come in, Asclepius proposed that Ammon too should be allowed to come. Thereon Thrice-greatest said:)

[Tris.] There is no cause why Ammon should be kept away from us. For we remember how we have ourselves set down in writing many things to his address, [*5] as though unto a son most dear and most beloved, of physics many things, of ethics [too] as many as could be.

It is, however, with thy name I will inscribe this treatise.

[p. 309]

But call, I prithee, no one else but Ammon, lest a most pious sermon on a so great theme be spoilt by the admission of the multitude.

For 'tis the mark of an unpious mind to publish to the knowledge of the crowd a tractate brimming o'er with the full Greatness of Divinity.

(When Ammon too had come within the holy place, and when the sacred group of four was now complete with piety and with God's goodly presence--to them, sunk in fit silence reverently, their souls and minds pendent on Hermes' lips, thus Love [*1] Divine began to speak.)

II

1. [Tris.] The soul of every man, O [my] Asclepius, is deathless; yet not all in like fashion, but some in one way or [one] time, some in another.

Asc. Is not, then, O Thrice-greatest one, each soul of one [and the same] quality?

Tris. How quickly hast thou fallen, O Asclepius, from reason's true sobriety!

Did not I say that "All" is "One," and "One" is "All," [*2] in as much as all things have

[p. 310]

been in the Creator before they were created. Nor is He called unfitly "All," in that His members are the "All."

Therefore, in all this argument, see that thou keep in mind Him who is "One"-"All," or who Himself is maker of the "All."

2. All things descend from Heaven to Earth, to Water and to Air.

'Tis Fire alone, in that it is borne upwards, giveth life; that which [is carried] downwards [is] subservient to Fire.

Further, whatever doth descend from the above, begetteth; what floweth upwards, nourisheth.

'Tis Earth alone, in that it resteth on itself, that is Receiver of all things, and [also] the Restorer of all genera that it receives.

This Whole, [*1] therefore, as thou rememberest, [*2] in that it is of all,--in other words, all things, embraced by nature under "Soul" and "World," [*3] are in [perpetual] flux, so varied by the multiform equality of all their forms, that countless kinds of well-distinguished qualities may be discerned, yet with this bond of union, that all should seem as One, and from "One" "All." [*4]

[p. 311]

III

1. That, then, from which the whole Cosmos is formed, consisteth of Four Elements--Fire, Water, Earth, and Air; Cosmos [itself is] one, [its] Soul [is] one, and God is one.

Now lend to me the whole of thee, [*1]--all that thou can'st in mind, all that thou skill'st in penetration.

For that the Reason [*2] of Divinity may not be known except by an intention of the senses like to it. [*3]

'Tis [*4] likest to the torrent's flood, down-dashing headlong from above with all-devouring tide; so that it comes about, that by the swiftness of its speed it is too quick for our attention, not only for the hearers, but also for the very teachers. [*5]

Footnotes

^307:1 I have added numbers to the paragraphs for greater convenience of reference.

^307:2 Menard has divided the treatise into fifteen parts, which I have thus distinguished; the numbering of the chapters are those usually found.

^307:3 Or, a sermon about the Gods.

^308:1 Intelligens.

^308:2 Reason or sermon or logos; cf. iii. and below: "For that the Reason," etc.

^308:3 But ii. 1, referring again to this idea, has the reading: "'All' is 'One.'" Cf. C. H., xvi. 3; and also xx. 2 below.

^308:4 This, as we shall see later on, is Tat. See xxxii. below.

^308:5 Lit. to his name.

^309:1 Cupido; without doubt Eros in the lost original; cf. xxi. 1 below; and Frag. xviii.

^309:2 This, as we have already noted, is a variant of the reading in i., where we find "omnia unius esse" ("all" is of "one") and not "omnia unum esse" ("all" is "one").

^310:1 Sc. the Cosmos.

^310:2 Presumably from some previous sermon.

^310:3 That is, Cosmos.

^310:4 The Latin of this paragraph is very obscure.

^311:1 Cf. C. H., xi. (xii.) 15: "Give thou thyself to Me, My Hermes, for a little while."

^311:2 Ratio--that is, Logos.

^311:3 Lit. divine--that is, by a concentration like to the singleness of the Godhead.

^311:4 That is, "This Reason is."

^311:5 "Quo efficitur ut intentionem nostram . . . celeri velocitate praetereat." Compare with this the description of the instruction of the Therapeuts in Philo's famous tractate, De Vita Contemplativa, 901 P., 483 M.--Conybeare's text, p. 117 (Oxford; 1895): "For when in giving an interpretation, one continues to speak rapidly without pausing for breath, the mind of the hearers is left behind, unable to keep up the pace"--o tun akroumenun nous synomartein adyntun ysterizei.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

2. [II. M.] Heaven, then, God Sensible, is the

[p. 312]

director of all bodies; bodies' increasings and decreasings are ruled by Sun and Moon.

But He who is the Ruler of the Heaven, and of its Soul as well, and of all things within the Cosmos,--He is God, who is the Maker of all things.

For from all those that have been said above, [*1] o'er which the same God rules, there floweth forth a flood of all things streaming through the Cosmos and the Soul, of every class and kind, throughout the Nature of [all] things.

The Cosmos hath, moreover, been prepared by God as the receptacle of forms of every kind. [*2]

Forth-thinking Nature by these kinds of things, He hath extended Cosmos unto Heaven by means of the Four Elements,--all to give pleasure to the eye of God.

IV

1. And all dependent from Above [*3] are subdivided into species in the fashion [*4] which I am to tell.

[p. 313]

The genera of all things company with their own species; so that the genus is a class in its entirety, the species is part of a genus.

The genus of the Gods will, therefore, make the species of the Gods out of itself.

In like way, too, the genus of the daimons, and of men, likewise of birds, and of all [animals] the Cosmos doth contain within itself, brings into being species like itself.

There is besides a genus other than the animal,--a genus, or indeed a soul, in that it's not without sensation,--in consequence of which it both finds happiness in suitable conditions, and pines and spoils in adverse ones;--I mean [the class] of all things on the earth which owe their life to the sound state of roots and shoots, of which the various kinds are scattered through the length and breadth of Earth.

2. The Heaven itself is full of God. The genera we have just mentioned, therefore, occupy up to the spaces of all things whose species are immortal.

For that a species is part of a genus,--as man, for instance, of mankind,--and that a part must follow its own class's quality.

From which it comes to pass that though all genera are deathless, all species are not so.

The genus of Divinity is in itself and in its species [*1] [also] deathless.

[p. 314]

As for the genera of other things,--as to their genus, they [too] are everlasting; [for] though [the genus] perish in its species, yet it persists through its fecundity in being born. And for this cause its species are beneath the sway of death; so that man mortal is, mankind immortal.

V

1. And yet the species of all genera are interblended with all genera; some [*1] which have previously been made, some which are made from these.

The latter, then, which are being made,--either by Gods, or daimons, or by men,--are species all most closely like to their own several genera.

For that it is impossible that bodies should be formed without the will of God; or species be configured without the help of daimons; or animals be taught and trained without the help of men. [*2]

2. Whoever of the daimons, then, transcending their own genus, are, by chance, united with a species, [*3] by reason of the neighbourhood of any species of the Godlike class,--these are considered like to Gods. [*4]

[p. 315]

Whereas those species of the daimons which continue in the quality of their own class,--these love men's rational nature [and occupy themselves with men], and are called daimons proper.

Likewise is it the case with men, or more so even. Diverse and multiform, the species of mankind. And coming in itself from the association spoken of above, it of necessity doth bring about a multitude of combinations of all other species and almost of all things.

3. Wherefore doth man draw nigh unto the Gods, if he have joined himself unto the Gods with Godlike piety by reason of his mind, whereby he is joined to the Gods; and [nigh] unto the daimons, in that he is joined unto them [as well].

Whereas those men who are contented with the mediocrity of their own class, and the remaining species of mankind, will be like those unto the species of whose class they've joined themselves. [*1]

Footnotes

^312:1 This seems to refer to the Elements.

^312:2 Omniformium specierum.

^312:3 Omnia autem desuper pendentia. Compare with this the famous Psalm of Valentius, "All things depending from Spirit I see"--panta kremamena pneumati blepu--Hippolytus, Philos., vi. 37. For revised text see Hilgenfeld's (A.) Ketzergeschichte, p. 304 (Leipzig, 1884), and for a translation, my Fragments of a Faith Forgotten, p. 307 (London; 1900). See also end of xix. 4 below, and C. H., xvi. 17.

^312:4 Genere.

^313:1 That is, the Gods.

^314:1 Sc. species.

^314:2 Cf. C. H., xvi. 18, for the hierarchy of Gods and daimones; and for the "intercourse of souls," C. H., x. (xi.) 22.

^314:3 That is, one of the immortal species, or a God.

^314:4 That is, they become Gods.

^315:1 A suggestion of man's attraction to the various species of the animal nature.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

VI

1. [III. M.] It is for reasons such as these, Asclepius, man is a mighty wonder,--an animal meet for our worship and for our respect.

[p. 316]

For he doth pass into God's Nature, [*1] as though himself were God. This genus [also] knows the genus of the daimons, as though man knew he had a [common] origin with them. He thinketh little of the part of human nature in him, from confidence in the divineness of [his] other part.

How much more happy is the blend of human nature [than of all the rest]! Joined to the Gods by his cognate divinity, a man looks down upon the part of him by means of which he's common with the Earth.

The rest of things to which he knows he's kin, by [reason of] the heavenly order [in him], he binds unto himself with bonds of love; and thus he turns his gaze to Heaven.

2. So, then, [man] hath his place in the more blessed station of the Midst; so that he loves [all] those below himself, and in his turn is loved by those above.

He tills the Earth. He mingles with the Elements by reason of the swiftness of his mind. He plunges into the Sea's depths by means of its [*2] profundity. He puts his values on all things.

Heaven seems not too high for him; for it is

[p. 317]

measured by the wisdom of his mind as though it were quite near.

No darkness of the Air obstructs the penetration of his mind. No density of Earth impedes his work. No depth of Water blunts his sight. [*1]

[Though still] the same [yet] is he all, and everywhere is he the same.

3. Of all these genera, those [species] which are animal have [many] roots, which stretch from the above below, [*2] whereas those which are stationary [*3]--these from [one] living root send forth a wood of branching greenery up from below into the upper parts.

Moreover, some of them are nourished with a two-fold form of food, while others with a single form.

Twain are the forms of food--for soul and body, of which [all] animals consist. Their soul is nourished by the ever-restless motion of the World [*4]; their bodies have their growth from

[p. 318]

foods [drawn] from the water and the earth of the inferior world. [*1]

Spirit, [*2] with which they [*3] all are filled, being interblended with the rest, [*4] doth make them live; sense being added, and also reason in the case of man--which hath been given to man alone as a fifth part out of the aether.

Of all the living things [*5] [God] doth adorn, extend, exalt, the sense of man alone unto the understanding of the Reason of Divinity. [*6]

But since I am impressed to speak concerning Sense, I will a little further on set forth for you the sermon on this [point]; for that it is most holy, and [most] mighty, not less than in the Reason of Divinity itself.

VII

1. But now I'll finish for you what I have begun. For I was speaking at the start of union with the Gods, by which men only [*7] consciously enjoy [*8] the Gods' regard,--I mean whatever men have won such rapture that they have obtained a share of that Divine Sense of intelligence which

[p. 319]

is the most [*1] Divine of Senses, found in God and in man's reason.

 Asc. Are not the senses of all men, Thrice-greatest one, the same?

 Tris. Nay, [my] Asclepius, all have not won true reason [*2]; but wildly rushing in pursuit of [reason's] counterfeit, [*3] they never see the thing itself, and are deceived. And this breeds evil in their minds, and [thus] transforms the best of animals into the nature of a beast and manners of the brutes.

2. But as to Sense and all things similar, I will set forth the whole discourse when [I explain] concerning Spirit.

For man is the sole animal that is twofold. One part of him is simple: the [man] "essential," [*4] as say the Greeks, but which we call the "form of the Divine Similitude."

He also is fourfold: that which the Greeks call "hylic," [*5] [but] which we call "cosmic"; of which is made the corporal part, in which is vestured what we just have said is the divine in man, [*6]--in which the godhead of the Mind alone,

[p. 320]

together with its kin, that is the Pure Mind's senses, findeth home and rest, its self with its own self, as though shut in the body's walls.

Footnotes

^316:1 This contradicts somewhat the more careful wording of C. H., x. (xi.) 1, where the term Energy is preferred.

^316:2 Sc. the mind's.

^317:1 Cf. C. H., xi. (xii.) 19.

^317:2 Compare with this the symbolism of the "fire-tree" and the "rootage" of the aeons, in the "Simonian" system of the Gnosis, taken by Hippolytus from the document entitled The Great Announcement (Hipp., Philos., vi. 9 and 18). Also the common figure of the Ashvattha tree of Indo-Aryan mythology; for instance, in the Kathopanishad, II. vi. 1: "The old, old tree that sees no morrow's dawn, [stands] roots up, branches down" (see Mead and Chattopadhyaya's Upanishads, i. 74--London; 1896). Ashvatthah = a-shvah-tha, that is, "which stands not till to-morrow." The idea is that the world-tree (samsaravriksha) never lasts till to-morrow, for all things are perpetually changing.

^317:3 Lit. non-animal.

^317:4 Or Cosmos.

^318:1 Cf. xi. 2.

^318:2 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 13, and Commentary thereon.

^318:3 That is, animal bodies.

^318:4 Presumably the rest of the Earth elements.

^318:5 Lit. animals.

^318:6 Lit. the Divine Reason, Ratio, or Logos.

^318:7 Sc. of the animals. Cf. xviii. 1 below.

^318:8 Per-fruuntur. Cf., for the idea, xxii. 1 below.

^319:1 Lit. more.

^319:2 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 23, 24; iv. (v.) 3; and ix. 3 below.

^319:3 Lit. image.

^319:4 The Greek term oysiw'des is here retained. Cf. viii. 2 below.

^319:5 The Greek ylikon being retained in the Latin.

^319:6 Cf. C. H., xvi. 15.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

3. [IV. M.] Asc. What, then, Thrice-greatest one, has caused it that man should be planted in the world, and should not pass his life in highest happiness in that part [of the universe] where there is God?

 [Tris.] Rightly thou questionest, O [my] Asclepius! And we pray God that He bestow on us the power of setting forth this reason; since everything depends upon His Will, and specially those things that are set forth about the Highest Whole, the Reason that's the object of our present argument. Hear, then, Asclepius!

VIII

1. The Lord and Maker of all things, whom we call rightly God, when from Himself He made the second [God], the Visible and Sensible, [*1]--I call him Sensible not that He hath sensation in Himself (for as to this, whether or no He have himself sensation, we will some other time declare), but that He is the object of the senses of those who see;--when, then, He made Him first, but second to Himself, and that He seemed

[p. 321]

to Him [most] fair, as one filled to the full with goodness of all things, He fell in love with Him as being part of His Divinity. [*1]

2. Accordingly, in that He was so mighty and so fair, He willed that some one else should have the power to contemplate the One He had made from Himself. And thereon He made man,--the imitator of His Reason and His Love. [*2]

The Will of God is in itself complete accomplishment; inasmuch as together with His having willed, in one and the same time He hath brought it to full accomplishment.

And so, when He perceived that the "essential" [*3] [man] could not be lover [*4] of all things, unless He clothed him in a cosmic carapace, He shut him in within a house of body,--and ordered it that all [men] should be so,--from either nature making him a single blend and fair-proportioned mixture.

[p. 322]

3. Therefore hath He made man of soul and body,--that is, of an eternal and a mortal nature; so that an animal thus blended can content his dual origin,--admire and worship things in heaven, and cultivate and govern things on earth. [*1]

By mortal things [*2] I do not mean the water or the earth [themselves], for these are two of the [immortal] elements that nature hath made subject unto men,--but [either] things that are by men, or [that are] in or from them [*3]; such as the cultivation of the earth itself, pastures, [and] buildings, harbours, voyagings, intercommunications, mutual services, which are the firmest bonds of men between themselves and that part of the Cosmos which consists [indeed] of water and of earth, [but is] the Cosmos' terrene part,--which is preserved by knowledge and the use of arts and sciences; without which [things] God willeth not Cosmos should be complete. [*4]

[p. 323]

In that necessity doth follow what seems good to God; performance waits upon His will.

Nor is it credible that that which once hath pleased Him, will become unpleasing unto God; since He hath known both what will be, and what will please Him, long before.

Footnotes

^320:1 Sc. the Logos as Cosmos. Cf. xxxi. 1 below.

^321:1 The Greek original of this passage is quoted by Lactantius, Div. Institt., iv. 6, and runs as follows in Fritzsche's (O. F.) text (Leipzig, 1842):

"The Lord and Maker of all things (whom 'tis our custom to call God) when He had made the second God, the Visible and Sensible,--I call him Sensible not that He hath sensation in Himself (for as to this, whether or no He have himself sensation, we will some other time enquire), but that He is object of senses and of mind;--when, then, He'd made Him first, and One and Only, He seemed to Him most fair, and filled quite full of all things good. At Him He marvelled, and loved Him altogether as His Son." With the last words, cf. Plat., Tim., 37 D.

^321:2 Diligentiae.

^321:3 The Greek oysiw'des being again, as in vii. 2, retained in the Latin. Cf. C. H., i. 15 and ix. (x.) 5.

^321:4 Diligentem.

^322:1 This sentence is also quoted by Lactantius (Div. Institt., vii. 13) in the original Greek, which reads:

"From the two natures, the deathless and the mortal, He made one nature,--that of man, one and the selfsame thing. And having made the selfsame [man] both somehow deathless and also somehow mortal, He brought him [forth], and set him up betwixt the godlike and immortal nature and the mortal; that seeing all he might wonder at all."

^322:2 That is, the "things on earth."

^322:3 That is, the two elements mentioned.

^322:4 The above paragraph seems to have been very imperfectly translated into Latin.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

IX

1. [V. M.] But, O Asclepius, I see that thou with swift desire of mind art in a hurry to be told how man can have a love and worship of the Heaven, or of the things that are therein. Hear, then, Asclepius!

The love of God and Heaven, together with all them that are therein, is one perpetual act of worship. [*1]

No other thing ensouled, of Gods or animals, can do this thing, save man alone. [*2] 'Tis in the admiration, adoration, [and] the praise of men, and [in their] acts of worship, that Heaven and Heaven's hosts find their delight.

2. Nor is it without cause the Muses' choir hath been sent down by Highest Deity unto the host of men; in order that, forsooth, the terrene world should not seem too uncultured, had it lacked the charm of measures, but rather that with songs and praise of men accompanied with

[p. 324]

music, [*1] He might be lauded,--He who alone is all, or is the Sire of all; and so not even on the earths, [*2] should there have been an absence of the sweetness of the harmony of heavenly praise.

3. Some, then, though they be very few, endowed with the Pure Mind, [*3] have been entrusted with the sacred charge of contemplating Heaven.

Whereas those men who, from the two-fold blending of their nature, have not as yet withdrawn their inner reason from their body's mass, [*4] these are appointed for the study of the elements, and [all] that is below them.

4. Thus man's an animal; yet not indeed less potent in that he's partly mortal, but rather doth he seem to be all the more fit and efficacious for reaching Certain Reason, since he has had mortality bestowed on him as well.

For it is plain he could not have sustained the strain of both, unless he had been formed out of both natures, [*5] so that he could possess the powers of cultivating Earthly things and loving Heaven.

[p. 325]

X

1. The Reason of a thesis such as this, O [my] Asclepius, I would that thou should'st grasp, not only with the keen attention of thy soul, but also with its living power [*1] [as well].

For 'tis a Reason that most men cannot believe; the Perfect and the True are to be grasped by the more holy minds. [*2] Hence, then, will I begin.

Footnotes

^323:1 Una est obsequiorum frequentatio. Cf. Ex. i. 3.

^323:2 Cf. C. H., xvi. 11: "The duty of mankind is to give worship."

^324:1 Musicatis; or perhaps "Muse-inspired"; a word which, like so many others, occurs only in the Latin of this treatise.

^324:2 In terris, pl.

^324:3 Cf. vii. 1 and 2 above.

^324:4 The reading is "interiorem intelligentiam mole corporis resederunt," of which I can make nothing; resederunt is evidently an error.

^324:5 There is here a "double" in the text, which the editor has not removed.

^325:1 Vivacitate. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 17; and xix. 1 below.

^325:2 Cf. C. H., ix. (x.) 10.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

2. [VI. M.] The Lord of the Eternity [*3] is the first God; the second's Cosmos; man is the third. [*4]

God is the Maker of the Cosmos and of all the things therein; at the same time He ruleth [*5] all, with man himself, [who is] the ruler of the compound thing [*6]; the whole of which man taking on himself, doth make of it the proper care of his own love, in order that the two of them, himself and Cosmos, may be an ornament each unto other; so that from this divine compost of man, "World" seems most fitly called "Cosmos" [*7] in Greek.

3. He knows himself; he knows the World as

[p. 326]

well. [*1] So that he recollects, indeed, what is convenient to his own parts. He calls to mind what he must use, that they may be of service to himself; giving the greatest praise and thanks to God, His Image [*2] reverencing,--not ignorant that he is, too, God's image the second [one]; for that there are two images of God--Cosmos and man. [*3]

4. So that it comes to pass that, since man's is a single structure,--in that part [of him] which doth consist of Soul, and Sense, of Spirit, and of Reason, he's divine; so that he seems to have the power to mount from as it were the higher elements into the Heaven.

But in his cosmic part, which is composed of fire, and water, and of air, he stayeth mortal on the Earth,--lest he should leave all things committed to his care forsaken and bereft.

Thus human kind is made in one part deathless, and in the other part subject to death while in a body.

XI

1. Now of that dual nature,--that is to say of man,--there is a chief capacity. [And that is] piety, which goodness follows after.

[p. 327]

[And] this [capacity] then, and then only, seems to be perfected, if it be fortified with virtue of despising all desires for alien things.

For alien from every part of kinship with the Gods [*1] are all things on the Earth, whatever are possessed from bodily desires,--to which we rightly give the name "possessions," in that they are not born with us, but later on begin to be possessed by us; wherefore we call them by the name possessions. [*2]

2. All such things, then, are alien from man,--even his body. So that we can despise not only what we long for, but also that from which the vice of longing comes to us.

For just as far as the increase of reason leads our [*3] soul, so far one should be man; in order that by contemplating the divine, one should look down upon, and disregard the mortal part, which hath been joined to him, through the necessity of helping on the lower [*4] world.

3. For that, in order that a man should be complete in either part, observe that he hath

[p. 328]

been composed of elements of either part in sets of four;--with hands, and feet, both of them pairs, and with the other [*1] members of his body, by means of which he may do service to the lower (that is to say the terrene) world.

And to these parts [are added other] four;--of sense, and soul, of memory, and foresight, by means of which he may become acquainted with the rest of things divine, and judge of them.

Hence it is brought about that man investigates the differences and qualities, effects and quantities of things, with critical research; yet, as he is held back with the too heavy weight of body's imperfection, he cannot properly descry the causes of the nature of [all] things which [really] are the true ones.

4. Man, then, being thus created and composed, and to such ministry and service set by Highest God,--man, by his keeping suitably the world in proper order, [and] by his piously adoring God, in both becomingly and suitably obeying God's Good Will,--[man being] such as this, with what reward think'st thou he should be recompensed?

If that, indeed,--since Cosmos is God's work,--he who preserves and adds on to its beauty

[p. 329]

by his love, joins his own work unto God's Will; when he with toil and care doth fashion out the species [*1] (which He hath made [already] with His Divine Intent), with help of his own body;--with what reward think'st thou he should be recompensed, unless it be with that with which our forebears [*2] have been blest?

5. That this may be the pleasure of God's Love, such is our prayer for you, devoted ones.

In other words, may He, when ye have served your time, and have put off the world's restraint, and freed yourselves from deathly bonds, restore you pure and holy to the nature of your higher self, [*3] that is of the Divine!

XII

1. Asc. Rightly and truly, O Thrice-greatest one, thou speakest. This is the prize for those who piously subordinate their lives to God and live to help the world.

 Tris. [To those], however, who have lived in other fashion impiously,--[to them] both is return to Heaven denied, and there's appointed them migration into other bodies [*4] unworthy of a holy soul and base; so that, as this discourse

[p. 330]

of ours will show, [*1] souls in their life on earth run risk of losing hope of future immortality.

2. But [all of this] doth seem to some beyond belief; a tale to others; to others [yet again], perchance, a subject for their mirth. [*2]

For in this life in body, it is a pleasant thing--the pleasure that one gets from one's possessions. [*3] 'Tis for this cause that spite, in envy of its [hope of] immortality, doth clap the soul in prison, [*4] as they say, and keep it down, so that it stays in that part of itself in which it's mortal, nor suffers it to know the part of its divinity.

3. For I will tell thee, as though it were prophetic-ly, [*5] that no one after us [*6] shall have the Single Love, the Love of wisdom-loving, [*7] which consists in Gnosis of Divinity alone,--[the practice of] perpetual contemplation and of holy piety. For that the many do confound philosophy with multifarious reasoning. [*8]

[p. 331]

Asc. Why is it, then, the many make philosophy so hard to grasp; or wherefore is it they confound this thing with multifarious reasoning?

XIII

1. Tris. 'Tis in this way, Asclepius;--by mixing it, by means of subtle expositions, with divers sciences not easy to be grasped,--such as arithmetic, and music, and geometry.

But Pure Philosophy, which doth depend on godly piety alone, should only so far occupy itself with other arts, that it may [know how to] appreciate the working out in numbers of the fore-appointed stations of the stars when they return, and of the course of their procession.

Let her, moreover, know how to appreciate the Earth's dimensions, its qualities and quantities, the Water's depths, the strength of Fire, and the effects and nature of all these. [And so] let her give worship and give praise unto the Art and Mind of God.

2. As for [true] Music,--to know this is naught else than to have knowledge of the order of all things, and whatsoe'er God's Reason hath decreed.

For that the order of each several thing when set together in one [key] for all, by means of skilful reason, will make, as 'twere,

[p. 332]

the sweetest and the truest harmony with God's [own] Song. [*1]

XIV

1. Asc. Who, therefore, will the men be after us [*2]?

 Tris. They will be led astray by sophists' cleverness, and turned from True Philosophy,--the Pure and Holy [Love].

For that to worship God with single mind and soul, and reverence the things that He hath made, and to give thanks unto His Will, which is the only thing quite full of Good,--this is Philosophy unsullied by the soul's rough curiousness.

But of this subject let what has been said so far suffice.

Footnotes

^325:3 That is, the Aeon. Cf. xxx. 1 below.

^325:4 Cf. Ex. i. 8.

^325:5 Reading gubernat for gubernando.

^325:6 That is, the compost, or "cosmic" part of himself, apparently, of v. 2.

^325:7 The original Greek kosmos is here retained in the Latin; it means "order, adornment, ornament," as well as "world."

^326:1 The idea is that man is a microcosm; he is, as to his bodies, "cosmic" ("mundanus homo"), for his vehicles are made of the elements; he is thus in these an image or seed (microcosm) of the universe, the macrocosm.

^326:2 Sc. Cosmos. Cf. xxxi. 1 below.

^326:3 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 25, last sentence.

^327:1 Ab omnibus divinae cognationis partibus.

^327:2 This seems somewhat tautological. The first clause runs: "quaecunque terrena corporali cupiditate possidentur; quae merito possessionem nomine nuncupantur." This Latin word-play seems almost to suggest that we are dealing with an embellishment of the translator; it may, however, have stood in the original. Cf. xii. 2 below.

^327:3 Lit. my.

^327:4 Reading inferioris for interioris, as immediately below in  section 3. Cf. vi. 3, last sentence.

^328:1 This seems very loose indeed; the text or the Latin translation is probably at fault, unless the "other members" are supposed to be grouped in sets of double pairs.

^329:1 Singular--that is, the species in the Cosmos, according to the type in the Divine Mind.

^329:2 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 5; Lact., D. I., i. 11; and xxxvii. 3 below.

^329:3 Lit. part.

^329:4 In corporalia . . . migratio.

^330:1 The Latin here does not construe.

^330:2 Cf. C. H., i. 29; also xxv. 3 below.

^330:3 Cf. xi. 1 above.

^330:4 Obtorto . . . collo.

^330:5 Ego enim tibi quasi praedivinans dixero. Notice the dixero,--the "prophetic" tense, if we may be permitted to coin a term to characterize this use, which reminds us so strongly of the "Sibylline" literature and the allied prophetic centonism of the time.

^330:6 Cf. Ex. ix. 8, and xiv. 1 below.

^330:7 Lit. philosophy. Cf. in Philo, D. V. C., the "Heavenly Love" with which the Therapeuts were "afire with God." Cf. xiv. 1, and Ex. i. 3.

^330:8 Cf. C. H., xvi. 2.

^332:1 Cf. "Heaven's harmonious song" in xxviii. 11 below.

^332:2 Cf. xii. 3 above, and notes.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

2. [VII. M.] And now let us begin to treat of Spirit and such things.

There was first God and Matter, [*3] which we in Greek [*4] believe [to be] the Cosmos; and Spirit was with Cosmos, or Spirit was in Cosmos, but not in like way as in God [*5]; nor were there

[p. 333]

things [as yet] from which the Cosmos [comes to birth] in God.

They were not; just for the very reason that they were not, but were as yet in that [condition] whence they have had their birth. [*1]

For those things only are not called ingenerable which have not yet been born, but [also] those which lack the fertilizing power of generating, so that from them naught can be born.

And so whatever things there are that have in them the power of generating,--these two are generable, [that is to say,] from which birth can take place, though they be born from their own selves [alone]. For there's no question that from those born from themselves birth can with ease take place, since from them all are born.

3. God, then, the everlasting, God the eternal, nor can be born, nor could He have been born. That [*2] is, That was, That shall be ever. This, therefore, is God's Nature--all from itself [alone].

But Matter [*3] (or the Nature of the Cosmos) [*4] and Spirit, although they do not seem to be things born from any source, [*5] yet in themselves

[p. 334]

possess the power of generation and of generating,--the nature of fecundity.

For the beginning [*1] [truly] is in [just that] quality of nature which possesses in itself the power and matter both of conception and of birth. [*2] This, [*3] then, without conception of another, is generable of its own self.

XV

1. But, on the other hand, [whereas] those things which only have the power of bringing forth by blending with another nature, are thus to be distinguished, this Space of Cosmos, [*4] with those that are in it, seems not to have been born, in that [the Cosmos] has in it undoubtedly all Nature's potency. [*5]

By "Space" I mean that in which are all things. For all these things could not have been had Space not been, to hold them all. Since for all things that there have been, must be provided Space.

For neither could the qualities nor quantities, nor the positions, nor [yet] the operations, be distinguished of those things which are no where.

[p. 335]

2. So then the Cosmos, also, though not born, still has in it the births [*1] of all; in that, indeed, it doth afford for all of them most fecund wombs for their conception.

It, therefore, is the sum of [all that] quality of Matter which hath creative potency, although it hath not been [itself] created.

And, seeing that [this] quality of Matter is in its nature [simple] productiveness; so the same [source] produces bad as well [as good].

XVI

1. I have not, therefore, O Asclepius and Ammon, said what many say, that God could not excise and banish evil from the Scheme [*2] of Things;--to whom no answer need at all be given. Yet for your sakes I will continue what I have begun, and give a reason.

They say that God ought to have freed the World from bad in every way; for so much is it [*3] in the World, that it doth seem to be as though it were one of its limbs.

This was foreseen by Highest God and [due] provision made, as much as ever could have been in reason made, then when He thought it proper to endow the minds of men with sense, [*4] and science and intelligence.

[p. 336]

2. For it is by these things alone whereby we stand above the rest of animals, that we are able to avoid the snares and crimes of ill.

For he who shall on sight have turned from them, before he hath become immeshed in them,--he is a man protected by divine intelligence and [godly] prudence.

For that the ground-work of [true] science doth consist of the top-stones of virtue.

3. It is by Spirit that all things are governed in the Cosmos, and made quick,--Spirit made subject to the Will of Highest God, as though it were an engine or machine.

So far, then, [only] let Him be by us conceived,--as Him who is conceivable by mind alone, who is called Highest God, the Ruler and Director of God Sensible, [*1]--of Him who in Himself includes all Space, all Substance, and all Matter, of things producing and begetting, and all whatever is, however great it be.

XVII

1. It is by Spirit that all species in the Cosmos are [or] moved or ruled,--each one according to its proper nature given it by God.

Matter, [*2] or Cosmos, on the other hand, is that which holds all things,--the field of motion, [*3] and

[p. 337]

the that which crowds together [*1] all; of which God is the Ruler, distributing unto all cosmic things all that is requisite to each.

It is with Spirit that He fills all things, according to the quality of each one's nature.

2. [Now,] seeing that the hollow roundness [*2] of the Cosmos is borne round into the fashion of a sphere; by reason of its [very] quality or form, it never can be altogether visible unto itself.

So that, however high a place in it thou shouldest choose for looking down below, thou could'st not see from it what is at bottom, because in many places it confronts [the senses], and so is thought to have the quality [of being visible throughout]. [*3]

For it is solely owing to the forms of species, with images of which it seems insculpted, that it is thought [to be] as though 'twere visible [throughout]; but as a fact 'tis ever to itself invisible.

3. Wherefore, its bottom, or its [lowest] part, if [such a] place there be within a sphere, is called in Greek a-eides [*4]; since that eidein [*5] in

[p. 338]

[paragraph continues] Greek means "seeing,"--which "being-seen" the sphere's beginning [*1] lacks.

Hence, too, the species have the name eideai, [*2] since they're of form we cannot see.

Therefore, in that they are deprived of "being-seen," in Greek they are called Hades; in that they are at bottom [*3] of the sphere, they're called in Latin Inferi.

These, then, are principal and prior, [*4] and, as it were, the sources and the heads of all the things which are in them, [*5] through them, or from them.

XVIII

1. Asc. All things, then, in themselves (as thou, Thrice-greatest one, dost say) are cosmic [principles] (as I should say) of all the species which are in them, [or] as it were, the sum and substance of each one of them. [*6]

 Tris. So Cosmos, then, doth nourish bodies; the Spirit, souls; the [Higher] Sense (with which Celestial Gift mankind alone is blest) [*7] doth feed the mind.

[p. 339]

And [these are] not all men, but [they are] few, whose minds are of such quality that they can be receptive of so great a blessing.

2. For as the World's illumined by the Sun, so is the mind of man illumined by that Light; nay, in [still] fuller measure.

For whatsoever thing the Sun doth shine upon, it is anon, by interjection of the Earth or Moon, or by the intervention of the night, robbed of its light.

But once the [Higher] Sense hath been commingled with the soul of man, there is at-onement from the happy union of the blending of their natures; so that minds of this kind are never more held fast in errors of the darkness.

Wherefore, with reason have they said the [Higher] Senses are the souls of Gods; to which I add: not of all Gods, but of the great ones [only]; nay, even of the principles of these.

Footnotes

^332:3 The Greek yle is here retained by the translator.

^332:4 Graece.

^332:5 The Latin translation is confused. The original seems to have stated that Spirit and Cosmos (or Matter) were as yet one, or Spirit-Matter.

^333:1 That is, presumably, they were in potentiality.

^333:2 Hoc.

^333:3 Again yle in the Latin text.

^333:4 Cf. "Matter or Cosmos" of xvii. 2.

^333:5 Principio, "beginning" the same word as that used in the Vulgate translation of the Proem of the fourth Gospel.

^334:1 Initium.

^334:2 This seems to make it clear that the idea "Cosmos" is regarded under the dual concept of Spirit-Matter.

^334:3 Sc. Primal Nature, or Spirit-Matter.

^334:4 Cf. xxx. 1, and xxxiv. 1 below.

^334:5 The Latin construction is very faulty.

^335:1 Naturas.

^335:2 Lit. nature.

^335:3 Sc. evil or bad.

^335:4 Presumably meaning the higher sense.

^336:1 That is, Cosmos.

^336:2 Again yle.

^336:3 Agitatio.

^337:1 Frequentatio.

^337:2 Cava rotunditas--that is, presumably, concavity.

^337:3 Propter quod multis locis instat, qualitatemque habere creditur. The Latin translation is evidently faulty. Menard omits the sentence entirely, as he so often does when there is difficulty.

^337:4 A-eide's--that is, "Invisible"; that is, Hades (Aides or Ades).

^337:5 eidein--? idein.

^338:1 Primum spherae; the top or bottom presumably, or periphery, of the world-sphere.

^338:2 eideai--? ideai--that is, forms, species,--but also used of the highest species, viewed as "ideas."

^338:3 Sc. at the centre.

^338:4 Or principles and priorities (antiquiora).

^338:5 Sc. the "ideas."

^338:6 The Latin text is hopeless.

^338:7 Cf. vii. i.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

XIX

1. [VIII. M.] Asc. What dost thou call, Thrice-greatest one, the heads of things, or sources of beginnings?

 Tris. Great are the mysteries which I reveal to thee, divine the secrets I disclose; and so I

[p. 340]

make beginning of this thing [*1] with prayers for Heaven's favour.

The hierarchies [*2] of Gods are numerous; and of them all one class is called the Noumenal, [*3] the other [class] the Sensible. [*4]

The former are called Noumenal, not for the reason that they're thought to lie beyond our [*5] senses; for these are just the Gods we sense more truly than the ones we call the visible,--just as our argument will prove, and thou, if thou attend, wilt be made fit to see.

For that a lofty reasoning, and much more one that is too godlike for the mental grasp of [average] men, if that the speaker's words are not received [*6] with more attentive service of the ears,--will fly and flow beyond them; or rather will flow back [again], and mingle with the streams of its own source. [*7]

2. There are, then, [certain] Gods who are the principals [*8] of all the species.

[p. 341]

Next there come those whose essence [*1] is their principal. These are the Sensible, each similar to its own dual source, [*2] who by their sensibility [*3] affect all things,--the one part through the other part [in each] making to shine the proper work of every single one.

Of Heaven,--or of whatsoe'er it be that is embraced within the term,--the essence-chief [*4] is Zeus; for 'tis through Heaven that Zeus gives life to all.

Sun's essence-chief is light; for the good gift of light is poured on us through the Sun's disk.

3. The "Thirty-six," who have the name of Horoscopes, [*5] are in the [self] same space as the Fixed Stars; of these the essence-chief, or prince, is he whom they call Pantomorph, or Omniform, [*6] who fashioneth the various forms for various species.

The "Seven" who are called spheres, have essence-chiefs, that is, [have each] their proper rulers, whom they call [all together] Fortune and Heimarmene, [*7] whereby all things are changed

[p. 342]

by nature's law; perpetual stability being varied with incessant motion. [*1]

The Air, moreover, is the engine, or machine, through which all things are made--(there is, however, an essence-chief of this, a second [Air])--mortal from mortal things and things like these. [*2]

4. These hierarchies of Gods, then, being thus and [in this way] related, [*3] from bottom unto top, are [also] thus connected with each other, and tend towards themselves; so mortal things are bound to mortal, things sensible to sensible.

The whole of [this grand scale of] Rulership, however, seems to Him [who is] the Highest Lord, either to be not many things, or rather [to be] one.

For that from One all things depending, [*4] and flowing down from it,--when they are seen as

[p. 343]

separate, they're thought to be as many as they possibly can be; but in their union it is one [thing], or rather two, from which all things are made;--that is, from Matter, by means of which the other things are made, and by the Will of Him, by nod of whom they're brought to pass.

XX

1. Asc. Is this again the reason, O Thrice-greatest one?

 Tris. It is, Asclepius. For God's the Father or the Lord of all, or whatsoever else may be the name by which He's named more holily and piously by men,--which should be set apart among ourselves for sake of our intelligence.

For if we contemplate this so transcendent God, we shall not make Him definite by any of these names.

For if a [spoken] word [*1] is this:--a sound proceeding from the air, when struck by breath, [*2] denoting the whole will, perchance, of man, or else the [higher] sense, which by good chance a man perceives by means of mind, when out of [all his] senses, [*3]--a name the stuff of which,

[p. 344]

made of a syllable or two, has so been limited and pondered, that it might serve in man as necessary link between the voice and ear;--thus [must] the Name of God in full consist of Sense, and Spirit, and of Air, and of all things in them, or through, or with them. [*1]

2. Indeed, I have no hope that the Creator of the whole of Greatness, the Father and the Lord of all the things [that are], could ever have one name, even although it should be made up of a multitude--He who cannot be named, or rather He who can be called by every name.

For He, indeed, is One and All [*2]; so that it needs must be that all things should be called by the same name as His, or He Himself called by the names of all.

3. He, then, alone, yet all-complete in the fertility of either sex, ever with child of His own Will, doth ever bring to birth whatever He hath willed to procreate.

His Will is the All-goodness, which also is the Goodness of all things, born from the nature of His own Divinity,--in order that all things may be, just as they all have been, and that henceforth the nature of being born from their own selves may be sufficient to all things that will be born.

[p. 345]

Let this, then, be the reason given thee, Asclepius, wherefore and how all things are made of either sex.

XXI

1. Asc. Thou speak'st of God, then, O Thrice-greatest one?

 Tris. Not only God, Asclepius, but all things living and inanimate. For 'tis impossible that any of the things that are should be unfruitful.

For if fecundity should be removed from all the things that are, it could not be that they should be for ever what they are. I mean that Nature, [*1] Sense, and Cosmos, have in themselves the power of being born, [*2] and of preserving all things that are born.

For either sex is full of procreation; and of each one there is a union, or,--what's more true,--a unity incomprehensible; which you may rightly call Eros [*3] or Aphrodite, or both [names].

2. This, then, is truer than all truth, and plainer than what the mind ['s eye] perceives;--that from that Universal God of Universal Nature all other things for evermore have found, and had bestowed on them, the mystery of

[p. 346]

bringing forth; in which there is innate the sweetest Charity, [and] Joy, [and] Merriment, Longing, and Love Divine.

We might have had to tell the mighty power and the compulsion of this mystery, if it had not been able to be known by every one from personal experience, by observation of himself.

3. For if thou should'st regard that supreme [point] of time when . . . [*1] the one nature doth pour forth the young into the other one, and when the other greedily absorbs [it] from the first, and hides it [ever] deeper [in itself]; then, at that time, out of their common congress, females attain the nature of the males, males weary grow with female listlessness.

And so the consummation of this mystery, so sweet and requisite, is wrought in secret; lest, owing to the vulgar jests of ignorance, the deity of either sex should be compelled to blush at natural congress,--and much more still, if it should be subjected to the sight of impious folk.

XXII

1. The pious are not numerous, however; nay, they are very few, so that they may be counted even in the world. [*2]

Whence it doth come about, that in the many

[p. 347]

bad inheres, through defect of the Gnosis and Discernment of the things that are.

For that it is from the intelligence of Godlike Reason, [*1] by which all things are ordered, there come to birth contempt and remedy of vice throughout the world.

But when unknowingness and ignorance persist, all vicious things wax strong, and plague the soul with wounds incurable; so that, infected with them, and invitiated, it swells up, as though it were with poisons,--except for those who know the Discipline of souls and highest Cure of intellect.

2. So, then, although it may do good to few alone, 'tis proper to develope and explain this thesis:--wherefore Divinity hath deigned to share His science and intelligence with men alone. Give ear, accordingly!

 When God, [our] Sire and Lord, made man, after the Gods, out of an equal mixture of a less pure cosmic part and a divine,--it [naturally] came to pass the imperfections [*2] of the cosmic part remained commingled with [our] frames, and other ones [*3] [as well], by reason of the food and sustenance we have out of necessity in common with all lives [*4]; by reason of which

[p. 348]

things it needs must be that the desires, and passions, and other vices, of the mind should occupy the souls of human kind.

3. As for the Gods, in as much as they had been made of Nature's fairest [*1] part, and have no need of the supports of reason and of discipline, [*2]--although, indeed, their deathlessness, the very strength of being ever of one single age, stands in this case for prudence and for science, still, for the sake of reason's unity, instead of science and of intellect (so that the Gods should not be strange to these),--He, by His everlasting law, decreed for them an order, [*3] circumscribed by the necessity of law.

While as for man, He doth distinguish him from all the other animals by reason and by discipline alone; by means of which men can remove and separate their bodies' vices,--He helping them to hope and effort after deathlessness.

4. In fine, He hath made man both good and able to share in immortal life,--out of two natures, [one] mortal, [one] divine.

And just because he is thus fashioned by the Will of God, it is appointed that man should be superior both to the Gods, who have been made

[p. 349]

of an immortal nature only, and also to all mortal things.

It is because of this that man, being joined unto the Gods by kinsmanship, doth reverence them with piety and holy mind; while, on their side, the Gods with pious sympathy regard and guard all things of men.

XXIII

1. But this can only be averred of a few men endowed with pious minds. Still, of the rest, the vicious folk, we ought to say no word, for fear a very sacred sermon should be spoiled by thinking of them.

Footnotes

^340:1 Initium facio; or perhaps perform the sacred rite, or give initiation.

^340:2 Genera.

^340:3 Intelligibilis (= oi noetoi); lit. that which can be known by intellect (alone).

^340:4 Sensibilis (= oi aisthetoi); lit. that which can be known by the senses.

^340:5 That is, the "Sense" of those who have reached the "Trismegistic" grade, though of course beyond the range of the normal senses.

^340:6 The text is faulty.

^340:7 Cf. x. 1 above; and C. H., x. (xi.) 17.

^340:8 Principes.

^341:1 The Greek original oysia being retained.

^341:2 That is, presumably, essence and sensibility.

^341:3 That is, presumably, their power of affecting the senses.

^341:4 The Greek oysiarxes is retained in the Latin.

^341:5 Horoscopi (= uroskopoi); generally called Decans; cf. Ex. ix., where the Decans are explained.

^341:6 Pantomorfon vel omniformem; see xxxv. below; also C. H., xi. (xii.) 16, Comment.

^341:7 That is, Fate, eimarmene.

^342:1 Quoted in the original Greek by Ioan. Laurentius Lydus, De Mensibus, iv. 7; Wunsch (Leipzig, 1898), p. 70, 22; as follows: "And Hermes is witness in his [book], called 'The Perfect Sermon,' when saying: 'They that are called the Seven Spheres have a Source that is called Fortune or Fate, which changes all things and suffers them not to remain in the same [conditions].'" The quotation is continued without a break; the rest of it, however, corresponds to nothing in our context, but is somewhat similar to ch. xxxix. 1, 2.

^342:2 That is, the region of things subject to death. The text is faulty. Cf. with this "engine" the "cylinder" of the K. K. Fragments (10).

^342:3 Ab imo ad summum se admoventibus; for admoventibus compare "genus admotum superis," Silius Italicus, viii. 295.

^342:4 Cf. iv. 1 above, and the note.

^343:1 Vox (= name), presumably logos in the original; a play on "word" and "reason," but also referring to the mysterious "name" of a person.

^343:2 Spiritu, or spirit.

^343:3 Ex sensibus = presumably, in ecstasis.

^344:1 The text of this paragraph is very unsatisfactory.

^344:2 Cf. i. 1 above.

^345:1 Here, presumably, meaning hyle.

^345:2 Naturam again.

^345:3 Cf. 1, 2, above.

^346:1 Quo ex crebro attritu prurimus ut . . . . 

^346:2 Cf. Ex. i. 16.

^347:1 Cf. vii. 1 above.

^347:2 Vitia; lit. vices.

^347:3 Sc. imperfections.

^347:4 Lit. animals.

^348:1 Mundissima--that is, most cosmic, or "adorned."

^348:2 Or science.

^348:3 Ordinem--that is, Cosmos. Compare this also with the idea of the Gnostic Horos which "surrounds" the Pleroma.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[IX. M.] And [*1] since our sermon treats of the relationship and intercourse [*2] of men and Gods,--learn, Asclepius, the power and strength of man!

 [Our] Lord and Father, or what is Highest God,--as He's Creator of the Gods in Heaven, so man's the maker of the gods who, in the temples, suffer man's approach, and who not only have light poured on them, but who send forth [their] light [on all]; not only does a man go forward towards the God[s], but also he confirms the Gods [on earth]. [*3]

[p. 350]

Art thou surprised, Asclepius; nay is it not that even thou dost not believe?

 2. Asc. I am amazed, Thrice-greatest one; but willingly I give assent to [all] thy words. I judge that man most blest who hath attained so great felicity.

 Tris. And rightly so; [for] he deserves our wonder, in that he is the greatest of them all.

As for the genus of the Gods in Heaven,--'tis plain from the commixture [*1] of them all, that it has been made pregnant from the fairest part of nature, [*2] and that the only signs [by which they are discerned] are, as it were, before all else their heads. [*3]

3. Whereas the species of the gods which humankind constructs is fashioned out of either nature,--out of that nature which is more ancient and far more divine, and out of that which is in men; that is, out of the stuff of which they have been made and are configured, not only in their heads alone, but also in each limb and their whole frame.

And [*4] so mankind, in imaging Divinity, stays

[p. 351]

mindful of the nature and the source of its own self.

So that, just as [our] Sire and Lord did make the Gods aeonian, that they might be like Him; so hath mankind configured its own gods according to the likeness of the look of its own self. [*1]

XXIV

1. Asc. Thou dost not mean their statues, dost thou, O Thrice-greatest one?

 Tris. [I mean their] statues, O Asclepius,--dost thou not see how much thou even, doubtest?--statues, ensouled with sense, and filled with spirit, which work such mighty and such [strange] results,--statues which can foresee what is to come, and which perchance can prophesy, foretelling things by dreams and many other ways,--[statues] that take their strength away from men, or cure their sorrow, if they do so deserve.

Dost thou not know, Asclepius, that Egypt is the image of the Heaven [*2]; or, what is truer still, the transference, or the descent, of all that are in governance or exercise in Heaven? And if more truly [still] it must be said,--this land of ours is Shrine of all the World.

[p. 352]

2. Further, in that 'tis fitting that the prudent should know all before, it is not right ye should be ignorant of this.

The time will come when Egypt will appear to have in vain served the Divinity with pious mind and constant worship [*1]; and all its holy cult will fall to nothingness and be in vain.

For that Divinity is now about to hasten back from Earth to Heaven, and Egypt shall be left; and Earth, which was the seat of pious cults, shall be bereft and widowed of the presence of the Gods.

And foreigners shall fill this region and this land; and there shall be not only the neglect of pious cults, but--what is still more painful,--as though enacted by the laws, a penalty shall be decreed against the practice of [our] pious cults and worship of the Gods--[entire] proscription of them.

3. Then shall this holiest land, seat of [our] shrines and temples, be choked with tombs and corpses. [*2]

O Egypt, Egypt, of thy pious cults tales only will remain, as far beyond belief for thy own sons [as for the rest of men]; words only will be left cut on thy stones, thy pious deeds recounting!

[p. 353]

And Egypt will be made the home of Scyth [*1] or Indian, or some one like to them,--that is a foreign neighbour. [*2]

Ay, for the Godly company [*3] shall mount again to Heaven, and their forsaken worshippers shall all die out; and Egypt, thus bereft of God and man, shall be abandoned.

4. And now I speak to thee, O River, holiest [Stream]! I tell thee what will be. With bloody torrents shalt thou overflow thy banks. Not only shall thy streams divine be stained with blood; but they shall all flow over [with the same].

The tale of tombs shall far exceed the [number of the] quick; and the surviving remnant shall be Egyptians in their tongue alone, but in their actions foreigners.

XXV

1. Why dost thou weep, Asclepius? Nay, more than this, by far more wretched,--Egypt herself shall be impelled and stained with greater ills.

For she, the Holy [Land], and once deservedly

[p. 354]

the most beloved by God, by reason of her pious service of the Gods on earth,--she, the sole colony [*1] of holiness, and teacher of religion [on the earth], shall be the type of all that is most barbarous.

And then, out of our loathing for mankind, the World will seem no more deserving of our wonder and our praise.

All this good thing, [*2]--than which there has been fairer naught that can be seen, nor is there anything, nor will there [ever] be,--will be in jeopardy.

2. And it will prove a burden unto men; and on account of this they will despise and cease to love this Cosmos as a whole,--the changeless work of God; the glorious construction of the Good, comprised of multifold variety of forms; the engine of God's Will, supporting His own work ungrudgingly; the multitudinous whole massed in a unity of all, that should be reverenced, praised and loved,--by them at least who have the eyes to see.

[p. 355]

For Darkness will be set before the Light, and Death will be thought preferable to Life. No one will raise his eyes to Heaven; the pious man will be considered mad, the impious a sage; the frenzied held as strong, the worst as best.

3. For soul, and all concerning it,--whereby it doth presume that either it hath been born deathless, or that it will attain to deathlessness, according to the argument I have set forth for you,--[all this] will be considered not only food for sport, [*1] but even vanity.

Nay, [if ye will] believe me, the penalty of death shall be decreed to him who shall devote himself to the Religion of the Mind.

New statutes shall come into force, a novel law; naught [that is] sacred, nothing pious, naught that is worthy of the Heaven, or Gods in Heaven, shall [e'er] be heard, or [even] mentally believed.

4. The sorrowful departure of the Gods from men takes place; bad angels [*2] only stay, who mingled with humanity will lay their hands on them, and drive the wretched folk to every ill of recklessness,--to wars, and robberies, deceits,

[p. 356]

and all those things that are opposed to the soul's nature. [*1]

Then shall the Earth no longer hold together; the Sea no longer shall be sailed upon; nor shall the Heaven continue with the Courses of the Stars, nor the Star-course in Heaven.

The voice of every God [*2] shall cease in the [Great] Silence that no one can break; the fruits of Earth shall rot; nay, Earth no longer shall bring forth; and Air itself shall faint in that sad listlessness.

XXVI

1. This, when it comes, shall be the World's old age, impiety,--irregularity, and lack of rationality in all good things.

And when these things all come to pass, Asclepius,--then He, [our] Lord and Sire, God First in power, and Ruler of the One God [Visible], [*3] in check of crime, and calling error back from the corruption of all things unto good manners and to deeds spontaneous with His Will (that is to say God's Goodness),--ending all ill, by either washing it away with water-flood, or burning it away with fire, or by the means of pestilent diseases, spread

[p. 357]

throughout all hostile lands,--God will recall the Cosmos to its ancient form [*1]; so that the World itself shall seem meet to be worshipped and admired; and God, the Maker and Restorer of so vast a work, be sung by the humanity who shall be then, with ceaseless heraldings of praise and [hymns of] blessing.

2. For this [Re-] birth of Cosmos is the making new [*2] of all good things, and the most holy and most pious bringing-back again of Nature's self, by means of a set course of time,--of Nature, which was without beginning, and which is without an end. For that God's Will hath no beginning; and, in that 'tis the same and as it is, it is without an end.

 Asc. Because God's Nature's the Determination [*3] of the Will. Determination is the Highest Good; is it not so, Thrice-greatest one?

[p. 358]

3. Tris. Asclepius, Will is Determination's child; nay, willing in itself comes from the Will.

Not that He willeth aught desiring it; for that He is the Fullness of all things, and wills what things He has.

He thus wills all good things, and has all that He wills. Nay, rather, He doth think and will all good.

This, then, is God; the World of Good's His Image.

XXVII

1. Asc. [Is Cosmos] good, Thrice-greatest one?

 Tris. ['Tis] good, [*1] as I will teach thee, O Asclepius.

For just as God is the Apportioner and Steward of good things to all the species, or [more correctly] genera, which are in Cosmos,--that is to say, of Sense, [*2] and Soul, and Life,--so Cosmos is the giver and bestower of all things which seem unto [us] mortals good;--that is to say, the alternation of its parts, of seasonable fruits, birth, growth, maturity, and things like these.

And for this cause God doth transcend the height of highest Heaven, extending everywhere, and doth behold all things on every side.

[p. 359]

2. Beyond the Heaven starless Space doth stretch, stranger to every thing possessed of body.

The Dispensator who's between the Heaven and Earth, is Ruler of the Space which we call Zeus [Above].

The Earth and Sea is ruled by Zeus Below [*1]; he is the Nourisher of mortal lives, and of fruit-bearing [trees].

It is by reason of the powers of all of these [*2] that fruits, and trees, and earth, grow green.

The powers and energies of [all] the other [Gods] will be distributed through all the things that are.

3. Yea, they who rule the earth shall be distributed [through all the lands], and [finally] be gathered in a state, [*3]--at top of Egypt's upper part, [*4]--which shall be founded towards the setting sun, and to which all the mortal race shall speed.

 Asc. But now, just at this moment, where are they, Thrice-greatest one?

 Tris. They're gathered in a very large 

[p. 360]

community, [*1] upon the Libyan Hill. [*2] And now enough concerning this hath been declared.

Footnotes

^349:1 This sentence and the first half of the next, down to "suffer man's approach," is quoted word for word in Latin by Augustine, De Civitate Dei, xxiii.

^349:2 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 22.

^349:3 The Latin translation of this paragraph seems confused.

^350:1 This is, apparently, the "star stuff" of which their bodies are made.

^350:2 De mundissima parte naturae esse praegnatum--whatever that means; but cf. p. 348, n. 1.

^350:3 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 10, 11.

^350:4 This sentence, together with the first five sentences of the next chapter, down to the words "and constant worship," are quoted in Latin with two or three slight verbal variants by Augustine, De Civitate Dei, xxiii.

^351:1 Cf. xxxvii. 2 below.

^351:2 Cf. Comment, on K. K., 46-48.

^352:1 Augustine's quotation ends here.

^352:2 Sepulchrorum erit mortuorumque plenissima. This sentence is quoted verbatim by Augustine, De Civitate Dei, xxvi.

^353:1 Compare Colossians iii. 11: "Where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ is all, and in all."

^353:2 Vicina barbaria; lit. a neighbouring foreign country. Compare this with the previous note. It is strange the two, Scyth and barbarian, coming twice together.

^353:3 Divinitas.

^354:1 Deductio the technical term for leading out a colony from the metropolis or mother city. Compare Philo, De Vita Contemplativa, P. 892, M. 474 (Conybeare, p. 58): "In Egypt there are crowds of them [the Therapeuts] in every province, or nome as they call it, and especially at Alexandria. For they who are in every way the most highly advanced, lead out a colony (apoikian stellontai), as it were to the Therapeutic father-land"; and also the numerous parallel passages cited by Conybeare from Philo's other writings.

^354:2 Sc. the Cosmos.

^355:1 Cf. xii. 2 above.

^355:2 Nocentes angeli,--usually daimones in our tractates; still, as Lactantius (D. I., ii. 15) says that Hermes calls the daimones "evil angels" (aggeloys ponerous), he most probably took it from the Greek original of our sermon.

^356:1 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 21.

^356:2 Omnis vox divina; or, perhaps, the "whole Word of God."

^356:3 That is, Cosmos.

^357:1 The above passage is cited in the original Greek by Lactantius (D. I., vii. 8) as from the "Perfect Sermon" of Hermes. As we might expect from what had been already said on this subject, it differs from our Latin translation, and runs as follows:

"Now when these things shall be as I have said, Asclepius, then will [our] Lord and Sire, the God and Maker of the First and the One God, look down on what is done, and making firm His Will, that is the Good, against disorder,--recalling error, and cleaning out the bad, either by washing it away with water-flood, or burning it away with swiftest fire, or forcibly expelling it with war and famine,--will bring again His Cosmos to its former state, and so achieve its Restoration."

^357:2 Cf. C. H., iii. (iv.) 1.

^357:3 Consilium = boyle'.

^358:1 This seems a formal contradiction of C. H., x. (xi.) 10, but is not really so.

^358:2 Meaning higher sense, presumably; reading sensus for sensibus.

^359:1 Jupiter Plutonius. Menard suggests "Zeus souterrain (Sarapis?)"; the original was probably Zeus Aidoneus.

^359:2 It is not clear who "these" are; perhaps all that have so far been mentioned, but this does not seem satisfactory. Doubtless the Latin translation is, as usual, at fault.

^359:3 Or city.

^359:4 In summo Aegypti initio.

^360:1 Civitate.

^360:2 In monte Libyco; lit. on a (or the) Libycan, or Libyan or African Hill or Mount. Compare with this xxxvii. below.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

4. [X. M.] But now the question as to deathlessness or as to death must be discussed.

The expectation and the fear of death torture the multitude, who do not know True Reason.

Now death is brought about by dissolution of the body, wearied out with toil, and of the number, when complete, by which the body's members are arranged into a single engine for the purposes of life. The body dies, when it no longer can support the life-powers [*3] of a man.

This, then, is death,--the body's dissolution, and the disappearance of corporeal sense. [*4]

As to this death anxiety is needless. But there's another [death] which no man can

[p. 361]

escape, [*1] but which the ignorance and unbelief of man think little of.

 5. Asc. What is it, O Thrice-greatest one, that men know nothing of, or disbelieve that it can be?

 Tris. So, lend thy ear, Asclepius!

XXVIII

1. When, [then,] the soul's departure from the body shall take place,--then shall the judgment and the weighing of its merit pass into its highest daimon's power. [*2]

And when he sees it pious is and just,--he suffers it to rest in spots appropriate to it.

But if he find it soiled with stains of evil deeds, and fouled with vice,--he drives it from Above into the Depths, and hands it o'er to warring hurricanes and vortices of Air, of Fire, and Water. [*3]

[p. 362]

2. 'Twixt Heaven and Earth, upon the waves of Cosmos, is it dragged in contrary directions, for ever racked with ceaseless pains [*1]; so that in this its deathless nature doth afflict the soul, in that because of its unceasing sense, it hath the yoke of ceaseless torture set upon its neck.

Know, then, that we should dread, and be

[p. 363]

afraid, and [ever] be upon our guard, lest we should be entangled in these [toils].

For those who do not now believe, will after their misdeeds be driven to believe, by facts not words, by actual sufferings of punishment and not by threats.

 3. Asc. The faults of men are not, then, punished, O Thrice-greatest one, by law of man alone?

 Tris. In the first place, Asclepius, all things on Earth must die.

Further, those things which live by reason of a body, and which do cease from living by reason of the same,--all these, according to the merits of this life, or its demerits, find due [rewards or] punishments.

[And as to punishments] they're all the more severe, if in their life [their misdeeds] chance to have been hidden, till their death. [*1] For [then] they will be made full conscious of all things by the divinity, just as they are, according to the shades of punishment allotted to their crimes.

[p. 364]

XXIX

1. Asc. And these deserve [still] greater punishments, Thrice-greatest one?

 Tris. [Assuredly;] for those condemned by laws of man do lose their life by violence, so that [all] men may see they have not yielded up their soul to pay the debt of nature, but have received the penalty of their deserts.

Upon the other hand, the righteous man finds his defence in serving God and deepest piety. For God doth guard such men from every ill. [*1]

2. Yea, He who is the Sire of all, [our] Lord, and who alone is all, doth love to show Himself to all.

It is not by the place where he may be, nor by the quality which he may have, nor by the greatness which he may possess, but by the mind's intelligence alone, that He doth shed His light on man,--[on him] who shakes the clouds of Error from his soul, and sights the brilliancy of Truth, [*2] mingling himself with the All-sense of the Divine Intelligence; through love [*3] of which he wins his freedom from that part of him o'er which Death rules, and has the

[p. 365]

seed of the assurance of his future Deathlessness implanted in him.

3. This, then, is how the good will differ from the bad. Each several one will shine in piety, in sanctity, in prudence, in worship, and in service of [our] God, and see True Reason, as though [he looked at it] with [corporal] eyes; and each will by the confidence of his belief excel all other men, as by its light the Sun the other stars. [*1]

For that it is not so much by the greatness of his light as by his holiness and his divinity, the Sun himself lights up the other stars. [*2]

Yea, [my] Asclepius, thou should'st regard him as the second God, [*3] ruling all things, and giving light to all things living in the Cosmos, whether ensouled or unensouled.

For if the Cosmos is a living thing, and if it has been, and it is, and will be ever-living,--naught in the Cosmos is subject to death.

For of an ever-living thing, it is [the same] of every part which is; [that is,] that 'tis [as ever-living] as it is [itself]; and in the World itself [which is] for everyone, and at the self-same time an ever-living thing of life,--in it there is no place for death. [*4]

5. And so he [*5] should be the full store of

[p. 366]

life and deathlessness; if that it needs must be that he should live for ever.

And so the Sun, just as the Cosmos, lasts for aye. So is he, too, for ever ruler of [all] vital powers, or of [our] whole vitality; he is their ruler, or the one who gives them out.

God, then, is the eternal ruler of all living things, or vital functions, that are in the World. He is the everlasting giver-forth of Life itself. [*1]

Once for all [time] He hath bestowed Life on all vital powers; He further doth preserve them by a law that lasts for evermore, as I will [now] explain.

XXX

1. For in the very Life of the Eternity [*2] is Cosmos moved; and in the very Everlastingness [*3] of Life [itself] is Cosmic Space. [*4]

On which account it [*5] shall not stop at any time, nor shall it be destroyed; for that its very self is palisaded [*6] round about, and bound together as it were, by Living's Sempiternity.

[p. 367]

Cosmos is [thus] Life-giver unto all that are in it, and is the Space of all that are in governance beneath the Sun.

The motion of the Cosmos in itself consisteth of a two-fold energy. 'Tis vivified itself from the without by the Eternity, [*1] and vivifies all things that are within, making all different, by numbers and by times, fixed and appointed [for them].

2. Now Time's distinguished on the Earth by quality of air, by variation of its heat and cold; in Heaven by the returnings of the stars to the same spots, the revolution of their course in Time.

And while the Cosmos is the home [*2] of Time, [*3] it is kept green [itself] by reason of Time's course and motion.

Time, on the other hand, is kept by regulation. Order and Time effect renewal of all things which are in Cosmos by means of alternation.

Footnotes

^360:3 Vitalia.

^360:4 This passage is quoted in the original Greek by Stobaeus, Florilegium, cxx. 27 (G. iii. 464; M. iv. 105, 106; Pat. 45, under title "Death"), under the heading "Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Asclepius." It runs as follows:

"Now must we speak of death. For death affrights the many as the greatest of all ills, in ignorance of fact. Death is the dissolution of the toiling frame. For when the 'number' of the body's joints becomes complete,--the basis of the body's jointing being number,--that body dies; [that is,] when it no longer can support the man. And this is death,--the body's dissolution and the disappearance of corporeal sense."

The directness and the sturdy vigour of the Greek original has clearly lost much in the rhetorical paraphrasing of the Latin translator.

^361:1 Necessaria.

^361:2 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 21.

^361:3 The substance of these two sentences is contained in a "quotation" from the Greek by J. Laurentius Lydus, De Mensibus, iv. 149 (Wunsch, 167, 15): "According to the Egyptian Hermes who, in what is called 'The Perfect Sermon,' says as follows: 'But such souls as transgress the norm of piety, when they do leave their body, are handed over to the daimones and carried downwards through the air, cast forth as from a sling into the zones of fire and hail, which poets call Pyriphlegethon and Tartarus.'" That this is a "quotation," however, I doubt very much, for if we compare it with D. M., iv. 31 (W. 90, 24), which very faintly echoes the teaching of our chaps, iv., v., xxvii., we shall find that Tartarus and Pyriphlegethon are entirely due to Laurentius himself. The passage runs as follows:

"For the Egyptian Hermes, in his Sermon called Perfect, says that the Avenging of the daimones, being present in matter itself, chastise the human part [of us] according as it has deserved; while the Purifying ones confined to the air purify the souls after death that are trying to soar aloft, [conducting them] round the haily and fiery zones of the air, which the poets and Plato himself in the Phaedo call Tartarus and Pyriphlegethon; while the Saving ones again, stationed in the lunar space, save the souls." Cf. Ex. ix. 6.

^362:1 Menard here quotes a couple of lines from Empedocles (c. 494-434 B.C.), cited by Plutarch, but without giving any reference. They are from the famous passage beginning estin anagkes xreima k.t.l. (369-382), of which the following is Fairbanks' translation. See Fairbanks (A.), The First Philosophers of Greece (London, 1898), p. 205:

"There is an utterance of Necessity, an ancient decree of the Gods, eternal, sealed fast with broad oaths: Whenever any one defiles his body sinfully with bloody gore or perjures himself in regard to wrongdoing,--one of those spirits who are heir to long life (daimun oite makraiunes lelaxasi bioio),--thrice ten thousand seasons shall he wander apart from the blessed, being born meanwhile in all sorts of mortal forms (fyomenon pantoia dia xronoy eidea thnetun) changing one bitter path of life for another. For mighty Air pursues him Seaward, and Sea spews him forth on the threshold of Earth, and Earth casts him into the rays of the unwearied Sun, and Sun into the eddies of Air: one receives him from the other, and all hate him. One of these now am I too, a fugitive from the gods and a wanderer, at the mercy of raging Strife."

^363:1 Cf. the Vision of Thespesius (Aridaeus) in Plutarch, De Sera Numinis Vindicta: "Thus he had to see that the shades of notorious criminals who had been punished in earth-life were not so hardly dealt with . . . ; whereas those who had passed their lives in undetected vice, under cloak and show of virtue, were hemmed in by the retributory agents, and forced with labour and pain to turn their souls inside out."

^364:1 Compare the Fragment quoted in Greek by Lactantius, D. I., ii. 15, and by Cyril, C. J., iv. 130.

^364:2 Cf. xiii. (xiv.) 7-9, Comment.

^364:3 Cf. xii. 3 above.

^365:1 Astris.

^365:2 Stellas.

^365:3 Cf. C. H., xvi. 5. ff.

^365:4 The text of this paragraph is very corrupt.

^365:5 That is, the Sun.

^366:1 See Comment on C. H., xvi. 17.

^366:2 Aeternitatis, doubtless aiunos in the original Greek,--that is, the Aeon; cf. x. 2 above. For the general Aeon-doctrine, see chap, xi. in the Prolegomena, and xxxii. 1 below.

^366:3 Aeternitate; Aeon again.

^366:4 Lit. the Space of Cosmos; cf. xv. 1 above.

^366:5 Sc. Cosmos.

^366:6 Circumvallatus et quasi constrictus. Compare with this the idea of the Horos or Boundary in the aeonology of "Them of Valentinus," as set forth by Hippolytus (Philosophumena, vi. 31):

"Moreover that the formlessness of the Abortion should finally never again make itself visible to the perfect Aeons, the Father Himself also sent forth the additional emanation of a single Aeon, the Cross [or Stock, ton stayron], which being created great, as [the creature] of the great and perfect Father, and emanated to be the Guard and Wall of protection [lit. Paling or Stockade--xarakuma, the Roman vallum] of the Aeons, constitutes the Boundary (oros) of the Pleroma, holding the thirty Aeons together within itself. For these [thirty] are they which form the divine creation." See F. F. F., p. 342.

^367:1 That is, the Aeon.

^367:2 Receptaculum.

^367:3 Cf. C. H., xi. (xii.) 2.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

3. [XI. M.] All things, then, being thus,

[p. 368]

there's nothing stable, nothing fixed, nothing immoveable, of things that are being born, in Heaven or on the Earth.

Immoveable [*1] [is] God alone, and rightly [He] alone; for He Himself is in Himself, and by Himself, and round Himself, completely full and perfect.

He is His own immoveable stability. Nor by the pressure of some other one can He be moved, nor in the space [of anyone].

4. For in Him are all [spaces], and He Himself alone is in them all; unless someone should venture to assert that God's own motion's in Eternity [*2]; nay, rather, it is just Immoveable Eternity itself, back into which the motion of all times is funded, and out of which the motion of all times takes its beginning.

XXXI

1. God, then, hath [ever] been unchanging, [*3] and ever, in like fashion, with Himself hath the Eternity consisted,--having within itself Cosmos ingenerate, which we correctly call [God] Sensible. [*4]

Of that [transcendent] Deity this Image [*5] hath been made,--Cosmos the imitator of Eternity.

[p. 369]

Time, further, hath the strength and nature of its own stability, in spite of its being in perpetual motion,--from its necessity of [ever] from itself reverting to itself.

2. And so, although Eternity is stable, motionless, and fixed, still, seeing that the movement of [this] Time (which is subject to motion) is ever being recalled into Eternity,--and for that reason Time's mobility is circular,--it comes to pass that the Eternity itself, although in its own self, is motionless, [yet] on account of Time, in which it is--(and it is in it),--it seems to be in movement as all motion.

So that it comes to pass, that both Eternity's stability becometh moved, and Time's mobility becometh stable.

So may we ever hold that God Himself is moved into Himself by [ever-] same transcendency of motion. [*1]

For that stability is in His vastness motion motionless; for by His vastness is [His] law exempt from change. [*2]

3. That, then, which so transcends, which is not subject unto sense, [which is] beyond all bounds, [and which] cannot be grasped,--That

[p. 370]

transcends all appraisement; That cannot be supported, nor borne up, nor can it be tracked out. [*1]

For where, and when, and whence, and how, and what, He is,--is known to none. [*2] For He's borne up by [His] supreme stability, and His stability is in Himself [alone],--whether [this mystery] be God, or the Eternity, or both, or one in other, or both in either.

4. And for this cause, just as Eternity transcends the bounds of Time; so Time [itself], in that it cannot have bounds set to it by number, or by change, or by the period of the revolution of some second [kind of Time],--is of the nature of Eternity.

Both, then, seem boundless, both eternal. And so stability, though naturally fixed, yet seeing that it can sustain the things that are in motion,--because of all the good it does by reason of its firmness, deservedly doth hold the chiefest place.

XXXII

1. The principals of all that are, are, therefore, God and Aeon. [*3]

The Cosmos, on the other hand, in that 'tis moveable, is not a principal. [*4]

[p. 371]

For its mobility exceeds its own stability by treating the immoveable fixation as the law of everlasting movement.

The Whole Sense, [*1] then, of the Divinity, though like [to Him] in its own self immoveable, doth set itself in motion within its own stability.

'Tis holy, incorruptible, and everlasting, and if there can be any better attribute to give to it, ['tis its],--Eternity of God supreme, in Truth itself subsisting, the Fullness of all things, of Sense, and of the whole of Science, consisting, so to say, with God. [*2]

2. The Cosmic Sense is the container [*3] of all sensibles, [all] species, and [all] sciences.

The human [higher sense consists] in the retentiveness of memory, in that it can recall all things that it hath done.

[p. 372]

For only just as far as the man-animal has the divinity of Sense [*1] descended; in that God hath not willed the highest Sense divine should be commingled with the rest of animals; lest it should blush for shame [*2] on being mingled with the other lives.

For whatsoever be the quality, or the extent, of the intelligence of a man's Sense, the whole of it consists in power of recollecting what is past.

It is through his retentiveness of memory, that man's been made the ruler of the earth.

3. Now the intelligence of Nature [*3] can be won by quality of Cosmic Sense,--from all the things in Cosmos which sense can perceive.

Concerning [this] Eternity, which is the second [one],--the Sense of this we get from out the senses' Cosmos, and we discern its quality [by the same means].

But the intelligence of Quality [itself], the "Whatness" of the Sense of God Supreme, is Truth alone,--of which [pure] Truth not even the most tenuous sketch, or [faintest] shade, in Cosmos is discerned.

For where is aught [of it] discerned by measurement of times,--wherein are seen untruths, and births [-and-deaths], and errors?

[p. 373]

4. Thou seest, then, Asclepius, on what we are [already] founded, with what we occupy ourselves, and after what we dare to strive.

 But unto Thee, O God most high, I give my thanks, in that Thou hast enlightened me with Light to see Divinity!

 And ye, O Tat, Asclepius and Ammon, in silence hide the mysteries divine within the secret places of your hearts, [*1] and breathe no word of their concealment [*2]!

5. Now in our case the intellect doth differ from the sense in this,--that by the mind's extension intellect can reach to the intelligence and the discernment of the quality of Cosmic Sense.

The Intellect of Cosmos, on the other hand, extends to the Eternity and to the Gnosis of the Gods who are above itself. [*3]

And thus it comes to pass for men, that we perceive the things in Heaven, as it were through a mist, as far as the condition of the human sense allows.

'Tis true that the extension [of the mind] which we possess for the survey of such transcendent things, is very narrow [still]; but [it

[p. 374]

will be] most ample when it shall perceive with the felicity of [true] self-consciousness.

Footnotes

^368:1 That is, changeless.

^368:2 That is, again, in the Aeon.

^368:3 Stabilis.

^368:4 Cf. viii. 1 above.

^368:5 Cf. x. 3 above.

^369:1 Eadem immobilitate. The whole is an endeavour to at-one the "Platonic" root-opposites "same" (tayton) and "other" (thateron)--the "Self" and the "not-Self," sat-asat, atmanatman, of the Upanishads.

^369:2 Lit. motionless.

^370:1 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 6; also xxxiv. 3 below.

^370:2 Compare the Hymn in C. H., v. (vi.) 10, 11.

^370:3 Or Eternity.

^370:4 Lit. does not hold the chief place.

^371:1 Cf. 3 below.

^371:2 Consistens, ut ita dixerim, cum deo. Is there possibly here underlying the Latin consistens cum deo the expanded form of the peculiar and elliptical pros ton theon of the Proem to the Fourth Gospel (the apud deum of the Vulgate)? This was explained by the Gnostic Ptolemy, somewhere about the middle of the second century, as "at-one-ment with God," in his exegesis of the opening words, which he glosses as: "The at-one-ment with each other, together with their at-one-ment with the Father" (e pros alle'loys ama kai e pros ton patera enusis). So that the first verse of the Proem would run: "In the Beginning was the Logos, and the Logos was (one) with God; yea, the Logos was God. He was in the Beginning (one) with God"--? consistens cum deo. See Irenaeus, Ref. Om. Haer., I. viii. 5--Stieren (Leipzig; 1853), i. 102; also F. F. F., p. 388.

^371:3 Or receptacle.

^372:1 That is, the divine or higher sense, connected with memory in its beginnings and with the Platonic "reminiscence" (the Pythagorean mathesis) in its maturity.

^372:2 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 19.

^372:3 That is, Cosmos.

^373:1 Lit. breasts.

^373:2 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 22.

^373:3 The super-cosmic Gods, or beings of the Intelligible Cosmos; the Aeons of the Gnostics.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

XXXIII

1. [XII. M.] Now on the subject of a "Void," [*1]--which seems to almost all a thing of vast importance,--I hold the following view.

Naught is, naught could have been, naught ever will be void.

For all the members of the Cosmos are completely full; so that Cosmos itself is full and [quite] complete with bodies, diverse in quality and form, possessing each its proper kind and size.

And of these bodies--one's greater than another, or another's less than is another, by difference of strength and size.

Of course, the stronger of them are more easily perceived, just as the larger [are]. The lesser ones, however, or the more minute, can scarcely be perceived, or not at all--those which we know are things [at all] by sense of touch alone.

Whence many come to think they are not bodies, and that there are void spaces,--which is impossible.

2. So also [for the Space] which is called

[p. 375]

[paragraph continues] Extra-cosmic,--if there be any (which I do not believe),--[then] is it filled by Him with things Intelligible, that is things of like nature with His own Divinity; just as this Cosmos which is called the Sensible, is fully filled with bodies and with animals, consonant with its proper nature and its quality;--[bodies] the proper shape of which we do not all behold, but [see] some large beyond their proper measure, some very small; either because of the great space which lies between [them and ourselves], or else because our sight is dull; so that they seem to us to be minute, or by the multitude are thought not to exist at all, because of their too great tenuity.

I mean the daimones, who, I believe, have their abode with us, and heroes, who abide between the purest part of air above us and the earth,--where it is ever cloudless, and no [movement from the] motion of a single star [disturbs the peace].

3. Because of this, Asclepius, thou shalt call nothing void; unless thou wilt declare of what that's void, which thou dost say is void;--for instance, void of fire, of water, or things like to these.

For if it should fall out, that it should seem that anything is able to be void of things like these,--though that which seemeth void be little

[p. 376]

or be big, it still cannot be void of spirit and of air.

XXXIV

1. In like way must we also talk concerning "Space," [*1]--a term which by itself is void of "sense." [*2]

For Space seems what it is from that of which it is [the space]. For if the qualifying [*3] word is cut away, the sense is maimed.

Wherefore we shall [more] rightly say the space of water, space of fire, or [space] of things like these.

For as it is impossible that aught be void; so is Space also in itself not possible to be distinguished what it is.

For if you postulate a space without that [thing] of which it is [the space], it will appear to be void space,--which I do not believe exists in Cosmos.

2. If nothing, then, is void, so also Space by its own self does not show what it is unless you add to it lengths, breadths [and depths],--just as you add the proper marks [*4] unto men's bodies.

These things, then, being thus, Asclepius, and ye who are with [him],--know the Intelligible

[p. 377]

[paragraph continues] Cosmos (that is, [the one] which is discerned by contemplation of the mind alone) is bodiless; nor can aught corporal be mingled with its nature,--[by corporal I mean] what can be known by quality, by quantity, and numbers. For there is nothing of this kind in that.

3. This Cosmos, then, which is called Sensible, is the receptacle of all things sensible,--of species, qualities, or bodies.

But not a single one of these can quicken without God. For God is all, and by Him [are] all things, and all [are] of His Will.

For that He is all Goodness, Fitness, Wisdom, unchangeable,--that can be sensed and understood by His own self alone.

Without Him naught hath been, nor is, nor will be.

4. For all things are from Him, in Him, and through Him,--both multitudinous qualities, and mighty quantities, and magnitudes exceeding every means of measurement, and species of all forms;--which things, if thou should'st understand, Asclepius, thou wilt give thanks to God.

And if thou should'st observe it [*1] as a whole, thou wilt be taught, by means of the True Reason, that Cosmos in itself is knowable to sense, [*2] and that all things in it are wrapped

[p. 378]

as in a vesture by that Higher Cosmos [*1] [spoken of above].

XXXV

1. Now every single class of living thing, [*2] Asclepius, of whatsoever kind, or it be mortal or be rational, whether it be endowed with soul, or be without one, just as each has its class, [*3] so does each several [class] have images of its own class.

And though each separate class of animal has in it every form of its own class, still in the selfsame [kind of] form the units differ from each other.

And so although the class of men is of one kind, so that a man can be distinguished by his [general] look, still individual men within the sameness of their [common] form do differ from each other.

2. For the idea [*4] which is divine, is bodiless, and is whatever is grasped by the mind.

So that although these two, [*5] from which the general form and body are derived, are bodiless, it is impossible that any single form should be produced exactly like another,--because the

[p. 379]

moments of the hours and points of inclination [when they're born] are different.

But they are changed as many times as there are moments in the hour of that revolving Circle in which abides that God whom we have called All-formed. [*1]

3. The species, [*2] then, persists, as frequently producing from itself as many images, and as diverse, as there are moments in the Cosmic Revolution, [*3]--a Cosmos which doth [ever] change in revolution. But the idea [*4] [itself] is neither changed nor turned.

So are the forms of every single genus permanent, [and yet] dissimilar in the same [general] form.

XXXVI

1. Asc. And does the Cosmos have a species, O Thrice-greatest one?

 Tris. Dost not thou see, Asclepius, that all has been explained to thee as though to one asleep?

For what is Cosmos, or of what doth it consist, if not of all things born?

This, [*5] then, you may assert of heaven, and

[p. 380]

earth, and elements. For though the other things possess more frequent change of species, [still even] heaven, [by its] becoming moist, or dry, or cold, or hot, or clear, or dull, [all] in one kind [*1] of heaven,--these [too] are frequent changes into species. [*2]

2. Earth hath, moreover, always many changes in its species;--both when she brings forth fruits, and when she also nourishes her bringings-forth with the return of all the fruits; the diverse qualities and quantities of air, its stoppings and its flowings [*3]; and before all the qualities of trees, of flowers, and berries, of scents, of savours--species.

Fire [also] brings about most numerous conversions, and divine. For these are all-formed images of Sun and Moon [*4]; they're, as it were, like our own mirrors, which with their emulous resplendence give us back the likenesses of our own images.

Footnotes

^374:1 Cf. C. H., xi. (xii.).

^376:1 Cf. xv. 1 above.

^376:2 Intellectu caret.

^376:3 Principale,--lit. principal.

^376:4 Signa; characteristics, presumably.

^377:1 Sc. the Cosmos.

^377:2 Sensibilem; probably referring to the sensus par excellence; that is, the higher or cosmic sense.

^378:1 That is, the Intelligible Cosmos; presumably the Aeon.

^378:2 Animalium.

^378:3 Genus.

^378:4 Species; meaning here apparently the genus or class.

^378:5 Apparently the idea and mind.

^379:1 Cf. C. H., xi. (xii.) 16; and C. H., xvi. 15; also xix. 3 above, and xxxvi. 2 below.

^379:2 That is, apparently, the "divine species," or idea, the genus.

^379:3 Cf. xl. 3 below.

^379:4 Species.

^379:5 That is, that there are genera embracing many species.

^380:1 Specie.

^380:2 The construction is here confuted and elliptical.

^380:3 This clause seems to be out of place.

^380:4 Presumably of the ideal Sun and Moon; for "all-formed," cf. xxxv. 2 above.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

XXXVII

1. [XIII. M.] But [*5] now let this suffice about such things; and let us once again return

[p. 381]

to man and reason,--gift divine, from which man has the name of rational animal.

Less to be wondered at are the things said of man,--though they are [still] to be admired. Nay, of all marvels that which wins our wonder [most] is that man has been able to find out the nature of the Gods and bring it into play.

2. Since, then, our earliest progenitors were in great error, [*1]--seeing they had no rational faith about the Gods, and that they paid no heed unto their cult and holy worship,--they chanced upon an art whereby they made Gods [for themselves]. [*2]

To this invention they conjoined a power that suited it, [derived] from cosmic nature; and blending these together, since souls they could not make, [they set about] evoking daimons' souls or those of angels; [and thus] attached them to their sacred images and holy mysteries, so that the statues should, by means of these, possess the powers of doing good and the reverse.

3. For thy forebear, Asclepius, the first discoverer of medicine, to whom there is a temple

[p. 382]

hallowed on Libya's Mount, [*1] hard by the shore of crocodiles, [*2] in which his cosmic man [*3] reposes, that is to say his body; for that the rest [of him], or better still, the whole (if that a man when wholly [plunged] in consciousness of life, [*4] be better), hath gone back home to heaven,--still furnishing, [but] now by his divinity, the sick with all the remedies which he was wont in days gone by to give by art of medicine.

4. Hermes, which is the name of my forebear, whose home is in a place called after him, [*5] doth aid and guard all mortal [men] who come to him from every side. [*6]

As for Osiris' [spouse]; how many are the blessings that we know Isis bestows when she's propitious; how many does she injure when she's wrath!

For that the terrene and the cosmic Gods are

[p. 383]

easily enraged, in that they are created and composed of the two natures.

5. And for this cause it comes to pass that these are called the "sacred animals" by the Egyptians, and that each several state [*1] gives service to the souls of those whose souls have been made holy, [*2] while they were still alive; so that [the several states] are governed by the laws [of their peculiar sacred animals], and called after their names.

It is because of this, Asclepius, those [animals] which are considered by some states deserving of their worship, in others are thought otherwise; and on account of this the states of the Egyptians wage with each other frequent war.

XXXVIII

1. Asc. And of what nature, O Thrice-greatest one, may be the quality of those who are considered terrene Gods?

 Tris. It doth consist, Asclepius, of plants, and stones, and spices, which contain the nature of [their own] divinity.

And for this cause they are delighted with repeated sacrifice, with hymns, and lauds, and

[p. 384]

sweetest sounds, tuned to the key of Heaven's harmonious song. [*1]

2. So that what is of heavenly nature, [*2] being drawn down into the images by means of heavenly use and practices, may be enabled to endure with joy the nature of mankind, and sojourn with it for long periods of time.

Thus is it that man is the maker of the Gods.

3. But do not, O Asclepius, I pray thee, think the doings of the terrene Gods are the result of chance.

The heavenly Gods dwell in the heights of Heaven, each filling up and watching o'er the rank he hath received; whereas these Gods of ours, [*3] each in its way,--by looking after certain things, foretelling others by oracles and prophecy, foreseeing others, and duly helping them along,--act as allies of men, as though they were our relatives and friends.

Footnotes

^380:5 The first six paragraphs of this chapter are quoted in Latin, with two slight verbal variants, by Augustine, De Civitate Dei, xxiv., xxvi.

^381:1 Menard thinks he can distinguish the hand of a Christian scribe in this sentence, which he translates with great freedom, "qui s'egaraient dans l'incredulite." A more careful translation, however, does not seem to favour this hypothesis. Hermes says simply that primitive mankind were ignorant of the Gods, and so in error.

^381:2 That is, images. Cf. xxx. above; and C. H., xvii.

^382:1 Cf. xxvii. 3 above.

^382:2 In monte Libyae circa littus crocodilorum. Does this refer to a Crocodilopolis (krokodeilun polis, Ptol., iv. 5,  section 65)? And if so, to which of these cities, for there were several? The best known of these is Arsinoe in the Faiyyum; but there was also another down south, in the Thebaid, on the W. bank of the Nile, lat. 25 degrees 6', of which remains are still visible at Embeshanda, on the verge of the Libyan desert. See Smith's Dict. of Gk. and Rom. Geography (London, 1878), sub voc.

^382:3 Presumably his mummy.

^382:4 In sensu vitae.

^382:5 Hermopolis therefore (compare Lact., D. Institt., i. 6); that is to say, Hermopolis Magna (Ermou polis megale), the modern Eshmun, on the left bank of the Nile, about lat. 27 degrees 4'.

^382:6 To get wisdom. Augustine's quotation ends here.

^383:1 Or city. For the animal cult of the Egyptians, see Plutarch, De Is. et Os., lxxii. ff.

^383:2 Or consecrated.

^384:1 Cf. "God's song" in xiii. 2 above.

^384:2 Namely, the nature of the Gods.

^384:3 The terrene Gods; the daimones of C. H., xvi. 14.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

XXXIX

1. [XIV. M.] Asc. What part of the economy, [*4] Thrice-greatest one, does the Heimarmene, or Fate, then occupy? For do not the celestial Gods rule over generals [*5]; the terrene occupy particulars?

[p. 385]

Tris. That which we call Heimarmene, Asclepius, is the necessity of all things that are born, [*1] bound ever to themselves with interlinked enchainments.

This, then, is either the effector of all things, or it is highest God, or what is made the second God by God Himself,--or else the discipline [*2] of all things both in heaven and on earth, established by the laws of the Divine.

2. And so these twain, Fate and Necessity, are bound to one another mutually by inseparable cohesion. [*3]

The former of them, the Heimarmene, gives birth to the beginnings of all things; Necessity compels the end of [all] depending from these principals.

On these doth Order follow, that is their warp-and-woof, and Time's arrangement for the perfecting of [all] things. For there is naught without the interblend of Order. [*4]

[p. 386]

That Cosmos [*1] is made perfect in all things; for Cosmos' self is vehicled [*2] in Order, or totally consists of Order.

XL

1. So, then, these three, Fate, [and] Necessity, [and] Order, are most immediately effected by God's Will, who rules the Cosmos by His Law and by His Holy Reason.

From these, accordingly, all willing or not-willing is altogether foreign, according to God's Will. [*3]

They are not moved by wrath nor swayed by favour, but are the instruments of the Eternal Reason's self-compulsion, which is [the Reason] of Eternity, [*4] that never can be turned aside, or changed, or be destroyed.

2. First, then, is Fate, which, as it were, by casting in the seed, supplies the embryo of all that are to be.

Follows Necessity, whereby they all are forcibly compelled unto their end.

Third, Order [comes], preserving warp-and-woof of [all] the things which Fate and [which] Necessity arrange. [*5]

[p. 387]

This, then, is the Eternity, which neither doth begin nor cease to be, which, fixed by law unchangeable, abides in the unceasing motion of its course.

3. It rises and it sets, by turns, throughout its limbs [*1]; so that by reason of Time's changes it often rises with the very limbs with which it [once] had set.

For [its] sphericity,--its law of revolution, [*2]--is of this nature, that all things are so straitly joined to their own selves, that no one knoweth what is the beginning of their revolution [*3]; since they appear for ever all to go before and follow after their own selves.

Good and bad issues, [*4] [therefore,] are commingled in all cosmic things.

Footnotes

^384:4 Rationis; lit. reason.

^384:5 Catholicorum.

^385:1 Or borne, quae geruntur.

^385:2 Disciplina = ? gnosis.

^385:3 Glutino.

^385:4 Cf. J. Laurentius Lydus, De Mensibus, iv. 7 (Wunsch, 70); the rest of the quotation following on what has been already quoted in the note to xix. 3. The Greek is either a very much shortened form or the Latin a very much expanded one, for the former may be translated as follows: "And Fate is also fated Activity (or Energy), or God Himself, or the Order that doth follow that Activity set over all things in the heaven and all things on the earth, together with Necessity. The former (Fate) gives birth to the very beginnings of things, the latter compels the ends also to come into existence. And on them there follow Order and Law, and there is naught that's orderless." Cf. Ex. i. 15, and Ex. xi. 1.

^386:1 Mundus = cosmos, meaning also order in Greek.

^386:2 Gestatur.

^386:3 Divinitus.

^386:4 That is, the Aeon.

^386:5 Fate thus seems to be regarded as the Creator, Order as the Preserver, and Necessity as the Destroyer or Regenerator.

^387:1 Membra; that is, parts, presumably constellations.

^387:2 Cf. xxxv. 3 below.

^387:3 Volubilitatis; that is, their turning into themselves; the symbol of which was the serpent swallowing its tail.

^387:4 Eventus et fors.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

4. [XV. M.] And now it hath been told you on each several point,--as man hath power [to tell], and God hath willed it and permitted it.

This, then, alone remains that we should do,--bless God and give Him praise; and so return to taking thought for body ['s comfort].

For now sufficiently have we been filled with feast of mind by our discourse on sacred things. [*5]

[p. 388]

XLI

1. Now when they came forth from the holy place, [*1] they turned their faces towards the south [*2] when they began their prayers to God.

For when the sun is setting, should anyone desire to pray to God, he ought to turn him thitherwards [*3]; so also at the rising of the same, unto that spot which lies beneath the sun. [*4]

As they were just beginning to recite the prayer, Asclepius did whisper:

 [Asc.] Let us suggest to father, Tat,--what he did bid us do, [*5]--that we should say our prayer to God with added incense and with unguents.

Whom when Thrice-greatest heard, he grew distressed and said:

 2. [Tris.] Nay, nay, Asclepius; speak more propitious words! For this is like to profanation of [our] sacred rites,--when thou dost pray to God, to offer incense and the rest.

For naught is there of which He stands in need, in that He is all things, or all are in Him.

[p. 389]

But let us worship, pouring forth our thanks. For this is the best incense in God's sight,--when thanks are given to Him by men. [*1]

 3. [We give] Thee grace, Thou highest [and] most excellent! For by Thy Grace we have received the so great Light of Thy own Gnosis.

O holy Name, fit [Name] to be adored, O Name unique, by which the Only God [*2] is to be blest through worship of [our] Sire,--[of Thee] who deignest to afford to all a Father's piety, and care, and love, and whatsoever virtue is more sweet [than these], endowing [us] with sense, [and] reason, [and] intelligence;--with sense that we may feel Thee; with reason that we may track Thee out from the appearances of things [*3]; with means of recognition that we may joy in knowing Thee.

4. Saved by Thy Power divine, let us rejoice that Thou hast shown Thyself to us in all Thy Fullness. Let us rejoice that Thou hast deigned to consecrate us, [still] entombed in bodies, to Eternity.

For this is the sole festival of praise worthy of man,--to know Thy Majesty.

We have known Thee; yea, by the Single Sense of our intelligence, we have perceived

[p. 390]

[paragraph continues] Thy Light supreme,--O Thou true Life of life, O Fecund Womb that giveth birth to every nature!

5. We have known Thee, O Thou completely filled with the Conception from Thyself of Universal Nature!

We have known Thee, O Thou Eternal Constancy!

For in the whole of this our prayer in worship of Thy Good, this favour only of Thy Goodness do we crave;--that Thou wilt keep us constant in our Love of knowing Thee, [*1] and let us ne'er be cut off from this kind of Life.

 With this desire we [now] betake us to [our] pure and fleshless meal. [*2]

Footnotes

^387:5 Cf. the conclusion of C. H., xvii.

^388:1 De adyto; "down from," literally.

^388:2 This is apparently an error for south-west or west.

^388:3 That is, to the setting sun or the west. Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 16, Comment.

^388:4 Subsolanus, lying beneath the sun; that is to say, eastern.

^388:5 Cf. xxxviii. 1 above.

^389:1 For the three preceding paragraphs, see Lact., D. I., vi. 25.

^389:2 The Cosmos, presumably, as the One God.

^389:3 Suspicionibus; hints, perhaps, and so phenomena.

^390:1 Or of Thy Gnosis.

^390:2 Caenam.

    
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

COMMENTARY

THE TITLE

The titles in the Latin MSS. vary. The heading preferred by Hildebrand is "Asclepius, or a Dialogue of Thrice-greatest Hermes"; while in the Bipontine edition, the title stands: "Thrice-greatest Hermes Concerning the Nature of the Gods; A Sermon addressed to Asclepius." Menard, the French translator, prefers: "A Sermon of Initiation, or Asclepius."

The treatise begins with a transparent gloss, in all probability originally the marginal note of some scribe, 

[p. 391]

or student, which has improperly crept into the text. It runs: "This Asclepius is my Sun-god"; that is to say, apparently: "This Sermon 'Asclepius' has illumined me"; from which it is evident that the title lying before the scribe was "Asclepius" simply, as may be seen from  section 2: "It is, however, with thy name I will inscribe this treatise." Stobaeus, moreover, in quoting from the original Greek (of xxvii. 4), heads his extract simply, "Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Asclepius."

On the other hand, the Church Father Lactantius, writing at the beginning of the fourth century, and quoting from the Greek original, says twice, categorically (D. I., iv. 6 and vii. 8): "Hermes in illo libro qui logos teleios inscribitur"; that is, "Hermes in the Book entitled 'The Perfect Sermon,' or 'The Sermon of Initiation'"; while Johannes Laurentius Lydus on three occasions quotes from this "Perfect Sermon" of Hermes, and on each occasion so names it.

I have accordingly preferred this as the main title, and added "The Asclepius" as an alternative.

THE OLD LATIN TRANSLATION AND THE GREEK ORIGINAL

Of the Greek original we have quotations or references by Lactantius (see viii. 1 and 3; xxv. 4: xxvi. 1; xli. 2), Johannes Laurentius Lydus (see xix. 3; xxviii. 1; xxxix. 1, 2), and Stobaeus (see xxvii. 4).

If we compare these Greek quotations with our Latin translation, we shall find, not only that the Latin is an exceedingly free rendering of the Greek, showing many expansions and contractions, and often missing the sense of the original, but also that even in Greek there were probably several recensions of the same text. [*1] 

[p. 392]

Indeed, the free rendering of our translation is of such a nature that it is impossible to base upon it any certain conclusions as to the date of the original or its precise worth in the history of religion. [*1]

That, however, our Latin translation is an ancient one is proved by Augustine's verbal quotations from it (see xxiii. 1; xxiii. 3-xxiv. 2; xxiv. 3; xxvii. 1-4). It was thus in existence about 400 A.D. at least. [*2]

Tradition, however, has assigned to it a far higher antiquity, attributing it to no less distinguished a writer than Appuleius, and so referring it to the first half of the second century.

This attribution has, of course, for long been questioned by modern criticism, and Reitzenstein, though he does not discuss the subject, accepts the adverse verdict and refers us to a "Pseudo-Appuleius."

Hildebrand, whose minute acquaintance with Appuleius' peculiar style and neologisms is a guarantee of his competence, has thoroughly gone into the matter; and though he sums up against tradition, it is in a half-hearted way. The translation, if not by Appuleius, is at any rate in old African Latin, and there is nothing in the style which absolutely forbids the possibility of its being by the author of The Golden Ass and the initiate of Isis. The strongest point, other than philological, against tradition is that Augustine does not say the translation was by Appuleius; but this seems to me to be unworthy of serious consideration.

It is, of course, difficult to turn possibilities into probabilities, but I see no reason why the Greek original of our Sermon should not be assigned to the

[p. 393]

earlier Hermes-Asclepian dialogues as well as to any others. That it was one of the most famous is evident by its wide quotation, and by the fact that several recensions of the Greek text were in circulation.

OF THE WRITER AND THE PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE

The Latin translator retains a number of the original Greek technical terms, and if we could only rely on his translation giving us the substance of the original in all cases, we should be presented in several passages with phenomena which would persuade us that the writer of the original intended his readers to think he was an Egyptian, and that his native nomenclature was other than Greek, as is also the case in C. H. (xvi.).

For instance, in vii. 2, "the man 'essential,' [*1] as say the Greeks,"--but this may be a gloss of the Latin translator.

Again, in x. 2: "So that . . . 'World' seems most fitly called 'Cosmos' in Greek,"--which seems to be the original.

Yet again, the "multifarious reasoning" of xii. 3 reminds us strongly of "the philosophizing of the Greeks--the noise of words," in C. H., xvi. 2.

On the other hand, the phrase, "which we in Greek (graece) believe to be the Cosmos," would seem to make the original author forget his Egyptian role.

While "its bottom . . . is called in Greek A-eides," coupled with "in Greek they are called Hades . . . in Latin Inferi" (xvii. 3), may be assigned to a gloss of the translator.

In xxiv. 1, however, the sentence, "Dost thou not know, Asclepius, that Egypt is the image of the Heaven? . . . This land of ours is shrine of the whole world"--coupled with the rest of the chapter, and Ch. xxv.

[p. 394]

[paragraph continues] --could hardly have been written by a Greek. In xxviii. 1, moreover, the "weighing of the merit" of the soul is strongly Egyptian, and so with the image and animal-cult.

As to the persons of the dialogue, I would suggest that originally the sermon was addressed to Asclepius alone, and that the slight narrative indications were added later to adapt it to wider circles.

The chief disciple is evidently Asclepius; he it is who is already "well versed in Nature," according to C. H., xiv. (xv.) 1; that is to say, he has progressed beyond the stage of Hearer, for he questions Hermes, whereas Tat does not ask questions, but listens only, he is "the one who is to hear" (i. 1). To them is added Ammon on the proposal of Asclepius; and Ammon is admitted on the ground that he had already had much written to him, but apparently had not yet been admitted to oral teaching.

The teaching is delivered in solemn surroundings in the holy place or shrine (i. 2), and teacher and pupils constitute the "sacred four." Hermes teaches in a state of exaltation; the place is filled with "God's goodly presence," and "Love Divine" instructs them, through Hermes' lips, in answer to the Pure and Single Love of Philosophy in their hearts (cf. xii. 3; xiv. 1).

The same hand that wrote the warning against revealing the sermon to others in i. 2 also probably wrote: "And ye, O Tat, Asclepius and Ammon, in silence hide the mysteries divine within the secret places of your hearts, and breathe no word of their concealment!" (xxxii. 4); he also, presumably, glossed "Asclepius" (xxxiv. 2) with "and ye who are with him," and added the naive whisper of Asclepius to Tat (xli. 1).

This redactor (if our analysis is correct), moreover,

[p. 395]

was a member of a select [*1] ascetic community, judging at any rate by his last sentence (xli. 5); in which case Ammon can hardly be equated with any King Ammon, but must be taken as standing for some grade of the community. I would suggest that this grade was similar to that of the Exoterici of the Pythagoreans or the outer circles of the Essenes, of which the members still lived in the world, but received instruction. In this case, however, the "we" of the last sentence would have to be taken as referring to Asclepius and Tat, and not to Ammon.

As to the dependence of our sermon on the rest of the literature, I find more points of contact between it and C. H., x. (xi.), "The Key" sermon addressed to Tat; none of the references, however, which I have given in the notes, show any literal dependence.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE WILL OF GOD

In the general doctrine the stress laid on the concept of the Will of God [*2] is to be specially noticed. This Will seems to be almost personified, and is, of course, a fundamental doctrine of the Trismegistic religio-philosophy. [*3]

In xxvi. 1 it is identified with the Goodness [*4] of God, and the Nature of God. [*5] But what it seems to correspond to most nearly is the Aeon or Eternity-idea which is set forth very clearly in xxx.-xxxii.--in fact, more clearly than anywhere else in the Trismegistic

[p. 396]

literature. God and Aeon are the sources of all things; and Aeon is "the Eternity of God, in Truth itself subsisting, the Fullness of all things" (xxxii. 1). The Will of God is thus the Aeon or Pleroma, the Wisdom, the Energy, the Spouse of the Supreme.

This Will rules Cosmos with Law and Holy Reason (xl.); Cosmos being the Order of things involved in Fate and Necessity the instruments of the Divine Will. [*1]

Our sermon is also characterized by the frequent use it makes of the terms Spirit and Sense.

CONCERNING SPIRIT AND THE ALL-SENSE

The Spirit is evidently Cosmic Life (vi. 4; xxvii. 1) and individual life (x. 4). [*2] The exposition of it begins with xiv. 2; Spirit and Matter, or the Nature of the Cosmos (xiv. 3), are practically regarded as the Positive and Negative, or Masculine and Feminine Energies of the Divine.

Spirit is the Ruler (xvii. 1) of all things in Cosmos or Nature; it is the immediate Instrument of the Will of God (xvi. 3); and is, indeed, loosely identified with that Will (xix. 4); while in still looser fashion Spirit seems to be symbolized by "Heaven" and the Sensible Cosmos by "Earth" (xix. 2).

It is very probable that this doctrine of Spirit as Divine Breath is fundamentally Egyptian, and owes nothing to immediate Semitic influence. However this may be, the use of the term Sense, as apparently in some way superior to Reason (vi. 4; x. 4), is very striking, and, as in some cases opposed to the exaltation of the Reason found elsewhere in our tractates, under the influence of this leading idea of Greek philosophy, discloses an Egyptian point of view.

[p. 397]

We have already noticed this use of the term in some of our tractates, but in our present sermon it is brought into great prominence. This Sense is not the differentiated senses, but a Unit or Cosmic Sense.

It is "the Divine Sense of intelligence," and is found only in God and in man's reason (vii. 1; xxxii. 2).

It is the "Higher Sense (with which Celestial Gift mankind alone is blest)"--characterized as the "feeder of the mind" (xviii. 1); yet on the other hand this "Higher Sense" is that "which by good chance a man perceives by mind, when out of all his senses."

This Sense is in some fashion closely connected with Nature and Cosmos (xxi. 1); through it man "disciplines his soul," and "cures his intellect," thus gaining "intelligence of God-like Reason" (xxii. 1), and finally "mingling himself with the All-sense of the Divine Intelligence" (xxix. 2).

This All-sense is the same as the "Whole Sense of Divinity," and is the Likeness of God; it is "in its own self immoveable," and yet "doth set itself in motion within its own stability" (xxxii. 1). Man must make himself like unto this Likeness.

This Likeness is evidently the Aeon or Intelligible Cosmos; for the "Cosmic Sense is the Container of all sensibles" (xxxii. 2).

In man its chief normal characteristic is the retentiveness of memory, "through which man is made ruler of the Earth" (xxxii. 2). This Sense is then man's continuum, the germ of everlastingness in him, the root-ground of consciousness (xxxii. 3), the Single Sense of the intelligence (xli. 4), which is fully brought to birth only when a man "is wholly plunged in consciousness of life (in sensu vitae)" (xxxvii. 3),--the "spiritual life" of the Christian Gnostics.

The fact that we have only a translation to deal with

[p. 398]

prevents us laying too much stress on details, but the general idea is clear enough; so too with the rest of this, the longest of our sermons, we must be content to refer only to general points, the chief of which are the "prophetic" utterances.

THE PROPHETIC UTTERANCES

These present us with problems of very great difficulty, and, so far, I have neither seen any solution nor has any occurred to me.

So much work has been done on contemporary prophetic utterances of this nature, especially on the Sibylline Literature, that it may be said that the scholastic mind has reached certain general criteria with regard to such pronouncements--the chief of which is that the hypothesis of genuine prophecy is not to be entertained.

In the Sibylline literature, indeed, this is clearly established; for much of it consists of traditional history written in the prophetical tense, so to say; when the history comes to an end the date of the "prophetical" writer is at once detected, for all that follows has no longer any relation to historical events.

In the case of our "prophecies," however, we have nothing of this nature to guide us. All we can say is that they seem to have been written, most probably, at a time when the Trismegistic communities were being persecuted.

That this was in the course of the fourth century, however, as Reitzenstein (p. 213) supposes, seems to me to be, so far, destitute of any sure objective confirmation; it not only compels us to suppose that the prophecies are later interpolations (which they may possibly be), but that these interpolations are later than Lactantius; whereas there is every probability that

[p. 399]

the Church Father had the text of them before him, [*1] and his date is the beginning of the fourth century.

On the other hand, Zosimus, writing somewhere about the end of the third and beginning of the fourth century, breathes no word of persecution, and leads us to suppose that the community was still flourishing. We are thus still in the gravest uncertainty.

The first of our "prophecies" is in xii. 3: "For I will tell thee as though it were propheticly"--addressed to Asclepius, and, therefore, probably not due to the redactor who we have supposed added the narrative sentences.

The lament of the writer is that "the Single Love, the Love of Pure Philosophy," is fast disappearing from the world; he can hardly have had Christianity in mind when writing these words, for he contrasts the "Pure Philosophy" with "multifarious reasoning" and "divers sciences," and the latter can hardly be said to be characteristic of General Christianity.

If, however, his words may be said to include also Gnostic Christianity, then he was clearly not in sympathy with it; but this can hardly be the case, seeing that the resemblances between the Trismegistic and Christian Gnosis are of a very intimate nature.

THE PROSCRIPTION OF THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS

Turning next to xxiv. 2, we meet with the clear statement that the worship of the Gods will be legally proscribed by the "barbarian" masters of Egypt (also xxv. 3).

Such a general proscription in this emphatic sense took place in Egypt only with the destruction of the Serapeum by the Christians themselves in 389 A.D.

[p. 400]

[paragraph continues] Of persecutions of the Christians by the Roman authorities in Egypt prior to this we get clear indications in the writings of the Christian Gnostic Basilides, who flourished at Alexandria at the beginning of the second century, and wrote specially of martyrdom. But this will little help us for the proscription of a cult that favoured the worship of the Gods and of their images.

Can it, then, be possible that these prophetic utterances were written at a time when many of the same nature were being penned by Jew and Christian? For our author, as for Jewish and Christian writers, the "End of the World" was at hand; his expectation is in this precisely the same as that of the writers of the New Testament documents.

The cause of this dire event is that Egypt, the "shrine of the whole world," the "Holy Land" [*1] par excellence, will be polluted with all iniquity and violence. The Cult of the Gods will cease, and the Gods will leave the Earth and mount to Heaven. The man's whole heart is bleeding for Egypt, even as the heart of a Jew for Jerusalem.

If there is any immediate historical references in these heartfelt utterances, we must seek them in such phrases as: "This holiest land, seat of our shrines and temples, shall be choked with tombs and corpses" (xxiv. 3); "the tale of tombs shall far exceed the number of the quick" (ibid.,  section 4) [*2]; and "Egypt shall be made the home of Scyth or Indian, or someone like to them--that is, a foreign neighbour."

It is true that the Christians were ever reproached

[p. 401]

with worshipping the dead, and building churches over the bones of the dead--an act of utter pollution according to all Pagan notions; but the words of our author, even allowing for all hyperbole, can hardly be construed in this sense.

People like Scyths or Indians, again, if we are to suppose any historical reference, can hardly be imagined to refer to the Romans; while the Goths under Alaric, who ravaged Greece in 395, 396 A.D., are too late even for Reitzenstein. Moreover, we have already in our notes pointed to the strange conjunction of Scyth and Barbarian in our text as being also found in Colossians.

On the other hand, nothing but the entire State suppression of the Pagan Religion in all its forms can satisfy xxv. 3, and this just suits the end of the fourth century.

If, however, we cannot entertain so late a date, and I do not think we can, there seems nothing for it but to give the writer some credit for his prognostication of the future; for eventually things certainly turned out for him and all he held most dear very much as he imagined or feared they would.

THE LAST HOPE OF THE RELIGION OF THE MIND

At any rate the last hope of the Pure Love, the Religion of the Mind, is in the Trismegistic Communities, if indeed it is so permitted to interpret xxvii. 3:

"Yea, they who rule the earth shall be distributed [through all the lands], and finally be gathered in a state,--at top of Egypt's upper part,--which shall be founded towards the setting sun, and to which all the mortal race shall speed."

We need not insist upon details, for our translator

[p. 402]

may have gone wide of the original; for instance, the "race" may, instead of being "mortal" in the original, have been the "Race" of which we have already heard so much in Philo and these tractates; but the similarity of the idea cannot fail to remind us of Philo when, in writing of the Redeemed of Spiritual Israel, he says:

"Those who were but scattered in Hellas and non-Grecian (Barbarian) lands, over islands and over continents, shall rise up with one impulse, and from diverse regions flock together unto the one spot revealed to them." [*1]

And with this further compare the famous passage on the Therapeuts:

"Now this Race of men is to be found in many parts of the inhabited world, both the Grecian and non-Grecian world, sharing in the Perfect Good.

"In Egypt there are crowds of them in every province, or nome as they call it, and especially round Alexandria. For they who are in every way (or in every nome) the most highly advanced, come as colonists, [*2] as it were, to the Therapeutic fatherland." [*3]

Moreover, just as the Therapeuts in the immediately following lines of Philo are said to have their community on a hill, so too in our text we immediately find mention of the Trismegistic communities as having their chief centre on the Libyan Hill,--a community which is spoken of as "very large" in numbers, and so is somewhat of a contradiction to the numbers of the Pious given in xxii. 1, where we are told "they may be counted even in the world," unless the sentence is to be taken as rhetorical.

[p. 403]

This Hill is called the Libyan Mount, a vague enough title; nor is this vagueness removed when we find it again referred to (in xxxvii. 3) as the place of burial of the body of the First Asclepius, and obtain the additional information that it is "hard by the shore of crocodiles," for this can hardly refer to Crocodilopolis in the Fayyum, the most northern of the towns so named, seeing that the Libyan Mount is "at the top of Egypt's upper part," and "towards the setting sun."

This, however, corresponds admirably with the location of Philo's Therapeut community on the southern shore of Lake Mareotis, just south of Alexandria; but few indeed will be found to entertain the possibility even that Philo and our author may be speaking of the same people from different standpoints and under different names.

As far as I can see, there is no certainty in the matter; and, therefore, I leave it as a problem of immense interest that has not as yet found a solution.

Footnotes

^391:1 See R. 195, 2.

^392:1 The so-founded opinions of Bernays and Zeller are characterized by Reitzenstein (p. 195) as of as little value as the opinions which made the whole of our literature dependent on New Platonism.

^392:2 Augustine's date is 354-430 A.D.

^393:1 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 14.

^395:1 Cf. for references to the "few," xxii. 1; xxiii. 1; xxxiv. 3; xl. 1.

^395:2 Cf. vii. 3; viii. 2; xi. 4; xiv. 1; xvi. 3; xix. 4; xx. 3; xxii. 4; xxv. 2; xxvi. 1, 2 and 3.

^395:3 Cf. especially C. H., iv. (v.) 1; x. (xi.) i.

^395:4 In the Greek text of Lactantius this is "the Good."

^395:5 Cf. vi. 1; xiv. 3.

^396:1 Cf. also C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 19, 20, and R. 39, n. 1.

^396:2 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 13, and Commentary.

^399:1 See xxv. 4, and note.

^400:1 The "image of the Heaven"; cf. K. K., 46-48.

^400:2 This is very different language from the more moderate tone of C. H., ix. (x.) 4, where we are told about the Gnostics, "they are thought mad and laughed at; they're hated and despised, and sometimes even put to death."

^402:1 De Execrat.,  section 9; M. ii. 435, 436; P. 937 (Ri. v. 255).

^402:2 Cf. in our Sermon, xxv. 1: Egypt, "the sole colony of holiness."

^402:3 D. V. C., C. 56 ff; M. i. 474; P. 892. Cf. F. F. F., 69.




===== BOOK: th3.txt =====


    
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

Thrice-Greatest Hermes 

Studies in Hellenistic Theosophyand Gnosis 

Being a Translation of the Extant Sermons and Fragments of the Trismegistic Literature, with Prolegomena, Commentaries, and Notes 

By

G. R. S. Mead 

Volume III.--Excerpts and Fragments

London and Benares

The Theosophical Publishing Society 

[1906]

Prepared for sacred-texts.com, February 2009. This text is in the public domain because it was published prior to 1922.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

Contents

I. EXCERPTS BY STOBAeUS

 EX. I. OF PIETY AND TRUE PHILOSOPHY <page 3>

      Commentary

 <page 12>

 EX. II. OF THE INEFFABILITY OF GOD <page 14>

      Commentary

 <page 15>

 EX. III. OF TRUTH <page 17>

      Commentary

 <page 23>

 EX. IV. GOD, NATURE AND THE GODS <page 24>

      Commentary

 <page 25>

 EX. V. OF MATTER <page 26>

 EX. VI. OF TIME <page 28>

 EX. VII. OF BODIES EVERLASTING AND BODIES PERISHABLE <page 30>

      Commentary

 <page 33>

 EX. VIII. OF ENERGY AND FEELING <page 34>

      Commentary

 <page 43>

 EX. IX. OF THE DECANS AND THE STARS <page 45>

      Commentary

 <page 54>

 EX. X. CONCERNING THE RULE OF PROVIDENCE, NECESSITY AND FATE <page 55>

      Commentary

 <page 57>

 EX. XI. OF JUSTICE <page 58>

      Commentary

 <page 59>

 EX. XII. OF PROVIDENCE AND FATE <page 60>

 EX. XIII. OF THE WHOLE ECONOMY <page 61>

 EX. XIV. OF SOUL, I. <page 63>

 EX. XV. OF SOUL, II. <page 65>

      The Embryonic Stages of Incarnation

 <page 68>

 EX. XVI. OF SOUL, III. <page 72>

 EX. XVII. OF SOUL, IV. <page 75>

 EX. XVIII. OF SOUL, V. <page 77>

      Commentary

 <page 79>

 EX. XIX. OF SOUL, VI. <page 80>

      Commentary

 <page 82>

 EX. XX. THE POWER OF CHOICE <page 84>

      Commentary

 <page 86>

 EX. XXI. OF ISIS TO HORUS <page 87>

      Commentary

 <page 87>

 EX. XXII. AN APOPHTHEGM <page 88>

 EX. XXIII. FROM "APHRODITE" <page 89>

      Commentary

 <page 90>

 EX. XXIV. A HYMN OF THE GODS <page 91>

      Commentary

 <page 92>

 EX. XXV. THE VIRGIN OF THE WORLD, I. <page 93>

 EX. XXVI. THE VIRGIN OF THE WORLD, II. <page 125>

 COMMENTARY
      Argument

 <page 134>

      Sources?

 <page 146>

      The Direct Voice and the Books of Hermes

 <page 147>

      Kamephis and the Dark Mystery

 <page 149>

      Kneph-Kamephis

 <page 151>

      Hermes I. and Hermes II.

 <page 152>

      The Black Rite

 <page 155>

      Black Land

 <page 158>

      The Pupil of the World's Eye

 <page 159>

      The Son of the Virgin

 <page 160>

      The Mystery of the Birth of Horus

 <page 162>

      "Ishon"

 <page 165>

      The Sixty Soul-Regions

 <page 168>

      Plutarch's Yogin

 <page 169>

      The Plain of Truth

 <page 171>

      The Boundaries of the Numbers which Pre-exist in the Soul

 <page 173>

      The Mysterious "Cylinder"

 <page 175>

      The Eagle, Lion, Dragon and Dolphin

 <page 180>

      Momus

 <page 182>

      The Mystic Geography of Sacred Lands

 <page 184>

 EX. XXVII. FROM THE SERMON OF ISIS TO HORUS <page 188>

 COMMENTARY
      Argument

 <page 204>

      Title and Ordering

 <page 206>

      The Books of Isis and Horus

 <page 207>

      The Watery Sphere and Subtle Body

 <page 209>

      The Habitat of Encarnate Souls

 <page 210>

II. REFERENCES AND FRAGMENTS IN THE FATHERS

  

 

I. JUSTIN MARTYR

 i.

 The Most Ancient of Philosophers

 <page 215>

  

 The "Words of Ammon"

 <page 215>

  

 The Ineffability of God

 <page 216>

 ii.

 Hermes and Asclepius Sons of God

 <page 217>

 iii.

 Hermes the Word who brings Tidings from God

 <page 217>

  

 The Sons of God in Hellenistic Theology

 <page 218>

  

 An Unverifiable Quotation

 <page 218>

  

  

 

II. ATHENAGORAS

 <page 220>

  

 

III. CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA

 i.

 Many Hermeses and Asclepiuses

 <page 221>

 ii.

 The Apotheosis of Hermes and Asclepius

 <page 222>

 iii.

 The Books of Hermes

 <page 222>

  

 The General Catalogue of the Egyptian Priestly Library

 <page 225>

  

  

 

IV. TERTULLIAN

 i.

 Hermes the Master of all Physics

 <page 226>

 ii.

 Hermes the Writer of Scripture

 <page 227>

 iii.

 Hermes the First Preacher of Reincarnation

 <page 227>

 iv.

 Hermes on Metempsychosis

  

 FRAG. I.

 <page 228>

  

  

 

V. CYPRIAN

  

 God is beyond all Understanding

 <page 229>

  

  

 

VI. ARNOBIUS

  

 The School of Hermes

 <page 230>

  

  

 

VII. LACTANTIUS

 i.

 Thoyth-Hermes and his Books of the Gnosis

 <page 231>

  

 FRAG. II.

 <page 233>

  

 The Historical Origin of the Hermetic Tradition

 <page 233>

 ii.

 Uranus, Cronus and Hermes, Adepts of the Perfect Science

 <page 234>

 iii.

 Divine Providence

 <page 235>

 iv.

 On Mortal and Immortal Sight

  

 FRAG. III.

 <page 235>

 v.

 Man made after the Image of God

 <page 236>

 vi.

 Hermes the First Natural Philosopher

 <page 237>

 vii.

 The Daimon-Chief

 <page 237>

 viii.

 Devotion in God-Gnosis

  

 FRAG. IV.

 <page 238>

 ix.

 The Cosmic Son of God

  

 FRAG. V.

 <page 239>

 x.

 The Demiurge of God

 <page 240>

 xi.

 The Name of God

  

 FRAG. VI.

 <page 241>

 xii.

 The Holy Word about the Lord of All

  

 FRAG. VII.

 <page 241>

 xiii.

 His Own Father and Own Mother

 <page 242>

 xiv.

 The Power and Greatness of the Word

 <page 242>

 xv.

 The Fatherless and Motherless

 <page 242>

 xvi.

 Piety the Gnosis of God

 <page 243>

 xvii.

 The Only Way to Worship God

 <page 243>

 xviii.

 The Worthiest Sacrifice to God

  

 FRAG. VIII.

 <page 244>

 xix.

 Man made in the Image of God

 <page 244>

 xx.

 Contemplation

 <page 245>

 xxi.

 The Dual Nature of Man

  

 FRAG. IX.

 <page 245>

  

 Wonder the Beginning of Philosophy

 <page 246>

 xxii.

 The Cosmic Restoration

  

 FRAG. X.

 <page 247>

 xxii.

 Of Hermes and his Doctrine Concerning God

 <page 247>

 xxiv.

 A Repetition

 <page 248>

 xxv.

 Plato as Prophet follows Trismegistus

 <page 248>

  

  

 

VIII. AUGUSTINE

 i.-iii.

 Three Quotations from the Old Latin Version of the "Perfect Sermon"

 <page 249>

  

  

 

IX. CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA

 i.

 Cyril's Corpus of XV. Books

 <page 251>

 ii.

 The Incorporeal Eye

  

 FRAG. XI.

 <page 253>

 iii.

 The Heavenly Word Proceeding Forth

  

 FRAG. XII.

 <page 254>

  

 The Pyramid

  

 FRAG. XIII.

 <page 254>

  

 The Nature of God's Intellectual World

  

 FRAG. XIV.

 <page 255>

  

 The Word of the Creator

  

 FRAG. XV.

 <page 256>

 iv.

 Mind of Mind

  

 FRAG. XVI.

 <page 257>

  

 He is All

  

 FRAG. XVII.

 <page 258>

  

 Concerning Spirit

  

 FRAG. XVIII.

 <page 258>

  

 The "To Asclepius" of Cyril's Corpus

 <page 259>

 v.

 From "The Mind"

 <page 260>

 vi.

 Osiris and Thrice-greatest Agathodaimon

  

 FRAG. XIX.

 <page 261>

  

 "Let there be Earth!"

  

 FRAG. XX.

 <page 262>

  

 The Generation of the Sun

  

 FRAG. XXI.

 <page 262>

  

 "Let the Sun be!"

  

 FRAG. XXII.

 <page 263>

 vii.

 The Firmament

  

 FRAG. XXIII.

 <page 263>

 viii.

 From the "To Asclepius"

 <page 264>

 ix.

 The Sole Protection

 <page 265>

 x.

 The Supreme Artist

  

 FRAG. XXIV.

 <page 266>

 xi.

 An Unreferenced Quotation

  

 FRAG. XXV.

 <page 266>

  

  

 

X. SUIDAS

  

 Hermes speaks of the Trinity

 <page 268>

  

 An Orphic Hymn

 <page 269>

  

  

 

XI. ANONYMOUS

 <page 270>

III. REFERENCES AND FRAGMENTS IN THE PHILOSOPHERS

 

I. ZOSIMUS

 On the Anthropos-Doctrine <page 273>

 The Processions of Fate <page 273>

 "The Inner Door" <page 274>

 Against Magic

 FRAG. XXVI.

 <page 275>

 Thoth the First Man <page 276>

 The Libraries of the Ptolemies <page 277>

 Nikotheos <page 278>

 From the Books of the Chaldaeans <page 279>

 Man the Mind

 FRAG. XXVII.

 <page 280>

 The Counterfeit Daimon

 <page 281>

 His Advice to Theosebeia

 <page 283>

  

 

II. JAMBLICHUS

 Abammon the Teacher

 <page 285>

 Hermes the Inspirer

 <page 286>

 Those of the Hermaic Nature

 <page 288>

 The Books of Hermes

 <page 289>

 The Monad from the One

 <page 291>

 The Tradition of the Trismegistic Literature

 <page 291>

 Bitys

 <page 294>

 Ostanes-Asclepius

 <page 296>

 From the Hermaic Workings

 <page 297>

 The Cosmic Spheres

 <page 299>

  

 

III. JULIAN THE EMPEROR

 The Disciples of Wisdom

 <page 303>

  

 

IV. FULGENTIUS THE MYTHOGRAPHER

 FRAG. XXVIII.

 <page 305>

IV. CONCLUSION

 An Attempt at Classifying the Extant Literature

 <page 306>

 Of Hermes

 <page 306>

 To Tat

 <page 308>

 To Asclepius

 <page 310>

 To Ammon

 <page 311>

 Of Asclepius

 <page 312>

 Of Isis

 <page 312>

 From the Agathodaimon Literature

 <page 313>

 Of Judgments of Value

 <page 314>

 The Sons of God

 <page 316>

 Concerning Dates

 <page 319>

 The Blend of Traditions

 <page 321>

 Of Initiation

 <page 323>

 A Last Word

 <page 325>

V. INDEX

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

I

Excerpts by Stobaeus

[p. 2]

[p. 3]

EXCERPT I.

 

OF PIETY AND [TRUE] PHILOSOPHY

(Title from Patrizzi (p. 4); preceded by "Of Thrice-greatest Hermes."

Text: Stobaeus, Phys., xxxv. 1, under heading: "Of Hermes--from the [Book] to Tat"; G. pp. 273-278; M. i. 190-194; W. i. 273-278. [*1]

Menard, Livre IV., No. i. of "Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son Tat," pp. 225-230.)

1. [*2] Her. Both for the sake of love to man, and piety [*3] to God, I [now], my son, for the first time take pen in hand. [*4]

[p. 4]

For there can be no piety more righteous than to know the things that are, and to give thanks for these to Him who made them,--which I will never cease to do.

2. Tat. By doing what, O father, then, if naught be true down here, may one live wisely?

Her. Be pious, [*1] son! Who pious is, doth reach the height of [all] philosophy [*2]; without philosophy the height of piety cannot be scaled.

But he who learns what are existent things, and how they have been ordered, and by whom, and for whose sake,--he will give thanks for all unto the Demiurge, as unto a good sire, a nurse [most] excellent, a steward who doth never break his trust. [*3]

3. Who giveth thanks, he will be pious; and he who pious is, will [get to] know both where is Truth, and what it is.

And as he learns, he will more and more pious grow.

For never, son, can an embodied soul that has once leaped aloft, so as to get a hold upon the truly Good and True, slip back again into the contrary.

For when the soul [once] knows the Author of its Peace, [*4] 'tis filled with wondrous love, [*5] and

[p. 5]

with forgetfulness [*1] of every ill, and can no more keep from the Good.

4. Let this be, O [my] son, the goal of piety;--to which if thou attain, thou shalt both nobly live, and happily depart from life, for that thy soul no longer will be ignorant of whither it should wing its flight again.

This is the only [Way], my son,--the Path [that leads] to Truth, [the Path] on which our forebears, [*2] too, did set their feet, and, setting them, did find the Good. [*3]

Solemn and smooth this Path, yet difficult to tread for soul while still in body.

5. For first it hath to fight against itself, and make a great dissension, and manage that the victory should rest with the one part [of its own self].

For that there is a contest of the one against the two, [*4]--the former trying to flee, the latter dragging down.

[p. 6]

And there's great strife and battle [dire] of these with one another,--the one desiring to escape, the others striving to detain.

6. The victory, moreover, of the one or of the others [*1] is not resemblant.

For that the one doth hasten [upwards] to the Good, the others settle [downwards] to the bad.

The one longs to be freed; the others love their slavery.

If [now] the two be vanquished, they remain deprived of their own selves and of their ruler [*2]; but if the one be worsted, 'tis harried by the two, and driven about, being tortured by the life down here.

This [*3] is, [my] son, the one who leadeth thee upon the Thither [*4] Path.

Thou must, [my] son, first leave behind thy body, [*5] before the end [of it [*6] is reached], and come out victor in the life of conflict, and thus as victor wend thy way towards home.

7. And now, [my] son, I will go through the things that are by heads [*7]; for thou wilt understand the things that will be said, if thou remember what thy ears have heard.

All things that are, are [then] in motion; alone the that which is not, is exempt from it.

[p. 7]

Every body is in a state of change; [but] all bodies are not dissolvable; some bodies [only] are dissolvable.

Not every animal is mortal; not every animal, immortal.

That which can be dissolved, can [also] be destroyed; the permanent [is] the unchangeable; the that which doth not change, [is] the eternal.

What doth become [*1] for ever, for ever also is destroyed [*2]; what once for all becomes, is never more destroyed, nor does it [ever more] become some other thing.

8. First God; second the Cosmos; third [is] man. [*3]

The Cosmos, for man's sake; and man, for God's.

The soul's irrational part [*4] is mortal; its rational part, immortal.

All essence [is] immortal; all essence, free from change.

All that exists [*5] [is] twofold; naught of existing things remains.

Not all are moved by soul; the soul moves all that doth exist. [*6]

[p. 8]

9. All that suffereth [is] sensible; not all that's sensible, doth suffer.

All that feels pain, doth also have experience of pleasure,--a mortal life [*1]; not all that doth experience pleasure, feeleth [also] pain,--a life immortal.

Not every body's subject to disease; all bodies subject to disease are subject [too] to dissolution.

10. The mind's in God; the reasoning faculty's [*2] in man.

The reason's in the mind; the mind's above all suffering.

Nothing in body's true [*3]; all in the bodiless is free from what's untrue.

All that becomes, [is] subject unto change; not all that doth become, need be dissolved.

Naught['s] good upon the earth; naught['s] bad in heaven.

11. God['s] good; [and] man [is] bad. [*4]

Good [is] free-willed; bad is against the will.

The gods do choose what things are good, as good; . . .

The good law of the mighty [One] [*5] is the good law; good law's the law.

[p. 9]

Time's for the gods; the law for men. [*1]

Bad is the stuff that feeds the world; time is the thing that brings man to an end.

12. All in the heaven is free from change; all on the earth is subject unto it.

Naught in the heaven's a slave; naught on the earth is free.

Nothing can not be known in heaven; naught can be known on earth.

The things on earth do not consort with things in heaven. [*2]

All things in heaven are free from blame; all on the earth are blameworthy.

The immortal is not mortal; the mortal, not immortal.

That which is sown, is not invariably brought forth; but that which is brought forth, must have invariably been sown.

13. [Now] for a body that can be dissolved, [there are] two "times":--[the period] from its sowing till its birth, and from its birth until its death; but for an everlasting body, the time from birth alone. [*3]

Things subject unto dissolution wax and wane.

The matter that's dissolved, doth undergo two

[p. 10]

contrary transformings:--death and birth; but everlasting [matter], doth change either to its own self, or into things like to itself.

The birth of man [is] the beginning of his dissolution; man's dissolution the beginning of his birth.

That which departs, [*1] [returns; and what returns] departs [again]. [*2]

14. Of things existent, some are in bodies, some in forms, and some [are] in activities. [*3]

Body['s] in forms; and form and energy in body.

The deathless shares not in the mortal [part]; the mortal shares in the immortal.

The mortal body doth not mount [*4] into the deathless one; the deathless one descends [*5] into the mortal frame.

Activities do not ascend, but they descend.

15. The things on earth bestow no benefit on things in heaven; the things in heaven shower every benefit on things on earth.

Of bodies everlasting heaven is the container; of those corruptible, the earth.

Earth [is] irrational; the heaven [is] rational.

The things in heaven [are] under it; the things on earth above the earth.

[p. 11]

Heaven['s] the first element; earth['s] the last element.

Fore-knowledge [*1] [is] God's Order; Necessity['s] handmaiden to Fore-knowledge.

Fortune['s] [*2] the course of the disorderly,--the image of activity, [*3] untrue opinion.

What, [then] is God? The Good that naught can change.

What, man? The bad that can be changed. [*4]

16. If thou rememberest these heads, [*5] thou wilt remember also what I have already set forth for thee with greater wealth of words. For these are summaries [*6] of those.

Avoid, however, converse with the many [on these things]; not that I would that thou shouldst keep them selfishly unto thyself, but rather that thou shouldst not seem ridiculous unto the multitude. [*7]

For that the like's acceptable unto the like; the unlike's never friend to the unlike.

Such words as these have very very few to give them ear; nay, probably, they will not even have the few. [*8]

They have, moreover, some [strange force]

[p. 12]

peculiar unto themselves; for they provoke the evil all the more to bad.

Wherefore thou shouldst protect the many [from themselves], for they ignore the power of what's been said.

17. Tat. What meanest thou, O father?

Her. This, [my] son! All that in man is animal, is proner unto bad [than unto good]; nay, it doth cohabit with it, because it is in love with it.

Now if this animal should learn that Cosmos is subject to genesis, and all things come and go according to Fore-knowledge [*1] and by Necessity, Fate ruling all,--in no long time it would grow worse than it is now, [*2] [and] thinking scorn of the whole [universe] as being subject unto genesis, and unto Fate referring [all] the causes of the bad, would never cease from every evil deed.

Wherefore, care should be taken of them, in order that being [left] in ignorance, they may become less bad through fear of the unknown.

 

COMMENTARY

Patrizzi thought so highly of this excerpt that he chose it for Book I. of his collection. He, however, erroneously made the persons of the dialogue Asclepius and Tat, instead of Hermes and Tat--an unaccountable

[p. 13]

mistake, in which he has been followed by all the editors of Stobaeus except Wachsmuth.

In the introduction the treatise purports to be a letter written to Tat,--a new departure, for it is "for the first time"; on the other hand the form of the treatise is the usual one of oral instruction, of question and answer ( section 2). Nevertheless in  section 16 we learn that the definitions given in  section section 7-15 are intended as heads or summaries of previous sermons.

But already in C. H., x. (xi.) 1, we have an abridgment or epitome (or rather a summation) of the General Sermons delivered to Tat, just as we have in C. H., xvi., "the summing up and digest, as it were, of all the rest'' of the Sermons of Asclepius to the King, under the traditional title, "The Definitions of Asclepius." The headings in our sermon, then, may probably have been intended for the summary of the teaching of the Expository Sermons to Tat (see in Cyril, Frag. xv.). Some of our definitions, however, are strikingly similar to those in C. H., x. (xi.), but this may be accounted for by supposing that "The Key" itself was one of, or rather the continuation of, the Expository Sermons. [*1]

The warning to use great discretion in communicating the instruction to the "many," because of the danger of teaching the Gnosis to the morally unfit, seems to be an appropriate ending to the sermon; we may then be fairly confident that we have in the above a complete tractate of "The [? Expository] Sermons to Tat"; the title, however, is the invention of Patrizzi, and not original.

Footnotes

^3:1 G. = Gaisford (T.), Joannis Stobaei Florilegium (Oxford, 1822), 4 vols.; Io. Stob. Ec. Phys. et Ethic. Libri Duo (Oxford, 1850), 2 vols.

M. = Meineke (A.), Joh. Stob. Flor. (Leipzig, 1855, 1856), 3 vols.; Joh. Stob. Ec. Phys. et Ethic. Lib. Duo (Leipzig, 1860), 2 vols.

W. = Wachsmuth (C.), Io. Stob. Anthologii Lib. Duo Priores . . . Ec. Phys. et Ethic. (Berlin, 1884), 2 vols.

H. = Hense (O.), I. Stob. Anth. Lib. Tert. (Berlin, 1894), 1 vol., incomplete.

^3:2 I have numbered the paragraphs in all the excerpts for convenience of reference.

^3:3 eysebeias,--it might also be rendered by worship.

^3:4 tode syllrafu.

^4:1 Or give worship unto God,--eysebei.

^4:2 In its true sense of wisdom-loving.

^4:3 epitropui pistui.

^4:4 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 3, Comment.

^4:5 Cf. P. S. A., ix. 1; xii. 3.

^5:1 Where le'the (forgetfulness) is opposed to erus (love),--that is to say, reminiscence, the secret of the mathesis (mathesis) of the Pythagoreans, the knowledge of the Author of our being or of our "race" within,--psyxe mathousa eayteis ton propatora (cf. Ex. iii. 6).

^5:2 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 5; P. S. A., xi. 4; xxxvii. 3; Lact., D. I., i. 11.

^5:3 Cf. C. H., xi. (xii.) 21.

^5:4 The "one" is the rational element (to logikon) and the "two" are the passional (to thymikon) and desiderative (to epithymetikon) elements of the irrational nature (to alogon, or to aistheton as below), the "heart" and the "appetite." Cf. Ex. xvii.; see also "Orphic Psychology" in my Orpheus (London, 1896), pp. 273-275.

^6:1 Lit. of the two.

^6:2 That is, the one.

^6:3 Sc. the one.

^6:4 ekeise--that is, to the Good and True, or God.

^6:5 Cf. Ex. ix. 12.

^6:6 Sc. the Path.

^6:7 Or summarily; cf.  section 16 below.

^7:1 Or is born.

^7:2 Or dies.

^7:3 pruton o theos, deuteron o kosmos, triton o anthrupos. Cf. P. S. A., x.: "The Lord of the Eternity (Aeon) is the first God; second is Cosmos; man's the third."

^7:4 Lit. sensible part,--to aistheton.

^7:5 pan to on,--as opposed to oysia. (essence).

^7:6 The meaning of ex-istence, being the coming out of pure being into the state of becoming.

^8:1 Or animal; perhaps this and the following interjection are glosses.

^8:2 o logismos,--perhaps a mistake for logos, as Patrizzi has it.

^8:3 Or real.

^8:4 But see  section 15 below; and cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 12.

^8:5 The text is faulty; as is also apparently that of the following sentence. None of the conjectures yet put forward are satisfactory.

^9:1 Or time is divine, the law is man's.

^9:2 I have not adopted W.'s lengthy emendations.

^9:3 This is the idea of sempiternity--of things which have a beginning but no end.

^10:1 Or dies.

^10:2 There is a lacuna in the text.

^10:3 Or energies.

^10:4 Lit. go.

^10:5 Lit. comes.

^11:1 Or Providence. Cf. P. S. A., xxxix. 2;  section 17 below; and Ex. xi. 1.

^11:2 tuxe.

^11:3 Or energy.

^11:4 Reading trepton for the hopeless atrepton of the text. Cf. 11 above.

^11:5 Cf.  section 7 above.

^11:6 perioxai.

^11:7 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 13 and 22.

^11:8 Cf. P. S. A., xxii. 1.

^12:1 Or Providence; cf.  section 15 above.

^12:2 Lit. than itself.

^13:1 Cf. R. (p. 128), who calls them a "Collection of Sayings of Hermes."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 14]

EXCERPT II.

 

[OF THE INEFFABILITY OF GOD]

(I have added the title, the excerpt not being found in Patrizzi.

Text: Stob., Flor., lxxx. [lxxviii.] 9, under the heading: "Of Hermes from the [Book] to Tat"; G. iii. 135; M. iii. 104, 105. [*1]

Menard, Livre IV., No. x. of "Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son Tat," p. 256.)

[Her.] To understand [*2] God is difficult, to speak [of Him] impossible.

For that the Bodiless can never be expressed in body, the Perfect never can be comprehended by that which is imperfect, and that 'tis difficult for the Eternal to company with the ephemeral.

The one is for ever, the other doth pass; the one is in [the clarity of] Truth, the other in the shadow of appearance.

So far off from the stronger [is] the weaker,

[p. 15]

the lesser from the greater [is so far], as [is] the mortal [far] from the Divine.

It is the distance, then, between the two that dims the Vision of the Beautiful.

For 'tis with eyes that bodies can be seen, with tongue that things seen can be spoken of; but That which hath no body, that is unmanifest, and figureless, and is not made objective [to us] out of matter,--cannot be comprehended by our sense.

I have it in my mind, O Tat, I have it in my mind, that what cannot be spoken of, is God.

 

COMMENTARY

Justin Martyr quotes these opening words of our excerpt verbatim, assigning them to Hermes (Cohort., 38; Otto, ii. 122). [*1]

The substance of the second sentence is given twice by Lactantius in Latin (Div. Institt., ii. 8; Ep. 4); in the second passage the Church Father also quotes verbatim the first sentence of our excerpt, and from his introductory words we learn that they were the beginning of a written sermon from Hermes to his son (Tat).

The first four sentences are also quoted in almost identical words (there being two variants of reading and two slight additions) by Cyril,--Contra Julianum, i. 31 (Migne, col. 549 B), who, moreover, gives some additional lines, beginning (Frag. xi.): "If, then, there be an incorporeal eye," etc.

[p. 16]

If, furthermore, we are right in supposing that Frag. xv. (Cyril, ibid., i. 33) is from the same sermon, then this sermon is the "First Sermon of the Expository [Sermons] to Tat," and the Stobaean heading, "From the [Book] to Tat," will mean the collection of Expository Sermons (see Comment, on Frag. xv.).

Footnotes

^14:1 Hense's text ends with xlii. 17; the second part has apparently never been published.

^14:2 Or think of.

^15:1 Which see for Commentary under "Fragments."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 17]

EXCERPT III.

 

OF TRUTH

(Title from Patrizzi (p. 46b), preceded by: "Of Thrice-greatest Hermes to Tat."

Text: Stob., Flor., xi. 23, under heading: "Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Tat"; G, i. 307-311; M. i. 248-251; H. iii. 436-441.

Menard, Livre IV., No. ix. of "Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son Tat," pp. 251-255.)

1. [Her.] Concerning Truth, O Tat, it is not possible that man should dare to speak, for man's an animal imperfect, composed out of imperfect members, his tabernacle [*1] patched together from many bodies strange [to him].

But what is possible and right, this do I say,--that Truth is [to be found] in the eternal bodies only, [those things] of which the bodies in themselves are true, [*2]--fire very fire and nothing else, earth very earth and nothing else, air very air and nothing else, and water very water and naught else.

[p. 18]

Our frames, however, are a compound of all these. For they have [in them] fire, and they have also earth, they've water, too, and air; but they are neither fire, nor earth, nor water, nor air, [*1] nor any [element that's] true.

And if our composition has not had Truth for its beginning, how can it either see or speak the Truth?

Nay, it can only have a notion of it,--[and that too] if God will.

2. All things, accordingly, that are on earth, O Tat, are not the Truth; they're copies [only] of the True.

And these are not all things, but few [of them]; the rest consist of falsity and error, Tat, and shows of seeming like unto images.

Whenever the appearance doth receive the influx from above, it turns into a copy of the Truth; without its [*2] energizing from above, it is left false.

Just as the portrait also indicates the body in the picture, but in itself is not a body, in spite of the appearance of the thing that's seen.

'Tis seen as having eyes; but it sees naught, hears naught at all.

The picture, too, has all the other things, but they are false, tricking the sight of the beholders,

[p. 19]

[paragraph continues] --these thinking that they see what's true, while what they see is really false.

All, then, who do not see what's false see truth.

If, then, we thus do comprehend, or see, each one of these [*1] just as it really is, we really comprehend and see.

But if [we comprehend, or see, things] contrary to that which is, we shall not comprehend, nor shall we know aught true.

3. [Tat.] There is, then, father, Truth e'en on the earth?

[Her.] Not inconsiderably, O son, art thou at fault.

Truth is in no wise, Tat, upon the earth, nor can it be.

But some men can, [I say,] have an idea of it,--should God grant them the power of godly vision. [*2]

Thus there is nothing true on earth,--[so much] I know and say. All are appearances and shows,--I know and speak true [things]. We ought not, surely, though, to call the knowing and the speaking of true things the Truth?

4. [Tat.] Why, how on earth ought we to know and speak of things being true,--yet nothing's true on earth?

[p. 20]

[Her.] This [much] is true,--that we do not know aught that's true down here. [*1] How could it be, O son?

For Truth is the most perfect virtue, the very highest Good, by matter undisturbed, uncircumscribed by body,--naked, [and] evident, changeless, august, unalterable Good.

But things down here, O son, thou seest what they are,--not able to receive this Good, corruptible, [and] passible, dissolvable, changeful, and ever altering, being born from one another.

Things, then, that are not true even to their own selves, how can they [possibly] be true?

For all that alters is untrue; it does not stay in what it is, but shows itself to us by changing into one another its appearances.

5. [Tat.] And even man,--is he not true, O father?

[Her.] As man,--he is not true, O son. For that the True is that which has its composition from itself alone, and in itself stays as it is.

But man has been composed of many things, and does not stay in his own self.

He changes and he alters, from age to age, from form to form, and that too, even while he's still in [one and] the [same] tent. [*2]

Nay, many fail to recognize their children,

[p. 21]

when a brief space of time comes in between; and so again of children with their parents.

That, then, which changes so that it's no longer recognized,--can that be true, O Tat?

Is it not, rather, false, coming and going, [*1] in the [all] varied shows of its [continual] changes?

But do thou have it in thy mind that a true thing is that which stays and lasts for aye.

But "man" is not for ever; wherefore it [*2] is not true. "Man's" an appearance. And appearance is extreme untruth.

6. [Tat.] But these external bodies, [*3] father, too, in that they change, are they not true?

[Her.] All that is subject unto genesis and change, is verily not true; but in as much as they are brought to being by the Forefather [*4] [of them all], they have their matter true.

But even they have something false in that they change; for naught that doth not stay with its own self is true.

[Tat.] True, father [mine]! Is one to say, then, that the Sun alone,--in that in greater measure than the rest of them he doth not change but stayeth with himself,--is Truth?

[Her.] [Nay, rather, but] because he, and

[p. 22]

he only, hath entrusted unto him the making of all things in cosmos, [*1] ruling all and making all;--to whom I reverence give, and worship pay unto his Truth, and recognise him as the Demiurge after the One and First.

[Tat.] What then, O father, should'st thou say is the first Truth?

[Her.] The One and Only, Tat,--He who is not of matter, or in body, the colourless, the figureless, the changeless [One], He who doth alter not, who ever is.

But the untrue, O son, doth perish. All things, however, on the earth that perish,--the Forethought of the True hath comprehended [them], and doth and will encompass [them].

For birth without corruption [*2] cannot be; corruption followeth on every birth, in order that it may be born again.

For that things that are born, must of necessity be born from things that are destroyed [*3]; and things that have been born, must of necessity be [once again] destroyed, in order that the genesis of things existent may not stop.

First, [then], see that thou recognize him [*4] as the Demiurge for birth-and-death [*5] of [all] existent things.

[p. 23]

8. Things that are born out of destruction, then, must of necessity be false,--in that they are becoming now these things, now those. For 'tis impossible they should become the same.

But that which is not "same,"--how can it possibly be true?

Such things we should, then, call appearances, [my] son; for instance, if we give the man his proper designation, [we ought to designate him] a man's [*1] appearance;--[and so] the child a child's appearance, the youth a youth's appearance, the man a man's appearance, the old man an appearance of the same.

For man is not a man, nor child a child, nor youth a youth, nor grown up man a grown up man, nor aged man a [single] aged man.

But as they change they are untrue,--both pre-existent things and things existent.

But thus think of them, son,--as even these untruths being energies dependent from above from Truth itself.

And this being so, I say untruth is Truth's in-working. [*2]

 

COMMENT

The excerpt seems complete in itself, but whether it lay before Stobaeus as a single sermon or as a part of a sermon it is impossible to say.

Footnotes

^17:1 skeinos. Cf. Ex. vii. 3 note, and also  section 5 below.

^17:2 Or real.

^18:1 Compare Lact., D. I., ii. 12.

^18:2 That is, Truth's.

^19:1 This presumably refers to the simple elements of things in themselves.

^19:2 ten theoptiken . . . dunamin.

^20:1 Taking enthade with the preceding clause.

^20:2 Cf.  section 1 above.

^21:1 Lit. becoming.

^21:2 Neuter, that is, the series of temporary appearances of the true man.

^21:3 The heavenly bodies presumably.

^21:4 tou propatoros; cf. Ex. i. 3.

^22:1 Cf. Ex. vii. 2, and  section 7 below.

^22:2 Or perishing.

^22:3 Or are corrupted, or perish.

^22:4 That is, the Sun; cf.  section 6 above.

^22:5 Lit. genesis.

^23:1 Lit. manhood's.

^23:2 Or operation; energema.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 24]

EXCERPT IV.

 

[GOD, NATURE AND THE GODS]

(Patrizzi (p. 51b) gives no title; but simply the heading "In Another [Book]."

Text: Stob., Phys., xxxv. 11, under the heading: "Of Hermes"; G. pp. 295, 296; M. i. 206; W. i. 293.

Menard, Livre IV., No. iv. of "Fragments Divers," p. 274).

1. [Her.] There is, then, That which transcends being, [*1]--beyond all things existent, and all that really are.

For That-transcending-being is [that mystery] because of which exists that being-ness [*2] which is called universal, common unto intelligibles that really are, and to those beings which are thought of according to the law of sameness.

Those which are contrary to these, according to the law of otherness, are again themselves according to themselves. [*3]

[p. 25]

And Nature is an essence which the senses can perceive, containing in itself all sensibles.

2. Between these [*1] are the intelligible [*2] and the sensible gods.

Things that pertain to the intelligence, share in [the nature of] the Gods that are intelligible only; while things pertaining to opinion, have their part with those that are the sensible.

These latter are the images of the intelligences [*3]; the Sun, for instance, is the image of the Demiurgic God above the Heaven.

For just as He hath made the universe, so doth Sun make the animals, and generate the plants, and regulate the breaths. [*4]

 

COMMENT

I have supplied the title for the sake of uniformity. If we compare our extract with Ex. vii, and especially the last sentence of the former with the first sentence of  section 2 of the latter, and note that in Stobaeus the one excerpt follows almost immediately on the other, we shall be fairly well persuaded that they both come from the same collection--namely, the Sermons to Tat.

 

Footnotes

^24:1 Or the pre-existent; to pro on, or to proon.

^24:2 oysiotes; or essentiality.

^24:3 This seems to refer to the seven spheres of difference or otherness (kata to eteron) moving symbolically against, or "crosswise with," the all-embracing sphere of sameness (kath' eayto); or it may mean that they have a sameness in the fact that their motions enter into themselves "again."

^25:1 Presumably God and Nature.

^25:2 noematikoi,--a very rare form, and may possibly mean perceptible.

^25:3 noematun.

^25:4 Or spirits. The last clause, "and regulates," etc., is absent from some MSS., and is, therefore, considered spurious by some editors; but its unexpectedness is a strong guarantee of its genuineness. The "spirits" are the prana's of Hindu physiological psychology; cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 13, Comment., and Exs. xv. 2, xix. 3.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 26]

EXCERPT V

 

[OF MATTER]

(I have added the title, it being the same as that of the main section of Stobaeus, Patrizzi (p. 51) giving only the simple heading "From the [Sermons] to Tat."

Text: Stobaeus, Phys., xi. 2, under the heading: "Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Tat"; G. p. 121; M. i. 84, 85; W. i. 131.

Menard, Livre IV., No. viii. of "Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his son Tat," p. 250.)

Her. Matter both has been born, O son, and it has been [before it came into existence]; for Matter is the vase of genesis, [*1] and genesis, the mode of energy of God, who's free from all necessity of genesis, and pre-exists.

[Matter], accordingly, by its reception of the seed of genesis, did come [herself] to birth, and [so] became subject to change, and, being shaped,

[p. 27]

took forms; for she, contriving the forms of her [own] changing, presided over her own changing self.

The unborn state [*1] of Matter, then, was formlessness [*2]; its genesis is its being brought into activity.

Footnotes

^26:1 Or receptacle or field of genesis, or birth (aggeion geneseus). The idea of a vessel or vase of birth was a familiar symbol with the Pythagoreans; metaggismos (from the simile of pouring water out of one vessel into another) being one of their synonyms for metempsychosis.

^27:1 agennesia

^27:2 amorfia. Compare this with the Christian Gnostic commentator of the Naassene Document, quoted by Hippolytus (Philos. v. 7), and the comment of Hippolytus on him: "Their first and Blessed Formless Essence (asxematistos oysia), the cause of all forms" ("Myth of Man,"  section 7).

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 28]

EXCERPT VI.

 

OF TIME

(Title from Patrizzi (p. 38b); followed by: "To the Same Tat."

Text: Stob., Phys., viii. 41, under heading: "Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Tat"; G. p. 93; M. i. 64.

Menard, Livre IV., No. v. of "Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son Tat," p. 241.)

1. NOW to find out concerning the three times; for they are neither by themselves, nor [yet] are they at-oned; and [yet] again they are at-oned, and by themselves [as well].

For should'st thou think the present is without the past, it can't be present unless it has become already past. [*1]

For from the past the present comes, and from the present future goes.

But if we have to scrutinize more closely, thus let us argue:

2. Past time doth pass into no longer being

[p. 29]

this, [*1] and future [time] doth not exist, in its not being present; nay, present even is not present, in its continuing.

Time, then, which stands not [steady] (esteke), but which is on the turn, without a central point at which to stop,--how can it be called in-stant (enestw's), [*2] seeing even that it hath no power to stand (estanai)?

Again, past joining present, and present [joining] future, they [thus] are one; for they are not without them [*3] in their sameness, and their oneness, and their continuity.

Thus, [then], time's both continuous and discontinuous, though one and the same [time].

Footnotes

^28:1 That is, apparently, you cannot think of the present until it is already past.

^29:1 That is, apparently, "present."

^29:2 The usual term in Greek for "present," but I have here translated it by "instant" in order to keep the word-play, which would otherwise entirely vanish in translation.

^29:3 That is, apparently, any one without the other two, or any two without the other one.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 30]

EXCERPT VII.

 

OF BODIES EVERLASTING [AND BODIES PERISHABLE]

(Title (first half) from Patrizzi (p. 45b), followed by "To the Same Tat."

Text: Stob., Phys., xxxv. 8, under the curious heading: "Of Hermes--From the [Sermons] to Ammon to Tat"; where "to Tat" is evidently a marginal correction for an erroneous "to Ammon." G. pp. 292-294; M. i. 204, 205; W. i. 290-292.

Menard, Livre IV., No. iii. of "Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son Tat," pp. 238, 239.)

1. [Her.] The Lord and Demiurge of all eternal bodies, Tat, when He had made them once for all, made them no more, nor doth He make them [now].

Committing them unto themselves, and co-uniting them with one another, He let them go, in want of naught, as everlasting things.

If they have want of any, it will be want of one another and not of any increase to their number from without, in that they are immortal.

[p. 31]

For that it needs must be that bodies made by Him should have their nature of this kind.

2. Our Demiurge, [*1] however, who is [himself already] in a body, [*2] hath made us,--he makes for ever, and will [ever] make, bodies corruptible and under sway of death.

For 'twere not law that he should imitate the Maker of himself,--all the more so as 'tis impossible.

For that the latter did create from the first essence which is bodiless; the former made as from the bodying [*3] brought into existence [by his Lord].

3. It follows, then, according to right reason, that while those bodies, since they are brought into existence from incorporal essence, are free from death, ours are corruptible and under sway of death,--in that our matter is composed of bodies, [*4] as may be seen from their being weak and needing much assistance.

For how would it be possible our bodies' continuity should last, unless it had some nutriment imported [into it] from similar elements, and [so] renewed our bodies day by day?

For that we have a stream of earth, and water,

[p. 32]

fire, and air, flowing into us, which renovates our bodies, and keeps our tent [*1] together.

We are too weak to bear the motions [of our frames], enduring them not even for one single day.

For know, [my] son, that if our bodies did not rest at night, we should not last a single day.

4. Wherefore, our Maker, being good, and with foreknowledge of all things, in order that the animal may last, hath given sleep, the greatest [calm [*2]] of the fatigue of motion, and hath appointed equal time to each, or rather more, for rest.

Ponder well, son, the mightiest energy of sleep,--the opposite to the soul's [energy], but not inferior to it.

For that just as the soul is motion's energy, so bodies also cannot live without [the help of] sleep.

For 'tis the relaxation and the recreation of the jointed limbs; it also operates within,

[p. 33]

converting into body the fresh supply of matter that flows in, apportioning to each its proper [kind],--the water to the blood, the earth to bones and marrow, the air to nerves and veins, the fire to sight. [*1]

Wherefore the body, too, feels keen delight in sleep, for it is sleep that brings this [feeling of] delight into activity.

 

COMMENT

Patrizzi's title is by no means descriptive of the main contents of the excerpt, which is evidently from the Sermons of Hermes to Tat, and from the same collection of these from which Stobaeus has taken the previous two extracts,--that is, presumably, the Expository Sermons.

Footnotes

^31:1 That is, the Demiurge of our bodies, which are not everlasting.

^31:2 The Sun, perhaps; cf. C. H., xvi. 18; and Ex., iii. 6 and iv. 2; and Lact., D. I., iv. 6.

^31:3 sumatw'seus,--cf. Ex. viii. 5.

^31:4 Sc. the elements.

^32:1 skeinos,--used by Plato (ap. Clem. Alex., 703), and the Pythagoreans (Timaeus Locr., 100 A, 101, C, E), and the Later Platonists, for the body as the tabernacle of the soul. See especially the response of the Oracle at Delphi, when consulted concerning the state of the soul of Plotinus after death, as quoted by Porphyry in his Life of Plotinus: "But now since thou hast struck thy tent, and left the tomb of thy angelic soul" (see my "Lives of the Later Platonists" in The Theosophical Review (July, 1896), xviii. 372. Cf. Ex. iii. 1 and 5; and C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 12 and 15.

^32:2 Added by Heeren to complete the sense.

^33:1 Cf. C. H., xvi. 7, note.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

EXCERPT VIII.

 

OF ENERGY AND FEELING

(Title from Patrizzi (p. 44); preceded by "Of Thrice-greatest Hermes."

Text: Stob., Phys., xxxv. 6, under the heading: "From the [Sermons] to Tat"; G. pp. 284-291; M. i. 198-203; W. i. 284-289.

Menard, Livre IV., No. ii. of "Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son Tat," pp. 231-237.)

1. Tat. Rightly hast thou explained these things, O father [mine]. Now give me further teaching as to those.

For thou hast said somewhere [*1] that science and that art do constitute the rational's energy. [*2]

But now thou say'st that the irrational lives, [*3] through deprivation of the rational, are and are called ir-rational.

According to this reasoning, [therefore], it follows of necessity that the irrational lives are

[p. 35]

without any share in science or in art, through deprivation of the rational.

2. Her. [It follows] of necessity, [my] son.

Tat. How, then, O father, do we see some of irrational [creatures] using [both] intelligence, and art?--the ants, for instance, storing their food for winter, and in like fashion, [too,] the creatures of the air building their nests, and the four-footed beasts [each] knowing their own holes. [*1]

Her. These things they do, O son, neither by science nor by art, but by [the force of] nature.

Science and art are teachable; but none of these irrationals is taught a thing.

Things done by nature are [so] done by reason of the general energy of things.

Things [done] by art and science are achieved by those who know, [and] not by all.

Things done by all are brought into activity [*2] by nature.

3. For instance, all look up [to heaven]; but all [are] not musicians, or [are] all archers, or hunters, or the rest.

But some of them have learned one thing,

[p. 36]

[paragraph continues] [others another thing], science and art being active [*1] [in them].

In the same way, if some ants only did this thing, and others not, thou would'st have rightly said they acted by [the light] of science, and stored their food by means of art.

But if they all without distinction are driven by their nature to [do] this, though [it may be] against their will,--'tis plain they do not do it or by science or by art.

4. For Tat, these energies, though [in themselves] they are incorporal, are [found] in bodies, and act through bodies.

Wherefore, O Tat, in that they are incorporal, thou sayest that they are immortal; but, in so far as without bodies they cannot manifest activity, [*2] I say that they are ever in a body.

Things once called into being for some purpose, or some cause, things that come under Providence and Fate, can never stay inactive of their proper energy.

For that which is, shall ever be; for that this [being] is [the very] body and the life of it.

5. It follows from this reason, [then,] that these are always bodies.

Wherefore I say that "bodying" [*3] itself is an eternal [exercise of] energy.

[p. 37]

If bodies are on earth, they're subject unto dissolution; yet must these [ever] be [on earth to serve] as places and as organs for the energies.

The energies, however, [are] immortal, and the immortal is eternally,--[that is, that] body-making, if it ever is, [*1] is energy.

6. [The energies] accompany the soul, though not appearing all at once.

Some of them energize the man the moment that he's born, united with the soul round its irrational [parts]; whereas the purer ones, with change of age, [*2] co-operate with the soul's rational part.

But all these energies depend on bodies. From godly [*3] bodies they descend to mortal [frames], these body-making [energies]; each one of them is [ever] active, either around the body or the soul.

Yea, they are active with the soul itself without a body. They are for ever in activity.

The soul, however, is not for ever in a mortal body, for it can be without the body; whereas the energies can never be without the bodies.

[p. 38]

This is a sacred saying (logos), son: Body apart from soul cannot persist; its being can. [*1]

7. Tat. What dost thou mean, O father [mine]?

Her. Thus understand it, Tat! When soul leaves body, body itself remains.

But [even] the body so abandoned, [*2] as long as it remains, is in activity, being broken up and made to disappear.

For body without [the exercise of] energy could not experience these things. [*3]

This energy, accordingly, continues with the body when the soul has gone.

This, therefore, is the difference of an immortal body and a mortal one,--that the immortal doth consist of a one single matter, but this [body does] not.

The former's active, and the latter's passive.

For every thing that maketh active is the stronger; and [every thing] that is made active is the weaker.

The stronger, too, being in authority and free, doth lead; the [weaker] follows [as] a slave.

8. The energies, then, energize not only bodies that are ensouled, but also [bodies] unensouled,

[p. 39]

[paragraph continues] --stocks, stones, [*1] and all such things;--both making [them] to grow, and to bear fruits, and ripening [them], dissolving, melting, rotting and crumbling [them], and setting up [in them] all like activities which bodies without souls can undergo.

For energy's [*2] the name, O son, for just the thing that's going on,--that is becoming.

And many things needs must for ever be becoming; nay, rather, all things [must].

For never is Cosmos bereft of any of existent things, but being borne [*3] for aye in its own self, it bears existent things,--[things] that shall never cease from being destroyed again. [*4]

9. Know, then, that energy of every kind is ever free from death,--no matter what it is, or in what body.

And of the energies, some are of godly bodies, and some of those which are corruptible; some [are] general, and some special. Some [are] of genera, and some are of the parts of every genus.

The godly ones, [accordingly], are those that exercise their energies through everlasting bodies. And these are perfect [energies], in that [they energize] through perfect bodies.

But partial [energies are] those [that energize] through each one of the [single] living things.

[p. 40]

And special [energies are those that energize] through each one of existent things.

10. This argument, accordingly, O son, deduces that all things are full of energies.

For though it needs must be that energies should be in bodies,--and there be many bodies in the Cosmos,--I say that energies are many more than bodies.

For often in one body there is [found] one, and a second and a third [activity],--not counting in the general ones that come with it.

By general ones I mean the purely corporal ones, that exercise themselves through the sensations [*1] and the motions [of the body].

For that without these energies the body [of an animal] can not persist.

11. The souls of men, however, have a second class of energies,--the special ones [that exercise themselves] through arts, and sciences, and practices, and [purposed] doings. [*2]

For that the feelings [*3] follow on the energies or rather are completions [*4] of the energies.

Know, then, O son, the difference of energy and of sensation.

[Thus] energy is sent down from above; whereas sensation, being in the body and having its existence from it, receives the energy

[p. 41]

and makes it manifest, as though it did embody it.

Wherefore I say sensations are both corporal and mortal, and last as long as doth the body [only].

Nay, rather, its sensations are born together with the body, and they die with it.

12. But the immortal bodies in themselves have no sensation,--[not even an] immortal [one], as though they were composed out of some essence of some kind.

For that sensation doth arise entirely from naught else than either from the bad or else the good that's added to the body, or that is, on the contrary, taken [from it] again.

But with eternal bodies there is no adding to nor taking from.

Wherefore, sensation doth not occur in them.

13. Tat. Is, then, sensation felt in every body?

Her. In every body, son; and energies are active in all [bodies, too].

Tat. Even in bodies without souls, O father [mine]?

Her. Even in them, O son. There are, however, differences in the sensations.

The feelings of the rationals occur with reason; those of irrationals are simply corporal; as for the things that have no soul, they [also] have

[p. 42]

sensations, but passive ones,--experience of increase [only] and decrease. [*1]

Moreover, passion and sensation depend from one [same] head, [*2] and they are gathered up again into the same, and that, too, by the energies.

14. Of lives [*3] with souls there are two other energies which go with the sensations and the passions,--grief and joy.

And without these, an ensouled life, and most of all a rational one, could not experience sensation.

Wherefore, I say that there are forms of passions,--[and] forms that dominate the rational lives more [than the rest].

The energies, then, are the active forces [in sensations], while the sensations are the indications of the energies.

15. Further, as these [*4] are corporal, they're set in motion by the irrational parts of [a man's] soul; wherefore, I say that both of them are mischievous.

For that both joy, though [for the moment] it provides sensation joined with pleasure, immediately becomes a cause of many ills [*5] to

[p. 43]

him who feeleth it; while grief [itself] provides [still] greater pains and suffering.

Wherefore, they both would seem [most] mischievous.

16. Tat. Can, then, sensation be the same in soul and body, father [mine]?

Her. How dost thou mean,--sensation in the soul, [my] son?

Tat. Surely it cannot be that soul's incorporal, and that sensation is a body, father,--sensation which is sometimes in a body and sometimes not, [just as the soul]?

Her. If we should put it in a body, son, we should [then] represent it as like the soul or [like] the energies. For that we say these [*1] are incorporals in bodies.

But [as] sensation's neither energy nor soul, nor any other thing than body, according to what has been said above, it cannot, therefore, be incorporal.

And if it's not incorporal, it must be body.

For of existing things some must be bodies and the rest incorporal.

 

COMMENT

Again, as with the last excerpt, the earlier editions of Stobaeus have Asclepius and Tat as the persons of

[p. 44]

the dialogue instead of Hermes and Tat. Wachsmuth gives them correctly.

The second sentence is of great interest, for it refers us presumably to C. H., x. (xi.), 22: "God's rays, to use a figure, are his energies; the Cosmos's are natures; the arts and sciences are man's." Seeing, however, that "The Key" is an Epitome of the General Sermons to Tat, the statement may also have been made in one of these sermons.

In either case the existence of these General Sermons is presupposed, and, therefore, it may be that our excerpt is, again, one of the Expository Sermons to Tat.

The beginning of the Sermon has clearly been omitted by Stobaeus, and apparently the end also.

Footnotes

^34:1 That is in some previous sermon.

^34:2 Action or operation,--energeian einai tou logikou. Cf.  section 11 below.

^34:3 Or animals.

^35:1 kai ta aeria zua omoius kalias eaytois syntithenta, ta de tetrapoda gnurizonta tous fuleous tous idioys. Compare Matt. viii. 20 = Luke ix. 58 (word for word): ai alw'pekes fuleous exoysin kai ta peteina tou oyranou kataskenw'seis--"The foxes have holes and the birds of the air nests." The first and third Evangelists here copy verbally from their "Logia" source.

^35:2 Or energized.

^36:1 Or energizing.

^36:2 Lit. energize.

^36:3 sumatusin,--cf. Ex. vii. 2; cf. also the psuxusis of K. K., 9.

^37:1 That is, if it goes on continually.

^37:2 kata metabolen teis elikias,--generally supposed to be the seventh year. Compare the apocryphal logos: "He who seeks me shall find me in children from the age of seven years"--quoted by the Christian Overwriter of the Naassene Document from the Gospel according to Thomas (Hipp., Philos., v. 7;  section 7 in "Myth of Man").

^37:3 Or divine,--the bodies of the Gods, the heavenly bodies, or the spiritual and immortal bodies of the soul.

^38:1 synestanai men suma xuris psyxeis oy dunatai, to de einai dunatai,--"its being" presumably refers to the abstract "bodying" (sumatusis) referred to above.

^38:2 Lit. this body.

^38:3 Sc. dissolution and disappearance.

^39:1 Cf. Naassene Document,  section 4, and  section 13 below.

^39:2 Or activity.

^39:3 Or conceived.

^39:4 Reading aythis for aytou, with Heeren.

^40:1 Or feelings.

^40:2 energematun,--cf.  section 1 above.

^40:3 Or sensations.

^40:4 Or effects--apotelesmata.

^42:1 Cf.  section 8 above, and note.

^42:2 apo mias koryfeis ertentai. Compare this with Plato, Phaedo, i. 60 B, where Socrates speaks of the pleasant and the painful as "two (bodies) hanging from one head" (ek mias koryfeis synemmenu).

^42:3 Or animals.

^42:4 That is, the sensation of pleasure and pain.

^42:5 Sc. by contrast.

^43:1 That is, soul and energies.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 45]

EXCERPT IX.

 

OF [THE DECANS AND] THE STARS

(Patrizzi (p. 38b) does not give the first third of the text ( section section 1-5), and his title, "Of the Stars," is evidently incomplete; it is followed by "To the Same [i.e. Tat]."

Text: Stob., Phys., xxi. 9, under the heading: "Of Hermes from the [Sermon] to Tat," pp. 184-190; M. i. 129-133; W. i. 189-194.

Menard, Livre IV., No. vi. of "Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son Tat," pp. 242-247, under the sub-heading, "Of the Decans and the Stars.")

1. Tat. Since in thy former General Sermons (Logoi [*1]), [father,] thou didst promise me an explanation of the Six-and-thirty Decans, [*2] explain, I prithee, now concerning them and their activity. [*3]

Her. There's not the slightest wish in me not to do so, O Tat, and this should prove the

[p. 46]

most authoritative sermon (logos) and the chiefest of them all. So ponder on it well.

We have already spoken unto thee about the Circle of the Animals, or the Life-giving one, [*1] of the Five Planets, and of Sun and Moon, and of the Circle [*2] of each one of these.

2. Tat. Thou hast done so, Thrice-greatest one. 

Her. Thus would I have thee understand as well about the Six-and-thirty Decans,--calling the former things to mind, in order that the sermon on the latter may also be well understood by thee.

Tat. I have recalled them, father, [to my mind].

Her. We said, [my] son, there is a Body which encompasses all things.

Conceive it, then, as being in itself a kind of figure of a sphere-like shape; so is the universe conformed.

Tat. I've thought of such a figure in my mind, just as thou dost describe, O father [mine].

3. Her. Beneath the Circle of this [all-embracing] frame [*3] are ranged the Six-and-thirty Decans, between this Circle of the Universe and that one of the Animals, determining the boundaries of both these Circles, and, as it were,

[p. 47]

holding that of the Animals aloft up in the air, and [so] defining it.

They [*1] share the motion of the Planetary Spheres, and [yet] have equal powers with the [main] motion of the Whole, [*2] crosswise [*3] the Seven.

They're [*4] checked by nothing but the All-encircling Body, for this must be the final thing in the [whole grades of] motion,--itself by its own self.

But they speed on the Seven other Circles, because they [*5] move with a less rapid motion than the [Circle] of the All.

Let us, then, think of them as though of Watchers stationed round [and watching] over both the Seven themselves and o'er the Circle of the All,--or rather over all things in the World,

[p. 48]

[paragraph continues] --holding together all, and keeping the good order of all things.

4. Tat. Thus do I have it, father, in my mind, from what thou say'st.

Her. Moreover, Tat, thou should'st have in thy mind that they are also free from the necessities laid on the other Stars.

They are not checked and settled in their course, nor are they [further] hindered and made to tread in their own steps again [*1]; nor are they kept away from [*2] the Sun's light,--[all of] which things the other Stars endure.

But free, above them all, as though they were inerrant Guards and Overseers of the whole, they night and day surround the universe.

5. Tat. Do these, then, also, further exercise an influence [*3] upon us?

Her. The greatest, O [my] son. For if they act in [*4] them, [*5] how should they fail to act on us as well,--both on each one of us and generally? [*6]

Thus, O [my] son, of all those things that happen generally, the bringing into action [*7] is from these [*8]; as for example,--and ponder what I say,--downfalls of kingdoms, states' rebellions,

[p. 49]

plagues [and] famines, tidal waves [and] quakings of the earth; no one of these, O son, takes place without their action. [*1]

Nay, further still, bear this in mind. If they rule over them, and we are in our turn beneath the Seven, dost thou not think that some of their activity extends to us as well,--[who are] assuredly their sons, or [come into existence] by their means?

6. Tat. What, [then,] may be the type [*2] of body that they have, O father [mine]?

Her. The many call them daimones; but they are not some special class of daimones, for they have not some other kind of bodies made of some special kind of matter, nor are they moved by means of soul, as we [are moved], but they are [simple] operations [*3] of these Six-and-thirty Gods.

Nay, further, still, have in thy mind, O Tat, their operations,--that they cast in the earth the seed of those whom [men] call Tanes, some playing the part of saviours, others being most destructive. [*4]

[p. 50]

7. Further the Stars [*1] in heaven as well do in their several [courses] bear them [*2] underworkers [*3]; and they [*4] have ministers and warriors [*5] too.

And they [*6] in [everlasting] congress with them [*7] speed on their course in aether floating, fullfilling [all] its [*8] space, so that there is no space above empty of stars.

They are the cosmic engine of the universe, [*9] having their own peculiar action, which is subordinate, however, to the action of the Thirty-six,--from whom throughout [all] lands arise the deaths of [all] the other lives [*10] with souls, and hosts of [lesser] lives that spoil the fruit.

8. And under them [*11] is what is called the

[p. 51]

[paragraph continues] Bear, [*1]--just in the middle of the Circle of the Animals, [*2] composed of seven stars, and with another corresponding [Bear] [*3] above its head.

Its energy is as it were an axle's, setting nowhere and nowhere rising, but stopping [ever] in the self-same space, and turning round the same, giving its proper motion [*4] to the Life-producing Circle, [*5] and handing over this whole universe from night to day, from day to night.

And after this [*6] there is another choir of stars, to which we have not thought it proper to give names; but they who will come after us, [*7] in imitation, will give them names themselves. [*8]

9. Again, below the Moon, are other stars, [*9] corruptible, deprived of energy, which hold together for a little while, in that they've been exhaled out of the earth itself into the air above the earth,--which ever are being broken up, in that they have a nature like unto [that of] useless lives on earth, which come into existence for no other purpose than to die,--such as the tribe of flies, and fleas, and worms, and other things like them.

[p. 52]

For these are useful, Tat, neither to us nor to the world; but, on the contrary, they trouble and annoy, being nature's by-products, [*1] which owe their birth to her extravagance. [*2]

Just in the same way, too, the stars exhaled from earth do not attain the upper space.

They cannot do so, since they are sent forth from below; and, owing to the greatness of their weight, dragged down by their own matter, they quickly are dispersed, and, breaking up, fall back again on earth, affecting nothing but the mere disturbance of the air about the earth.

10. There is another class, O Tat, that of the so-called long-haired [stars], [*3] appearing at their proper times, and after a short time, becoming once again invisible;--they neither rise nor set nor are they broken up.

These are the brilliant messengers and heralds of the general destinies of things [*4] that are to be.

They occupy the space below the Circle of the Sun.

When, then, some chance is going to happen to the world, [comets] appear, and, shining for some days, again return behind [*5] the Circle of the Sun, and stay invisible,--some showing in

[p. 53]

the east, some in the north, some in the west, and others in the south. We call them Prophets. [*1]

11. Such is the nature of the stars. The stars, however, differ from the star-groups. [*2]

The stars are they which sail [*3] in heaven; the star-groups, on the contrary, are fixed in heaven's frame, [*4] and they are borne along together with the heaven,--Twelve out of which we call the Zodia. [*5]

He who knows these can form some notion clearly of [what] God is; and, if one should dare say so, becoming [thus] a seer for himself, [so] contemplate Him, and, contemplating Him, be blessed.

12. Tat. Blessed, in truth, is he, O father [mine], who contemplateth Him.

Her. But 'tis impossible, O son, that one in body [*6] should have this good chance.

Moreover, he should train his soul beforehand, here and now, that when it reacheth there, [the space] where it is possible for it to contemplate, it may not miss its way.

But men who love their bodies,--such men will never contemplate the Vision of the Beautiful and Good.

[p. 54]

For what, O son, is that [fair] Beauty which hath no form nor any colour, nor any mass? [*1]

Tat. Can there be aught that's beautiful apart from these?

Her. God only, O [my] son; or rather that which is still greater,--the [proper] name of God.

 

COMMENTARY

The earlier editors of Stobaeus (apparently following the mistake of Patrizzi) have Asclepius instead of Tat as the second person of the dialogue, which is clearly wrong according to the text itself (see the first sentence given to Hermes, and  section section 9 and 10). [*2]

The excerpt is from a sermon in the Collection to Tat. It belongs to the further explanation of things referred to only generally in the General Sermons; it is, therefore, again probably from one of the Expository Sermons, in which series already a sermon has been given on the Zodiacal Twelve and on the Seven Spheres.

Seeing also that it is stated that this sermon is "most authoritative and the chiefest of them all," we must suppose that it came at the end of one of the Books of the Expository Sermons.

We seem to have the beginning of the sermon, but not the end, for Stobaeus breaks off in an aimless and provoking fashion in the midst of a subject.

For a list of the Egyptian names of the Decans, with their Greek transcriptions and symbols, see Budge, Gods of the Egyptians, ii. 304-308.

Footnotes

^45:1 en tois emprosthen genikois logois. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 1 and 7; xiii. (xiv.) 1; and Ex. xviii. 1.

^45:2 These are the "Horoscopes" of P. S. A., xix. 3. Cf. also Origen, C. Cels., viii. 58; R. 225, n. 1.

^45:3 Or energy.

^46:1 The zodiac; peri tou zudiakou kukloy e tou zuoforoy,--of which the second member is probably a gloss; but see  section 8 below.

^46:2 Or sphere.

^46:3 Or body.

^47:1 That is, the Decans.

^47:2 Or Universe.

^47:3 This refers to the astronomical system underlying the Pythagoreo-Platonic tradition, as, for instance, set forth allegorically and symbolically by Plato in the famous passage in The Timaeus (36 B, C). "The entire compound he (the Demiurge) divided lengthways into two parts, which he joined to one another at the centre like the letter X, and bent them into a circular form, connecting them with themselves and each other at the point opposite to their original meeting point; and, comprehending them in a uniform revolution upon the same axis, he made the one the outer and the other the inner circle. Now the motion of the outer circle he called the motion of the same, and the motion of the inner circle the motion of the other or diverse" (Jowett's Translation, iii. 454, 455). The X symbolizes the "crosswise," which in terms of motion may be translated as "inverse to."

^47:4 Sc. the Decans.

^47:5 The Decans.

^48:1 Referring, presumably, to the fixed stars and the planets.

^48:2 Reading apo for ypo,--referring to eclipses.

^48:3 Or energy.

^48:4 Or energize.

^48:5 That is, the Seven Spheres.

^48:6 The rest of the fragment is also found in Patrizzi (p. 38b) under the title "Of the Stars."

^48:7 Or energy.

^48:8 Sc. the Decans.

^49:1 Cf. C. H., xvi. 10.

^49:2 tupos. The question concerning the spiritual and other spaces and their inhabitants, "Of what type are they?"--occurs with great frequency in the Bruce and Askew Gnostic Codices.

^49:3 Or energies.

^49:4 oti kai eis ten gein spermatizoysin as kalousi tanas, tas men suterioys, tas de olethriw'tatas. Neither Patrizzi nor Gaisford, nor Meineke, nor Wachsmuth, nor Menard, has a word to say on this most interesting passage. I would suggest in the first place that the text is faulty, and that we should read "oys kalousi Tanas, tous men suterioys, tous de olethriutatoys"; and in the second that Tanas is a shortened form of Titanas or Titans. Tanas (? from Tan) is connected with tanaos, "stretched out," from  sqrttan, just as Titan is connected with titainu,--Titanes thus signifying the Stretchers or Strivers. It may, however, also be connected with titas (tites)--from tinu, and so mean Avengers. Cf. J. Laurent. Lydus, De Mensibus, iv. 31 (W. 90, 24), as given in note to P. S. A., xxviii. 1.

^50:1 The planetary spheres, presumably.

^50:2 Sc. the Decans.

^50:3 ypoleitoyrgous--a apax legomenon. The term leitoyrgoi, however, is of frequent occurrence in the Askew and Bruce Codices. See, for instance, Pistis Sophia (Schwartze's Trans.), p. 10: "Atque dekanoi arxontun eorumque leitoyrgoi"

^50:4 The Decans.

^50:5 stratiw'tas--soldiers; one of the most famous of the degrees of the Mithriac mysteries was that of the Soldier. See Cumont (F.), Textes et Monuments Figures relatifs aux Mysteres de Mithra (Bruxelles; 1899), i. 315, and especially 317, n. 1.

^50:6 The Star-spheres.

^50:7 The Decans.

^50:8 Aether's.

^50:9 sygkosmountes to pan.

^50:10 Or animals.

^50:11 The Decans.

^51:1 The Great Bear. Compare "Behold the Bear up there that circles round the Pole."

^51:2 The zodiac.

^51:3 The Little Bear.

^51:4 Lit. energy.

^51:5 Cf.  section 1 above.

^51:6 Sc. the Bear.

^51:7 Cf. P. S. A., xii. 3; xiv. 1.

^51:8 That is, apparently, invent them out of their own heads haphazard.

^51:9 Referring, presumably, to the phenomena of "shooting stars."

^52:1 parakoloythe'mata--sequellae.

^52:2 See the same idea in Plutarch, De Is. et Os., iv. 5, concerning lice.

^52:3 The comets--tun kaloymenun kometun.

^52:4 apotelesmatun.

^52:5 Lit. below.

^53:1 manteis, seers or diviners.

^53:2 asteres de astrun diaforan exoysin. The asteres are the planets, aerolites and comets; the astra are the sidera, signs of the fixed stars or constellations.

^53:3 Or float (aiuroumenoi), lit. are raised aloft.

^53:4 Or body.

^53:5 The zodiac; lit. the animal signs, or signs of lives.

^53:6 Cf. Ex. i. 6.

^54:1 Or body.

^54:2 Menard and Wachsmuth have Tat. For other changes of a similar nature cf. Exx. i. and viii., and C. H., ii. (iii.), and xvii.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

EXCERPT X.

 

[CONCERNING THE RULE OF PROVIDENCE, NECESSITY AND FATE]

(Title in Patrizzi (p. 38), "Of Fate," simply; followed by "From the [Sermons] to Tat."

Text: Stob., Phys., iv. 8, under heading: "Of Hermes to his Son"; G. pp. 61, 62; M. i. 42, 43; W. i. 73, 74.

Menard, Livre IV., No. vii. of "Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son Tat," pp. 248, 249.)

1. [Tat.] Rightly, O father, hast thou told me all; now further, [pray,] recall unto my mind what are the things that Providence doth rule, and what the things ruled by Necessity, and in like fashion also [those] under Fate.

[Her.] I said there were in us, O Tat, three species of incorporals.

The first's a thing the mind alone can grasp [*1]; it thus is colourless, figureless, massless, [*2] proceeding out of the First Essence in itself, sensed by the mind alone. [*3]

And there are also, [secondly,] in us, opposed

[p. 56]

to this, [*1] configurings, [*2]--of which this serves as the receptacle. [*3]

But what has once been set in motion by the Primal [*4] Essence for some [set] purpose of the Reason (Logos), and that has been conceived [*5] [by it], straightway doth change into another form of motion; this is the image of the Demiurgic Thought. [*6]

2. And there is [also] a third species of incorporals, which doth eventuate round bodies,--space, time, [and] motion, figure, surface, [*7] size, [and] species.

Of these there are two [sets of] differences.

The first [lies] in the quality pertaining specially unto themselves; the second [set is] of the body.

The special qualities are figure, colour, species, space, time, movement.

[The differences] peculiar to body are figure

[p. 57]

configured, and colour coloured; there's also form conformed, surface and size. [*1]

The latter with the former have no part.

3. The Intelligible Essence, then, in company with God, [*2] has power o'er its own self, and [power] to keep [*3] another, in that it keeps itself, since Essence in itself is not under Necessity.

But when 'tis left by God, it takes unto itself the corporal nature; its choice of it being ruled by Providence,--that is, its choosing of the world. [*4]

All the irrational is moved to-wards some reason.

Reason [comes] under Providence; unreason [falls] under Necessity; the things that happen in the corporal [fall] under Fate.

Such is the Sermon on the rule of Providence, Necessity and Fate.

 

COMMENT

I have taken the title from the concluding words, which are evidently the end of the sermon. Stobaeus thus seems to have reproduced the whole of this little tractate, which should be read in connection with Exx. xi., xii. and xiii. C. H., xii. (xiii.) 6 (see Commentary), seems to presuppose this sermon.

Footnotes

^55:1 Or an intelligible something.

^55:2 Or bodiless.

^55:3 That is, the intelligible essence.

^56:1 Sc. of opposite nature to the first incorporal, as negative to positive, say.

^56:2 sxematotetes--that is, the "somethings" more subtle or ideal than figures or shapes,--types, or prototypes, or paradigms of some kind.

^56:3 That is, plays the part of matter, "womb," or "nurse" to these.

^56:4 Lit. intelligible.

^56:5 Or received.

^56:6 Or Mind. Heeren (as also all editors subsequent to him) thinks that something has here fallen out of the text, because he finds no second incorporal specifically mentioned; but the duality of the demiurgic thought, active and passive, creative and conceptive, will do very well for the second.

^56:7 Or appearance.

^57:1 The distinction seems to be between colour, form, etc., "in itself," and differentiated colours, forms, etc.

^57:2 pros tui theui genomene.

^57:3 Or save, preserve.

^57:4 This sentence seems to be corrupt.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 58]

EXCERPT XI.

 

[OF JUSTICE]

(I have added the title, the excerpt not being found in Patrizzi.

Text: Stob., Phys., iii. 52, under the vague heading: "Of Hermes"; G. p. 50; M. i. 33, 34; W. i. 62, 63.

Menard, Livre IV., No. iv. of "Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son Tat," p. 240.)

1. [Her.] For there hath been appointed, O [my] son, a very mighty Daimon turning in the universe's midst, that sees all things that men do on the earth.

Just as Foreknowledge [*1] and Necessity have been set o'er the Order of the gods, in the same way is Justice set o'er men, causing the same to act on them.

For they rule o'er the order of the things existing as divine, which have no will, nor any power, to err.

For the Divine cannot be made to wander; from which the incapacity to err accrues [to it].

[p. 59]

But Justice is appointed to correct the errors men commit on earth.

2. For, seeing that their race is under sway of death, and made out of bad matter, [it naturally errs], and failure is the natural thing, especially to those who are without the power of seeing the Divine. [*1]

'Tis over these that Justice doth have special sway. They're subject both to Fate through the activities of birth, [*2] and unto Justice through the mistakes [they make] in life. [*3]

 

COMMENT

The title and place of this excerpt has been discussed in the Commentary on C. H., xii. (xiii.) 6. It belongs to the Tat-Sermons, and in the collection of Lactantius probably stood prior to the Sermon of Hermes to Tat, "About the General Mind." [*4]

Footnotes

^58:1 Or Providence. Cf. Ex. i. 15, note.

^59:1 This recalls Philo's description of the Therapeuts, who were "taught ever more and more to see," and strive for the "intuition" or "sight of that which is,"--teis tou ontos theas (Philo, D. V. C., 891 P., 473 M.).

^59:2 That is, through the natural accidents that attend life in a body.

^59:3 That is, in their way of living--en tui biu.

^59:4 Compare with it Exx. x., xii., xiii.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 60]

EXCERPT XII.

 

OF PROVIDENCE AND FATE

(Title from Patrizzi (p. 38); followed by: "From the [Sermons] to Ammon."

Text: Stob., Phys., v. 20, under heading: "Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Ammon"; G. p. 70; M. i. 48, 49; W. i. 82.

Menard, Livre IV., No. ii. of "Fragments of the Books of Hermes to Ammon," p. 258.)

ALL things are born by Nature and by Fate, and there is not a [single] space bereft of Providence.

Now Providence is the Self-perfect [*1] Reason.

And of this [Reason] there are two spontaneous powers,--Necessity and Fate.

And Fate doth minister to Providence and to Necessity; while unto Fate the Stars [*2] do minister.

For Fate no one is able to escape, nor keep himself from their [*3] shrewd scrutiny. [*4]

For that the Stars are instruments of Fate; it is at its behest that they effect all things for nature and for men. [*5]

Footnotes

^60:1 aytoteles logos,--complete in itself.

^60:2 That is, the Seven Spheres.

^60:3 Sc. of the Stars.

^60:4 deinotetos.

^60:5 With this extract compare Exx. x., xi., xiii.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 61]

EXCERPT XIII.

 

OF THE WHOLE ECONOMY

(Patrizzi (p. 38) gives no title, but only the heading: "To the Same Ammon (Ammuna)."

Text: Stob., Phys., v. 16, under sub-heading: "Of the Whole Economy," followed by: "Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Ammon (Amoun [*1])"; G. p. 68; M. i. 47; W. i. 79, 80.

Menard, Livre IV., No. i. of "Fragments of the Books of Hermes to Ammon").

NOW what supporteth the whole World, [*2] is Providence; what holdeth it together and encircleth it about, is [called] Necessity; what drives all on and drives them round, [*3] is Fate, bringing Necessity to bear on them (for that its nature is the bringing into play of [this] Necessity); [it [*4] is] the cause of birth and death [*5] of life.

So, then, the Cosmos is beneath the sway of

[p. 62]

[paragraph continues] Providence [*1] (for 'tis the first to meet with it); but Providence [itself] [*2] extends itself to Heaven.

For which cause, [*3] too, the Gods revolve, and speed round [Heaven], [*4] possessed of tireless, never-ceasing motion.

But Fate [extends itself in Cosmos]; for which cause, too, Necessity [encompasses the Cosmos]. [*5]

And Providence foreknows; but Fate's the reason of the disposition of the Stars. [*6]

Such is the law that no one can escape, by which all things are ordered. [*7]

Footnotes

^61:1 The only place in which this form occurs in Stobaeus; cf. v. 20, and xxxv. 4, 7, 8.

^61:2 Or Cosmos.

^61:3 Or makes them to revolve

^61:4 Fate--eimarmene.

^61:5 Or destruction.

^62:1 Lit. "first has Providence." The following words in parentheses seem to be the gloss of a scribe who was puzzled by the sentence. Usener, however, would detect a lacuna after the parentheses and the beginning of a new excerpt after that, and Wachsmuth agrees with him. This seems to me to be unnecessary.

^62:2 That is, pure Providence unmixed with Necessity and Fate.

^62:3 That is, because of Providence, the law of heaven.

^62:4 ayton.

^62:5 The text is hopeless, being simply: eimarmene de, dioti kai anagke.

^62:6 That is, the Seven Spheres.

^62:7 Cf. Exx. x., xi., xii.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 63]

EXCERPT XIV.

 

OF SOUL [I.]

(Title from Patrizzi (p. 40); preceded by "Of Thrice-greatest Hermes," and followed by "To the Same Ammon."

Text: Stob., Phys., xxxv. 9, under heading: "Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Ammon"; G. pp. 282, 283; M. i. 196, 197; W. 281, 282.

Menard, Livre IV., No. iii. of "Fragments of the Books of Hermes to Ammon," pp. 259, 260.)

1. THE Soul is further [in itself] incorporal essence, and even when in body it by no means doth depart from the essentiality peculiar to itself.

Its nature is, according to its essence to be for ever moving, according to its thought [to be] self-motive [purely], not moved in something, nor towards something, nor [yet] because of something.

For it is prior [to them] in power, and prior stands not in any need of consequents.

"In something," furthermore,--means space, and time, and nature; "towards something,"--[this] means harmony, and form, and figure; "because of something,"--[this] means body, for 'tis because of body that there is time, and space, and nature.

[p. 64]

Now all these things are in connection with each other by means of a congenital relationship.

2. For instance, now, the body must have space, for it would be past all contriving that a body should exist without a space.

It changes, too, in nature, and 'tis impossible for change to be apart from time, and from the movement nature makes; nor is it further possible for there to be composing of a body apart from harmony.

It is because of body, then, that space exists; for that by its reception of the changes of the body, it does not let a thing that's changing pass away.

But, changing, it doth alternate from one thing to another, and is deprived of being in a permanent condition, but not of being body.

For body, qua body, remains body; but any special moment of its state does not remain.

The body, then, keeps changing in its states.

3. And so, space is incorporal, and time, and natural motion; but each of these has naturally its own peculiar property.

The property of space is receptivity; of time ['tis] interval and number; of nature [it is] motion; of harmony ['tis] love; of body, change.

The special nature of the Soul, however, is essential thought. [*1]

Footnotes

^64:1 Or thinking according to essence,--e kat' oysian noesis.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 65]

EXCERPT XV.

 

[OF SOUL, II.]

(Patrizzi (p. 40) runs this on to the preceding without a break.

Text: Stob., Phys., xxxv. 7, under heading: "Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Ammon"; G. pp. 291, 292; M. i. 203, 204; W. i. 289, 290.

Menard, Livre IV., No. iv. of "Fragments of the Books of Hermes to Ammon," pp. 261, 262.)

1. THAT which is moved is moved according to the operation of the motion that doth move the all.

For that the Nature of the all supplies the all with motion,--one [motion being] the [one] according to its [*1] Power, the other that according to [its] Operation. [*2]

The former doth extend itself throughout the whole of Cosmos, and holdeth it together from within; the latter doth extend itself [around it], and encompasseth it from without. And these go everywhere together through all things.

[p. 66]

Now the [Productive] Nature [*1] of all things supplies the things produced with [power of re-] production, sowing the seeds of its own self, [and] having its becomings [*2] by means of moving matter.

2. And Matter being moved was heated and did turn to Fire and Water,--the one [being] strong and active, and the other passive.

And Fire opposed by Water was dried up by it, and did become Earth borne on Water.

And when it [*3] was excessively dried up, [*4] a vapour rose from out the three,--from Water, Earth and Fire,--and became Air.

The [Four] came into congress, [then,] according to the reason of the Harmony, [*5]--hot with cold, [and] dry with moist.

And from the union [*6] of these [four] is spirit born, and seed proportionate to the surrounding Spirit.

This [spirit] falling in the womb does not remain inactive in the seed, but being active it transforms the seed, and [this] being [thus] transformed, develops growth and size.

[p. 67]

And as it grows in size, it draws unto itself a copy of a model, [*1] and is modelled.

3. And on the model is the form supported,--by means of which that which is represented by an image is so represented.

Now, since the spirit in the womb had not the motion that maintaineth life, but that which causeth fermentation [*2] [only], the Harmony composed the latter as the receptacle [*3] of rational life. [*4]

This [life] is indivisible and changeless; it never changes from its changelessness.

It [*5] ruleth the conception of the thing within the womb, by means of numbers, delivereth it, and bringeth it into the outer air.

The Soul [*6] dwells very near to it [*7];--not owing to some common property, but under the constraint of Fate; for that it has no love to be with body. [*8]

Wherefore, [the Harmony [*9]] according unto Fate doth furnish to the thing that's born [its] [*10]

[p. 68]

rational motion, and the intellectual essence of the life itself.

For that [this [*1]] doth insinuate itself into the spirit, and set it moving with the motion of the life. [*2]

 

COMMENTARY

Patrizzi is evidently at fault in running this on to Ex. xiv. without a break. The subject again is not so much "Of Soul" as "Of Conception and Birth," but as the general exposition falls in very well with the nature of the subjects treated in Exx. xiv. and xvi., we may keep the same general title, though we may be quite certain that it was not that of the original.

The exposition in  section 2 is reminiscent of an apocalyptic style, and seems to be a Greek overworking of Egyptian ideas; for though the details are different and the precise meaning difficult to disentangle, the general point of view may be compared with the embryonic stages of incarnation given in the Pistis Sophia (pp. 344 ff.).

THE EMBRYONIC STAGES OF INCARNATION

"Then the Rulers summon the workmen of their aeons, to the number of three hundred and sixty-five, and hand over to them the soul and the counterfeit of the spirit bound together, the one to the other, the counterfeit of the spirit being outside the soul, and the

[p. 69]

compound of the power within the soul being inside both, that they may hold together.

"(345) And the Rulers give commandment to the workmen, saying: 'This is the type which ye shall set in the body of the matter of the world. Set ye the compound of the power which is in the soul within all of them, that they may hold together, for it is their support, and outside the soul place the counterfeit of the spirit.' This is the order which they have given to their workmen, that they may set the antitypes in bodies.

"Following this plan the workmen of the Rulers bring the power, the soul and the counterfeit of the spirit, and pour them all three into the world, passing through the world of the Rulers of the Midst.

"The Rulers of the Midst also inspect the counterfeit of the spirit and also the destiny. The latter, whose name is the destiny, leadeth on a man until it hath him killed by the death which is destined for him. This the Rulers of the Great Fate have bound to the soul.

"And the workmen of the Sphere bind the soul with the power, with the counterfeit of the spirit and with the destiny. And the whole is divided so as to form two parts, to surround the man and also the woman in the world, in whom the sign hath been set for them to be sent unto them. (346) And they give one part to the man and the other to the woman in the food of the world, either in the aery, or watery, or etheric substance which they imbibe. . . .

"Now, therefore, when the workmen of the Rulers have cast one part into the woman and the other into the man in the manner which I have just related, even though [the pair] be removed to a great distance from one another, the workmen compel them secretly to be

[p. 70]

united together in the union of the world. Then the counterfeit of the spirit which is in the male cometh unto the part [of itself] which hath been sent into the world in the matter of the body [of the man], and sacrificeth it and casteth it into the womb of the woman, a deposit of the seed of iniquity. And forthwith the three hundred and sixty-five workmen of the Rulers enter into her, to take up their abode in her. The workmen of the two parts are all there together.

"(347) And the workmen check the blood that cometh from all the nourishment that the woman eateth or drinketh, and keep it in the womb of the woman for forty days. And after forty days, they work the blood [that cometh] from the essence of all the nourishment, and work it together carefully in the woman's womb.

"After forty days they spend another thirty days in building its members in the likeness of the body of a man; each buildeth a member. I will tell you of the decans who thus build [the body] . . . when I explain the emanation of the pleroma.

"Afterwards, when the workmen have completed the body entirely with all its members in seventy days, they summon into the body which they have builded, first the counterfeit of the spirit, next they summon the soul within those, and finally they summon the compound of the power within the soul, and the destiny they place outside all, for it is not blended with them, but followeth after and accompanieth them."

(An elaborate account of the "sealing" of the members of the plasm is then given.)

"And when the number of the months of the child's conception is full, the babe is born, the compound of the power being small in it, the soul being small in it, and the counterfeit of the spirit being small in it;

[p. 71]

whereas the destiny, being vast, is not mingled with the body, according to the regulation of the three (350), but followeth after the soul, the body and the counterfeit of the spirit, until the soul passeth from the body according to the type of death whereby he shall die according to what hath been decreed unto him by the Rulers of the Great Fate."

Footnotes

^65:1 Sc. Nature's.

^65:2 Or energy.

^66:1 fusis simply; but as there is a play in the original on the words fusis, fuoysa, fye'n, and fyomenois, I have tried to retain it in translation by a series of allied words.

^66:2 geneseis.

^66:3 Sc. Fire.

^66:4 perixerainomenoy.

^66:5 Or law of Harmony,--kata ton teis armonias logon.

^66:6 Lit. "breathing with one breath,"--ek teis sympnoias--a wordplay on pneuma (spirit). For "spirit," cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 13, Comment., and Exx. xix. 3; iv. 2.

^67:1 Or image of a figure,--eidulon . . . sxe'matos.

^67:2 ten de brastike'n.

^67:3 Or vehicle,--ypodoxe'n.

^67:4 tus dianoetikeis zueis,--of the purposive rational life, otherwise called the Harmony.

^67:5 Sc. the Harmony.

^67:6 Reading psyxe for psyxei.

^67:7 The new-born babe.

^67:8 Compare Plutarch, Frag., v. 9 (ed. Didot): "For you should know the intercourse and the conjunction of the soul with body is contrary to nature."

^67:9 It is not easy to disentangle the subjects of some of the above clauses.

^67:10 Sc. the thing's.

^68:1 Sc. the rational movement.

^68:2 zutikus,--this may perhaps have some reference to the circle of lives, or the zodiac.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 72]

EXCERPT XVI.

 

[OF SOUL, III.]

(I have added the title, Patrizzi (p. 40b) having only the heading: "To the Same Ammon."

Text: Stob., Phys., xli. 3, under the simple heading: "Of Hermes"; G. pp. 323, 324; M. i. 227, 228; W. i. 320, 321.

Menard, Livre IV., No. v. of "Fragments of the Books of Hermes to Ammon," pp. 263, 264.)

1. THE Soul is, then, incorporal essence; for if it should have body, it would no longer have the power of being self-maintained. [*1]

For every body needeth being; it needeth also ordered life [*2] as well.

For that for every thing that comes to birth, [*3] change also must succeed. [*4]

For that which doth become, [*5] becomes in size; for in becoming it hath increase.

[p. 73]

Again, for every thing that doth increase, decrease succeedeth; and on increase destruction.

For, sharing in the form of life, [*1] it [*2] lives; it shares, also, in being through the Soul.

2. But that which is the cause of being to another, is being first itself.

And by [this] "being" I now mean becoming in reason, and taking part in intellectual life.

It is the Soul that doth supply this intellectual life.

It is called living [*3] through the life, and rational through the intellect, and mortal through the body.

Soul is, accordingly, a thing incorporal, possessing [in itself] the power of freedom from all change.

For how would it be possible to talk about an intellectual living thing, [*4] if that there were no [living] essence to furnish life?

Nor, any more, would it be possible to say a rational [living] thing, were there no ratiocinative essence to furnish intellectual life.

3. It is not to all [lives] that intellect extends; [it doth depend] on the relationship of body's composition to the Harmony.

[p. 74]

For if the hot in the compost be in excess, he's light [*1] and fervid; but if the cold, he's heavy and he's dull.

For Nature makes the composition fit the Harmony.

There are three forms of the becoming,--the hot, the cold, and medium.

It [*2] makes it fit according to the ruling Star [*3] in the star-mixture.

And Soul receiving it, [*4] as Fate decrees, supplies this work of Nature with [the proper kind of] life.

Nature, accordingly, assimilates the body's harmony unto the mixture of the Stars, and co-unites its complex mixtures with their Harmony, so that they are in mutual sympathy.

For that the end of the Stars' Harmony is to give birth to sympathy according to their Fate.

Footnotes

^72:1 Or of saving itself.

^72:2 zueis teis en taxei keimenes,--lit. life set, or placed, in order (as distinguished from intellectual life), that is, presumably, sensible or cosmic life.

^72:3 Or has becoming, or genesis.

^72:4 Or follow.

^72:5 Or is born.

^73:1 eidoys zueis,--that is, formal life, or life set in order.

^73:2 Sc. body, or that which comes to birth.

^73:3 zuon (subs.) according to Gaisford,--that is, an animal; but I prefer zuon (adj.), taking it with the following logikon and thneton.

^73:4 Or animal.

^74:1 koufos (mas.),--the subject is, therefore, man, the rational animal.

^74:2 Sc. Nature.

^74:3 Or, presumably, planetary sphere.

^74:4 Sc. the body-compost.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 75]

EXCERPT XVII.

 

[OF SOUL, IV.]

(Patrizzi (p. 41) runs this on to the preceding without a break.

Text: Stob., Phys., xli. 4, under heading: "Of the Same"--that is, "Of Hermes"; G. pp. 324, 325; M. i. 228, 229; W. i. 321, 322.

Menard, Livre IV., No. vi. of "Fragments of the Book of Hermes to Ammon," pp. 265, 266.)

1. SOUL, Ammon, then, is essence containing its own end within itself; in [its] beginning taking to itself the way of life allotted it by Fate, it draws also unto itself a reason like to matter, possessing "heart" and "appetite." [*1]

"Heart," too, is matter; if it doth make its state accordant with the Soul's intelligence, it, [then,] becometh courage, and is not led away by cowardice.

And "appetite" is matter, too; if it doth make its state accord with the Soul's rational power, it [then] becometh temperance, and is not

[p. 76]

moved by pleasure, for reasoning fills up the "appetite's" deficiency.

2. And when both [these] [*1] are harmonized, and equalized, and both are made subordinate to the Soul's rational power, justice is born.

For that their state of equilibrium doth take away the "heart's" excess, and equalizes the deficiency of "appetite."

The source of these, [*2] however, is the penetrating essence of all thought, [*3] its self by its own self, [working] in its own reason that doth think round everything, [*4] with its own reason as its rule. [*5]

It is the essence that doth lead and guide as ruler; its reason is as 'twere its counsellor who thinks about all things. [*6]

3. The reason of the essence, then, is gnosis of those reasonings which furnish the irrational [part] with reasoning's conjecturing, [*7]--a faint thing as compared with reasoning [itself], but reasoning as compared with the irrational, as echo unto voice, and moonlight to the sun.

And "heart" and "appetite" are harmonized upon a rational plan; they pull the one against the other, and [so] they learn to know in their own selves a circular intent. [*8]

Footnotes

^75:1 In a metaphorical sense,--thymon kai epithymia; terms originally belonging to a primitive stage of culture, and often translated "anger and concupiscence"--positive and negative, denoting the "too much" and the "too little" of the animal nature, and to he paralleled with the nous and epinoia of the rational nature. Cf. Ex. i. 5 and xviii. 3.

^76:1 Sc. virtues,--courage and temperance.

^76:2 Sc. two virtues.

^76:3 e dianoetike oysia,--that is, the essence which penetrates, or pervades, all things by means of thought.

^76:4 en tui ayteis perinoetikui logui.

^76:5 Or power, or ruling principle.

^76:6 o perinoetikos.

^76:7 eikasmon.

^76:8 dianoia.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 77]

EXCERPT XVIII.

 

[OF SOUL, V.]

(Patrizzi (p. 41) runs this on to the last without a break.

Text: Stob., Phys., xli. 5, under heading: "Of the Same"--that is, "Of Hermes"; G. pp. 325-327; M. i. 229, 230; W. i. 322-324.

Menard, Livre IV., No. vii. of "Fragments of the Books of Hermes to Ammon," pp. 267, 268.)

1. [NOW], every Soul is free from death and in perpetual motion.

For in the General Sermons [*1] we have said some motions are by means of the activities, [*2] others are owing to the bodies.

We say, moreover, that the Soul's produced out of a certain essence,--not a matter,--incorporal itself, just as its essence is.

Now every thing that's born, must of necessity be born from something.

All things, moreover, in which destruction followeth on birth, must of necessity have two kinds of motion with them:--the [motion] of

[p. 78]

the Soul, by which they're moved; and body's [motion], by which they wax and wane.

Moreover, also, on the former's dissolution, the latter [*1] is dissolved.

This I define, [then,] as the motion of bodies corruptible.

2. The Soul, however, is in perpetual motion,--in that perpetually it moves itself, and makes [its] motion active [too] in other things.

And so, according to this reason, every Soul is free from death, having for motion the making active of itself.

The kinds of Souls are three:--divine, [and] human, [and] irrational.

Now the divine [is that] of its divine body, in which there is the making active of itself. For it is moved in it, and moves itself.

For when it is set free from mortal lives, it separates itself from the irrational portions of itself, departs unto the godlike body, and as 'tis in perpetual motion, is moved in its own self, with the same motion as the universe.

3. The human [kind] has also something of the godlike [body], but it has joined to it as well the [parts] irrational,--the appetite and heart. [*2]

These latter also are immortal, in that they

[p. 79]

happen also in themselves to be activities; but [they are] the activities of mortal bodies.

Wherefore, they are removed far from the godlike portion of the Soul, when it is in its godlike body; but when this [*1] enters in a mortal frame, they [*2] also cling to it, and by the presence [of these elements] it keeps on being a human Soul.

But that of the irrationals consists of heart and appetite. And for this cause these lives are also called irrational, through deprivation of the reason of the Soul.

4. You may consider, too, as a fourth [kind] that of the soulless, which from without [*3] the bodies operates in them, and sets them moving.

But this should [really] be the moving of itself within its godlike body, and the moving of these [other] things as it were by the way.

 

COMMENT

The mention of the General Sermons ( section 1) raises the question as to whether or no our extract may not be from one of the Sermons to Tat, for in all other cases these General Sermons are referred to in the Tat-literature. The contents, however, are so similar to the extracts from the Sermons to Ammon that we keep this excerpt with them.

Footnotes

^77:1 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 1 and 7; xiii. (xiv.) 1; and Ex. ix. 1.

^77:2 Or energies.

^78:1 The former is here the body; the latter, the motion of waxing and waning.

^78:2 Cf. Ex. xvii.

^79:1 Sc. the divine part.

^79:2 The irrational parts.

^79:3 The other kinds presumably operating in bodies from within.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 80]

EXCERPT XIX.

 

[OF SOUL, VI.]

(Patrizzi (p. 41b) runs this on to the last without a break.

Text: Stob., Phys., xli. 6, under heading: "Of the Same"--that is, "Of Hermes"; G. pp. 327, 328; M. i. 229, 230; W. i. 324, 325.

Menard, Livre IV., No. viii. of "Fragments of the Books of Hermes to Ammon," pp. 269, 270.)

1. SOUL, then, is an eternal intellectual essence, having for purpose [*1] the reason of itself; and when it thinks with [*2] [it,] [*3] it doth attract [unto itself] the Harmony's intention. [*4]

But when it leaves behind the body Nature makes, [*5] it bideth in and by itself,--the maker of itself in the noetic [*6] world.

It ruleth its own reason, bearing in its own thought [*7] a motion (called by the name of life)

[p. 81]

like unto [that of] that which cometh into life. [*1]

2. For that the thing peculiar to the Soul [is this],--to furnish other things with what is like its own peculiarity.

There are, accordingly, two lives, two motions:--one, that according to the essence of the Soul; the other, that according to the nature of the body.

The former [is] more general, [the latter is more partial]; the [life] that is according unto essence has no authority but its own self, the other [is] under necessity.

For every thing that's moved, is under the necessity of that which moveth [it].

The motion that doth move, however, is in close union with the love of the noetic essence.

For Soul must be incorporal,--essence that hath no share in any body Nature makes.

For were it corporal, it would have neither reason nor intelligence. [*2]

For every body is without intelligence; but when it doth receive of essence, it doth obtain the power of being a breathing animal.

3. The spirit [*3] [hath the power to contemplate] the body; the reason of the essence hath the power to contemplate the Beautiful.

[p. 82]

The sensible--the spirit--is that which can discern appearances. It is distributed into the various sense-organs [*1]; a part of it becometh spirit by means of which we see, [*2] [a part] by means of which we hear, [a part] by means of which we smell, [a part] by means of which we taste, [a part] by means of which we touch.

This spirit, when it is led upwards by the understanding, discerns that which is sensible [*3]; but if 'tis not, it only maketh pictures for itself.

For it is of the body, and that, too, receptible of all [impressions].

4. The reason of the essence, on the other hand, is that which is possessed of judgment. [*4]

The knowledge of things worthy [to be known] is co-existent with the reason; [that which is coexistent] with the spirit [is] opinion.

The latter has its operation from the surrounding world; the former, from itself.

 

COMMENT

As Exx. xvi.-xix. follow one another in Stobaeus, it is highly probable that they are all taken from the same group of sermons, and as their contents are so similar to those of Exx. xiv. and xv., and these are stated by

[p. 83]

[paragraph continues] Stobaeus to be from the "Sermons to Ammon," we are fairly justified in grouping them all together. How many Sermons to Ammon there may have been in the collection used by Stobaeus we have no means of knowing; they may also perhaps have had no distinctive title; but as Stobaeus usually leaves out the titles in quoting, even when we know them from other sources, there is no definite conclusion to be drawn from his silence.

Footnotes

^80:1 noema.

^80:2 synnoousa.

^80:3 Sc. the reason.

^80:4 dianoian.

^80:5 Lit. the physical body.

^80:6 This might here be translated "the self-purposive," to pick up the word-play on noema and dianoia.

^80:7 Or purpose,--noe'mati.

^81:1 That is, presumably, of the same nature as the motion of the soul in incarnation or perhaps of the animal soul.

^81:2 noesin.

^81:3 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 13, Comment.; and Exx. xv. 2, iv. 2.

^82:1 Lit. organic senses; cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 17.

^82:2 Lit. spirituous sight.

^82:3 That is, the sensible or phenomenal world.

^82:4 to fronoun.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 84]

EXCERPT XX.

 

[THE POWER OF CHOICE]

(Patrizzi (p. 42) runs this on to Ex. xix. without a break.

Text: Stob., Ethica, vii. 31, under heading: "Of Hermes"; G. (ii.) pp. 654, 655; M. ii. 100, 101; W. ii. 160, 161.

Menard, Livre IV., No. i. of "Fragments Divers," pp. 271, 272.)

THERE is, then, essence, reason, thought, [*1] perception. [*2]

Opinion and sensation move towards perception; reason directs itself towards essence; and thought sends itself forth through its own self.

And thought is interwoven with perception, and entering into one another they become one form,--which is that of the Soul [itself].

Opinion and sensation move towards the Soul's perception; but they do not remain in the same state. Hence is there excess, and falling short, and difference with them.

[p. 85]

When they are drawn away from the perception, they deteriorate; but when they follow it and are obedient, they share in the perceptive reason through the sciences. [*1]

2. We have the power to choose; it is within our power to choose the better, and in like way [to choose] the worse, according to our will. [*2]

And if [our] choice clings to the evil things, it doth consort with the corporeal nature; [and] for this cause Fate rules o'er him who makes this choice.

Since, then, the intellectual essence [*3] in us is absolutely free,--[namely] the reason that embraces all in thought,--and that it ever is a law unto itself and self-identical, on this account Fate does not reach it. [*4]

Thus furnishing it first from the First God, it [*5] sent forth the perceptive reason, and the whole reason which Nature hath appointed unto them that come to birth.

With these the Soul consorting, consorteth with their fates, though [in herself] she hath no part [or lot] in their fates' nature.

[p. 86]

(Patrizzi (p. 42) adds the following to the preceding; it is not found in Stobaeus, and appears to be a scholium.)

What is necessitated by the interwoven harmony [*1] of [all] the parts, in no way differs from that which is fated.

 

COMMENT

I have supplied a temporary heading for the sake of uniformity. Our extract, however, seems to be taken from a lengthy treatise, and was probably one of the Sermons to Tat.

Footnotes

^84:1 noema.

^84:2 dianoia.

^85:1 dia tun mathematun.

^85:2 Reading ekoysius for the meaningless akoysius of the text.

^85:3 Reading noematike with Patrizzi, instead of sumatike as with G. W. prefers asw'matos (incorporal).

^85:4 Sc. the reason.

^85:5 The Soul, or intellectual essence. The text is very obscure, and Wachsmuth does not seem to have improved it. Cf. C. H., xii. (xiii.) 8.

^86:1 Lit. interweaving.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 87]

EXCERPT XXI.

 

OF ISIS TO HORUS

(Title in Patrizzi (p. 45) is "From Isis."

Text: Stob., Flor., xiii. 50, under the heading: "Of Hermes from the [Sermon] of Isis to Horus"; G. i. 328; M. i. 265; H. iii. 467.

Schow gives another heading, which Gaisford (in a note) thinks is from the Vienna codex, namely: "Of Hermes from the Intercession (or Supplication,--Presbeias) of Isis." [*1]

Menard, Livre IV., No. ii. of "Fragments Divers," p. 272.)

A REFUTATION, when it is recognized, O greatest King, carries the man who is refuted towards the desire of things he did not know before.

 

COMMENT

This fragment is clearly not in the style of the excerpt from the "Sermon of Isis to Hermes" (Ex. xxvii.); it is far more closely reminiscent of C. H., xvi. or xvii., and is, therefore, probably from the Sermon of Asclepius to the King.

Footnotes

^87:1 R. (p. 134, n. 3) says simply that the last word ("Horus") is missing in the Vindobonensis, and finds no difficulty in recognizing a type of literature in which King (Ammon) is a pupil of Isis.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 88]

EXCERPT XXII.

 

[AN APOPHTHEGM]

(Text: W., i. 34, 5.)

HERMES on being asked, What is God?--replied: The Demiurge of wholes,--the Mind most wise and everlasting.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 89]

EXCERPT XXIII.

 

FROM "APHRODITE"

(Title in Patrizzi (p. 45) is "The Likeness of Children," followed by: "From Aphrodite."

Text: Stob., Phys., xxxvi. 2, under heading: "Of Hermes from 'Aphrodite'"; G. pp. 297, 298; M. i. 207, 208; W. i. 295, 296.

Menard, Livre IV., No. iii. of "Fragments Divers," p. 273.)

[----] How, [then,] are offspring born like to their parents? Or how are they returned [*1] to [their own] species [*2]?

[Aphrodite.] I will set forth the reason. When generation stores up seed from the ripe blood being sweated forth, [*3] it comes to pass that somehow there's exhaled from the whole mass [*4] of limbs a certain essence, following the

[p. 90]

law of a divine activity, as though the man himself were being born; the same thing also in the woman's case apparently takes place.

When, then, what floweth from the man hath the ascendancy, and keeps intact, the young one's brought to light resembling its sire; contrary wise, in the same way, [resembling] its dam.

Moreover, if there should be ascendancy of any part, [then] the resemblance [of the young] will favour that [especial] part.

But sometimes also for long generations the offspring favoureth the husband's form, because his decan has the greater influence [*1] at that [particular] moment when the wife conceives.

 

COMMENT

This fragment belongs to a type of Hermetic literature of which it is the sole surviving specimen. It is in form identical with the Isis and Horus type; but what the name of the questioner of Aphrodite could have been is difficult to say.

Footnotes

^89:1 apodidotai,--referring, presumably, to the idea of metempsychosis.

^89:2 Or families.

^89:3 exafedroymenoy. But W. has exafroymenoy (turned into foam), following the emendation of Usener, based on Clem. Al. Paedagog., I, vi. 48.

^89:4 Lit. body.

^90:1 logon.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 91]

EXCERPT XXIV.

 

[A HYMN OF THE GODS]

(Text: Stob., Phys., v. 14, under the simple heading: "Of Hermes"; G. p. 65 M. i. 45; W. i. 77. The same verses are read in the appendix to the Anthologia Palatina, p. 768, n. 40.)

SEVEN Stars far varied in their course revolved upon the [wide] Olympian plain; with them for ever will Eternity [*1] spin [fate] [*2]:--Mene that shines by night, [and] gloomy Kronos, [and] sweet Helios, and Paphie who's carried in the shrine, [*3] courageous Ares, fair-winged Hermes, and Zeus the primal source [*4] from whom Nature doth come.

Now they themselves have had the race of

[p. 92]

men entrusted to their care; so that in us there is a Mene, Zeus, an Ares, Paphie, a Kronos, Helios and Hermes.

Wherefore we are divided up [so as] to draw from the aetherial spirit, [*1] tears, laughter, anger, birth, reason, sleep, desire.

Tears are Kronos, birth Zeus, reason [is] Hermes, courage Mars, and Mene sleep, in sooth, and Cytherea desire, and Helios [is] laughter--for 'tis because of him that justly every mortal thinking thing doth laugh and the immortal world.

 

COMMENT

This is the only known specimen of verses attributed to the Trismegistic tradition. Liddell and Scott, however, under "nyktifane's," do not question this attribution, while Clement of Alexandria (Strom., vi. p. 633 [this is a reference of Wachsmuth's which I cannot verify]) praises the "Hymns of the Gods" of Hermes. On the contrary, in Anthol. Palat., p. 442, n. 491, the seventh verse is ascribed to Theon of Alexandria.

Footnotes

^91:1 Or Aeon.

^91:2 epine'setai. But the Anthology reads "kai toisin aei kanonizetai"--that is to say, Eternity or Aeon is for ever regulated or measured by the Seven; which seems to have no sense unless it means that the Seven are the instruments, whereby Eternity is divided into time.

^91:3 That is, Venus, the image of whom was, presumably, carried in a small shrine in processions.

^91:4 arxigenethlos.

^92:1 Meaning the one element or ether simply.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 93]

EXCERPT XXV.

 

THE VIRGIN OF THE WORLD [I.] [*1]

(Title in Patrizzi (p. 27b), in the Latin translation, "Minerva Mundi." [*2]

Text: Stob., Phys., xli. 44, under heading: "From Thrice-Greatest Hermes' Sacred Book 'The Virgin of the World'"; G. pp. 395-419; M. i. 281-298; W. i. 385-407.

Menard, Livre III., No. i. of "Fragments of the Sacred Book entitled 'The Virgin of the World,'" pp. 177-200.)

1. [*3] SO speaking Isis doth pour forth for Horus the sweet draught (the first) of

[p. 94]

deathlessness [*1] which souls have custom to receive from Gods, and thus begins her holiest discourse (logos):

Seeing that, Son Horus, Heaven, adorned with many a wreath [of starry crowns], is set o'er every nature of [all] things beneath, and that nowhere it lacketh aught of anything which the whole cosmos now doth hold,--in every way it needs must be that every nature which lies underneath, should be co-ordered and full-filled by those that lie above; for things below cannot of course give order to the ordering above.

It needs must, therefore, be the less should give place to the greater mysteries. The ordinance of the sublimer things transcends the lower; it is both sure in every way and falleth 'neath no mortal's thought. Wherefore the [mysteries] below did sigh, fearing the wondrous beauty and the everlasting durance of the ones above,

'Twas worth the gazing [*2] and the pains to see Heaven's beauty, beauty that seemed like God,--God who was yet unknown, and the rich majesty of Night, who weaves her web with rapid light, [*3] though it be less than Sun's, and of the other mysteries [*4] in turn that move in Heaven, with ordered motions and with periods

[p. 95]

of times, with certain hidden influences [*1] bestowing order on the things below and co-increasing them.

2. Thus fear succeeded fear, and searching search incessant, and for so long as the Creator of the universals willed, did ignorance retain its grip on all. But when He judged it fit to manifest Him who He is, He breathed into the Gods the Loves, and freely poured the splendour [*2] which He had within His heart, into their minds, in ever greater and still greater measure; that firstly they might have the wish to seek, next they might yearn to find, and finally have power to win success as well. But this, my Horus, wonder-worthy son, could never have been done had that seed [*3] been subject to death, for that as yet had no existence, but only with a soul that could vibrate responsive to the mysteries of Heaven.

3. Such was all-knowing Hermes, who saw all things, and seeing understood, and understanding had the power both to disclose and to give explanation. For what he knew, he graved on stone; yet though he graved them onto stone he hid them mostly, keeping sure silence though in speech, that every younger age of cosmic time

[p. 96]

might seek for them. And thus, with charge unto his kinsmen of the Gods to keep sure watch, he mounted to the Stars.

To him succeeded Tat, who was at once his son and heir unto these knowledges; and not long afterwards Asclepius-Imuth, according to the will of Ptah who is Hephaestus, [*1] and all the rest who were to make enquiry of the faithful certitude of heavenly contemplation, as Foreknowledge [*2] willed, Foreknowledge queen of all.

4. Hermes, however, made explanation to surrounding [space], how that not even to his son (because of the yet newness of his youth) had he been able to hand on the Perfect Vision. But when the Sun did rise for me, and with all-seeing eyes I [*3] gazed upon the hidden [mysteries] of that New Dawn, and contemplated them, slowly there came to me--but it was sure--conviction that the sacred symbols of the cosmic elements were hid away hard by the secrets of Osiris.

5. [Hermes], ere he returned to Heaven, invoked a spell on them, and spake these words. (For 'tis not meet, my son, that I should leave this proclamation ineffectual, but [rather] should speak forth what words [our] Hermes uttered

[p. 97]

when he hid his books away.) Thus then he said:

"O holy books, who have been made by my immortal hands, by incorruption's magic spells, . . . [*1] free from decay throughout eternity remain and incorrupt from time! Become unseeable, unfindable, for every one whose foot shall tread the plains of this [our] land, until old Heaven doth bring forth meet instruments for you, whom the Creator shall call souls."

Thus spake he; and, laying spells on them by means of his own works, he shuts them safe away in their own zones. And long enough the time has been since they were hid away. [*2]

6. And Nature, O my son, was barren, till they who then were under orders to patrol the Heaven, approaching to the God of all, their King, reported on the lethargy of things. The time was come for cosmos to awake, and this was no one's task but His alone.

"We pray Thee, then," they said, "direct Thy thought to things which now exist and to what things the future needs."

7. When they spake thus, God smiled and said: "Nature, arise!" And from His word

[p. 98]

there came a marvel, feminine, possessed of perfect beauty, gazing at which the Gods stood all-amazed. And God the Fore-father, with name of Nature, honoured her, and bade her be prolific.

Then gazing fixedly on the surrounding space, He spake these words as well: "Let Heaven be filled with all things full, and Air, and Aether too! "God spake and it was so. And Nature with herself communing knew she must not disregard the Sire's command; so with the help of Toil she made a daughter fair, whom she did call Invention. And on her [*1] God bestowed the gift of being, and with His gift He set apart all them that had been so-far made, filled them with mysteries, and to Invention gave the power of ruling them.

8. But He, no longer willing that the world above should be inert, but thinking good to fill it full of breaths, so that its parts should not remain immotive and inert, He thus began on these [*2] with use of holy arts as proper for the bringing forth of His own special work.

For taking breath from His own Breath and blending this with knowing Fire, [*3] He mingled them with certain other substances which have

[p. 99]

no power to know; and having made the two [*1]--either with other--one, with certain hidden words of power, He thus set all the mixture going thoroughly; until out of the compost smiled a substance, as it were, far subtler, purer far, and more translucent than the things from which it came; it was so clear that no one but the Artist could detect it.

9. And since it neither thawed when fire was set unto it (for it was made of Fire), nor yet did freeze when it had once been properly produced (for it was made of Breath), but kept its mixture's composition a certain special kind, peculiar to itself, of special type and special blend,--(which composition, you must know, God called Psychosis, after the more auspicious meaning of the name and from the similarity of its behaviour [*2])

[p. 100]

[paragraph continues] --it was from this coagulate He fashioned souls enough in myriads, [*1] moulding with order and with measure the efflorescent product of the mixture for what He willed, with skilled experience and fitting reason, so that they should not be compelled to differ any way one from another.

10. For, you must know, the efflorescence that exhaled out of the movement God induced, was not like to itself. For that its first florescence was greater, fuller, every way more pure, than was its second; its second was far second to the first, but greater far than was its third. [*2] And thus the total number of degrees reached up to sixty. [*3] In spite of this, in laying down the law, He ordered it that all should be eternal, as though from out one essence, the forms of which Himself alone could bring to their completion.

11. Moreover, He appointed for them limits and reservations in the height of upper Nature, [*4]

[p. 101]

that they might keep the cylinder [*1] a-whirl in proper order and economy and [thus] might please their Sire. And so in that all-fairest station of the Aether He summoned unto Him the natures of all things that had as yet been made, and spake these words:

"O Souls, ye children fair of Mine own Breath and My solicitude, whom I have now with My own Hands [*2] brought to successful birth and consecrate to My own world, give ear unto these words of Mine as unto laws, and meddle not with any other space but that which is appointed for you by My will.

"For you, if ye keep steadfast, the Heaven, with the star-order, and thrones I have ordained full-filled with virtue, shall stay as now they are for you; but if ye shall in any way attempt some innovation contrary to My decrees, I swear to you by My most holy Breath, and by this mixture out of which I brought you into being, and by these Hands of Mine which gave you life, [*3] that I will speedily devise for you a bond and punishments."

12. And having said these words, the God,

[p. 102]

who is my Lord, mixed the remaining cognate elements (Water and Earth [*1]) together, and, as before, invoking on them certain occult words, words of great power though not so potent as the first, He set them moving rapidly, and breathed into the mixture power of life; and taking the coagulate (which like the other floated to the top), when it had been well steeped and had become consistent, He modelled out of it those of the [sacred] animals [*2] possessing forms like unto men's.

The mixtures' residue He gave unto those souls that had gone in advance and had been summoned to the lands of Gods, to regions near the Stars, and to the [choir of] holy daimones. He said:

13. "My sons, ye children of My Nature, fashion things! Take ye the residue of what My art hath made, and let each fashion something which shall bear resemblance to his own nature. These will I further give to you as models."

He took and set in order fair and fine, agreeably to the motions of the souls, the world of sacred animals, appending as it were to those resembling men those which came next in order, and on these types of lives He did bestow

[p. 103]

the all-devising powers and all-contriving procreative breath of all the things which were for ever generally to be.

And He withdrew, with promises to join unto the visible productions of their hands breath that cannot be seen, [*1] and essence of engendering its like to each, so that they might give birth to others like themselves. And these are under no necessity to do aught else than what they did at first.

14. [And Horus asked:]

What did the souls do, mother, then?

And Isis said:

Taking the blend of matter, Horus, son, they first looked at the Father's mixture and adored it, and tried to find out whence it was composed; but this was not an easy thing for them to know.

They then began to fear lest they should fall beneath the Father's wrath for trying to find out, and so they set to work to do what they were bid.

Thereon, out of the upper stuff which had its topmost layer superfluously light, they formed the race of birds; while they were doing this the mixture had become half-hardened, and by this time had taken on a firm consistency--thereon they fashioned out the race of things

[p. 104]

which have four feet; [next they did fashion forth] the race of fish--less light and needing a moist substance of a different kind to swim in; and as the residue was of a cold and heavy nature, from it the Souls devised the race of creeping things.

15. They then, my son, as though they had done something grand, with over-busy daring armed themselves, and acted contrary to the commands they had received; and forthwith they began to overstep their proper limits and their reservations, and would no longer stay in the same place, but were for ever moving, and thought that being ever stationed in one place was death.

That they would do this thing, however, O my son (as Hermes says when he speaks unto me), had not escaped the Eye of Him who is the God and Lord of universal things; and He searched out a punishment and bond, the which they now in misery endure.

Thus was it that the Sovereign King of all resolved to fabricate with art the human frame, in order that in it the race of Souls throughout might be chastised.

16. "Then sending for me," Hermes says, "He spake: 'Soul of My Soul, and holy mind of My own Mind, [*1] up to what point, the nature of the

[p. 105]

things beneath, shall it be seen in gloom? How long shall what has up to now been made remain inactive and be destitute of praise? Bring hither to Me now, My son, all of the Gods in Heaven,' said God"--as Hermes saith.

And when they came obedient to His command,--"Look down," said He, "upon the Earth, and all beneath." And they forthwith both looked and understood the Sovereign's will. And when He spake to them on human kind's behalf, they [all] agreed to furnish those who were to be, with whatsoever thing they each could best provide.

17. Sun said: "I'll shine unto my full."

Moon promised to pour light upon the after-the-sun course, and said she had already given birth to Fear, and Silence, and also Sleep, and Memory--a thing that would turn out to be most useful for them. [*1]

Cronus announced himself already sire of Justice and Necessity.

Zeus said: "So that the race which is to be may not for ever fight, already for them have I made Fortune, and Hope, and Peace."

Ares declared he had become already sire of Struggle, Wrath, and Strife.

Nor yet did Aphrodite hesitate; she also said: "I'll join to them Desire, my Lord, and Bliss,

[p. 106]

and Laughter [too], so that our kindred souls, in working out their very grievous condemnation, may not exhaust their punishment unto the full."

Full pleased were all, my son, at Aphrodite's words.

"And for my part," said Hermes, "I will make men's nature well endowed; I will devote to them Prudence and Wisdom, Persuasiveness and Truth, and never will I cease from congress with Invention, but ever will I benefit the mortal life of men born underneath my types of life. [*1] For that the types our Father and Creator hath set apart for me, are types of wisdom and intelligence, and more than ever [is this so] what time the motion of the Stars set over them doth have the natural power of each consonant with itself."

18. And God, the Master of the universe, rejoiced on hearing this, and ordered that the race of men should be.

"I," Hermes says, "was seeking for the stuff which had to be employed, and calling on the Monarch for His aid. And He gave order to the Souls to give the mixture's residue; and taking it I found it utterly dried up.

"Thereon, in mixing it, I used more water far than was required to bring the matter back unto

[p. 107]

its former state, so that the plasm was in every way relaxable, and weak and powerless, in order that it might not, in addition to its natural sagacity, be full of power as well.

"I moulded it, and it was fair; and I rejoiced at seeing mine own work, and from below I called upon the Monarch to behold. And He did look on it, and was rejoiced, and ordered that the Souls should be enfleshed.

"Then were they first plunged in deep gloom, and, learning that they were condemned, began to wail. [*1] I was myself amazed at the Souls' utterances."

19. Now give good heed, son Horus, for thou art being told the Mystic Spectacle which Kamephis, our forefather, was privileged to hear from Hermes, record-writer of all deeds, and I from Kamephis, most ancient of [us] all, when he did honour me with the Black [Rite] that gives perfection; hear thou it now from me!

For when, O wondrous son of mighty fame, if they were about to be shut in their prisons, some simply uttered wails and groans--in just the self-same way as beasts that once have been at liberty, when torn from their accustomed haunts they love so well, will be bad slaves, will fight

[p. 108]

and make revolt, and be in no agreement with their masters; nay more, if circumstance should serve, will even do to death those that oppress them. [*1]

Others with louder outcry hissed like snakes; another one shrieked shrilly, and ere he spake shed many tears, and, turning up and down what things served him as eyes, he said:

20. "O Heaven, thou source of our begetting, O Aether, Air, O Hands and holy Breath of God our Monarch, O ye most brilliant Stars, eyes of the Gods, O tireless light of Sun and Moon, co-nurslings of our origin,--reft from [you] all we suffer piteously.

"And this the more, in that from spacious realms of light, from out [thy] holy envelope and wealthy dome, and from the blessed government we shared with Gods, we shall be thus shut down into these honourless and lowly quarters.

"What is the so unseemly thing we miserables have done? What [crime] deserves these punishments? How many sins await us wretched ones? How many are the things we have to do in this our hopeless plight, necessities to furnish for this watery frame that is so soon dissolved?

21. "For that no longer shall our eyes behold

[p. 109]

the souls of God; when through such watery spheres as these we see our own forefather Heaven grown small and tiny, we shall dissolve in sighs,--nay, there'll be times we shall not see at all, [*1] for sentence hath been passed on us poor things; the gift of real sight hath not been given to us, in that it hath not been permitted us to see without the light. Windows they are, not eyes! [*2]

"How wretchedly shall we endure to hear our kindred breaths breathe in the air, when we no longer shall be breathing with them! For home, instead of this great world high in the air, a heart's small mass awaits us. Set Thou us free from bonds so base as these to which we have sunk down, and end our grief!

"O Lord, and Father, and our Maker, if so it be Thou hast thus quickly grown indifferent unto the works of Thine own Hands, appoint for us some limits! Still deem us worthy of some words, though they be few, while yet we can see through the whole world-order bright on every side!"

22. Thus speaking, Horus, son, the Souls gained their request; for that the Monarch came, and sitting on the Throne of Truth made answer to their prayers.

[p. 110]

"O Souls, Love and Necessity shall be your lords, [*1] they who are lords and marshals after Me of all. [*2] Know, all of you who are set under My unageing rule, that as long as ye keep you free of sin, ye shall dwell in the fields of Heaven; but if some cause of blame for aught attach itself to you, ye shall dwell in the place that Destiny allots, condemned to mortal wombs.

"If, then, the things imputed to your charge be slight, leaving the bond of fleshly frames subject to death, ye shall again embrace your [father] Heaven, and sigh no more; but if ye shall commit some greater sins, and with the end appointed of your frames be not advanced, no longer shall ye dwell in Heaven, nor even in the bodies of mankind, but shall continue after that to wander round in lives irrational." [*3]

[p. 111]

23. Thus speaking, Horus mine, He gave to all the gift of breath, [*1] and thus continued:

"It is not without purpose or by chance I have laid down the law of your transformings [*2]; but as [it will be] for the worse if ye do aught unseemly, so for the better, if ye shall will what's worthy of your birth.

"For I, and no one else, will be the Witness and the Watcher. Know, then, it is for what ye have done heretofore, ye do endure this being shut in bodies as a punishment.

"The difference in your rebirths, accordingly, for you, shall be as I have said, a difference of bodies, and their [final] dissolution [shall be] a benefit and a [return to] the fair happiness of former days.

"But if ye think to do aught else unworthy of Me, your mind shall lose its sight so as to think the contrary [of what is true], and take the punishment for benefit; the change to better things for infamous despite.

"But the more righteous of you, who stand upon the threshold of the change to the diviner state, shall among men be righteous kings, and genuine philosophers, founders of states, and lawgivers, and real seers, and true herb-knowers,

[p. 112]

and prophets of the Gods most excellent, skilful musicians, skilled astronomers, and augurs wise, consummate sacrificers,--as many of you as are worthy of things fair and good.

24. "Among winged tribes [they shall be] eagles, for these will neither scare away their kind nor feed on them; nay more, when they are by, no other weaker beast will be allowed by them to suffer wrong, for what will be the eagles' nature is too just [to suffer it].

"Among four-footed things [they will be] lions,--a life of strength and of a kind which in a measure needs no sleep, in mortal body practising the exercises of immortal life--for they nor weary grow nor sleep. [*1]

"And among creeping things [they will be] dragons, in that this animal will have great strength and live for long, will do no harm, and in a way be friends with man, and let itself be tamed; it will possess no poison and will cast its skin, [*2] as is the nature of the Gods.

[p. 113]

"Among the things that swim [they will be] dolphins; for dolphins will take pity upon those who fall into the sea, and if they are still breathing bear them to the land, while if they're dead they will not ever even touch them, though they will be the most voracious tribe that in the water dwells."

25. Thus speaking God became imperishable Mind. [*1] Thereon, son Horus, from the Earth uprose a very Mighty Spirit which no mass of body could contain, whose strength consisted in his intellect. And though he knew full well the things on which he questioned--the body with which man was clothed according to his type, a body fair and dignified, yet savage overmuch and full of fear--immediately he saw the souls were entering the plasms, he cried out:

"What are these called, O Hermes, Writer of the Records of the Gods?"

And when he answered "Men!"--"Hermes," he said, "it is a daring work, this making man, with eyes inquisitive, and talkative of tongue, with power henceforth to hear things even which

[p. 114]

are no concern of his, dainty of smell, who will use to its full his power of touch on every thing.

"Hast thou, his generator, judged it good to leave him free from care, who in the future daringly will gaze upon the fairest mysteries which Nature hath? Wouldst thou leave him without a grief, who in the days to come will make his thoughts reach unto mysteries beyond the Earth?

26. "Men will dig up the roots of plants, and will find out their juices' qualities. Men will observe the nature of the stones. Men will dissect not only animals irrational, but they'll dissect themselves, desiring to find out how they were made. They will stretch out their daring hands e'en to the sea, and cutting self-grown forests down will ferry one another o'er to lands beyond. [Men] will seek out as well the inner nature of the holy spaces which no foot may tread, and will chase after them into the height, desiring to observe the nature of the motion of the Heaven.

"These are yet moderate things [which they will do]. For nothing more remains than Earth's remotest realms; nay, in their daring they will track out Night, the farthest Night of all.

27. "Naught have they, then, to stop them from receiving their initiation in the good of

[p. 115]

freedom from all pain, and, unconstrained by terror's grievous goads, from living softly out a life free from all care.

"Then will they not gird on the armour of an over-busy daring up to Heaven? Will they not, then, reach out their souls freed from all care unto the [primal] elements themselves?

"Teach them henceforth to long to plan out something, where they have as well to fear the danger of its ill-success, in order that they may be tamed by the sharp tooth of pain in failure of their hopes.

"Let the too busy nature of their souls be balanced by desires, and fears, and griefs, and empty hopes.

"Let loves in quick succession sway their souls, hopes, manifold desires, sometimes fulfilled, and sometimes unfulfilled, that the sweet bait of their success may draw them into struggle amid direr ills.

"Let fever lay its heavy hand on them, that losing heart they may submit desire to discipline."

28. Thou grievest, dost thou, Horus, son, to hear thy mother put these things in words? Art thou not struck with wonder, art thou not terror-struck at how poor man was grievously oppressed? Hear what is sadder still!

When Momos said these things Hermes was pleased, for what he said was said out of affection

[p. 116]

for him; and so he did all that he recommended, speaking thus:

"Momos, the Nature of the Breath Divine which doth surround [all things] shall not become inert. The Master of the universe appointed me as steward and as manager.

"Wherefore the overseer of His command will be the keen-eyed Goddess of the all, Adrasteia [*1]; and I will skilfully devise an instrument, mysterious, possessed of power of sight that cannot err, and cannot be escaped, whereto all things on earth shall of necessity be subject, from birth to final dissolution,--an instrument which binds together all that's done. This instrument shall rule all other things on Earth as well [as man]."

29. These words, said Hermes, did I speak to Momos, and forthwith the instrument was set a-going.

When this was done, and when the souls had entered in the bodies, and [Hermes] had himself been praised for what was done, again the Monarch did convoke the Gods in session. The Gods assembled, and once more did He make proclamation, saying:

"Ye Gods, all ye who have been made of chiefest Nature, free from all decay, who have

[p. 117]

received as your appointed lot for ever more to order out the mighty Aeon, through whom all universal things will never weary grow surrendering themselves in turn the one to other,--how long shall we be rulers of this sovereignty that none can ever know? How long these things, shall they transcend the power of sight of Sun and Moon?

"Let each of us bring forth according to his power. Let us by our own energy wipe out this inert state of things; let chaos seem to be a myth incredible to future days. Set hand to mighty work; and I myself will first begin."

30. He spake; straightway in cosmic order there began the differentiation of the up-to-then black unity [of things]. And Heaven shone forth above tricked out with all his mysteries; Earth, still a-tremble, as the Sun shone forth grew harder, and appeared with all the fair adornments that bedeck her round on every side. For beautiful to God are even things which men think mean, in that in truth they have been made to serve the laws of God.

And God rejoiced when now He saw His works a-moving; and filling full His Hands, which held as much as all surrounding space, with all that Nature had produced, and squeezing tight the handfuls mightily, He said:

"Take [these], O holy Earth, take those, all-

[p. 118]

honoured one, who art to be the mother of all things, and henceforth lack thou naught!"

31. God spake, and opening His Hands, such Hands as God should have, He poured them all into the composition of the world. And they in the beginnings were unknown in every way; for that the Souls as newly shut in prison, not enduring their disgrace, began to strive in emulation with the Gods in Heaven, in full command of their high birth, and when held back, in that they had the same Creator, made revolt, and using weaker men as instruments, began to make them set upon each other, and range themselves in conflict, and make war among themselves.

Thus strength did mightily prevail o'er weakness, so that the strong did burn and massacre the weak, and from the holy places down they cast the living and the dead down from the holy shrines, until the Elements in their distress resolved to go to God their Monarch [to complain] about the savage state in which men lived.

The evil now being very great, the Elements approached the God who made them, and formulated their complaint in some such words as these:

32. It was moreover Fire who first received authority to speak. He said:

"O Lord, Artificer of this new World, thou

[p. 119]

[paragraph continues] Name mysterious among the Gods, and up to now revered by all mankind, how long hast Thou, O Daimon, judged it right to leave the life of mortals without God?

"Show now Thyself unto Thy World consulting [*1] Thee; initiate the savagery of life with peace; give laws to life; to right give oracles; fill with fair hopes all things; and let men fear the vengeance of the Gods, and none will sin.

"Should they receive due retribution for their sins, they will refrain henceforth from doing wrong; they will respect their oaths, and no one any more will ponder sacrilege.

"Let them be taught to render thanks for benefits received, that I, the Fire, may joyfully do service in the sacrificial rites, that they may from the altar send sweet-smelling vapours forth.

"For up to now I am polluted, Lord; and by the godless daring of these men I am compelled to burn up flesh. They will not let me be for what I was brought forth; but they adulterate with all indecency my undecaying state."

33. And Air too said:

"I also, Master, am made turbid by the vapours which the bodies of the dead exhale, and I am pestilential, and, no longer filled with health, I gaze down from above on things I ought not to behold."

[p. 120]

Next Water, O my son of mighty soul, received authority to speak, and spake and said:

"O Father, O wonderful Creator of all things, Daimon self-born, and Nature's Maker, who through Thee doth conceive all things, now at this last, command the rivers' streams for ever to be pure, for that the rivers and the seas or wash the murderers' hands or else receive the murdered."

34. After came Earth in bitter grief, and taking up the tale, O son of high renown, thus she began to speak:

"O sovereign Lord, Chief of the Heavenly Ones, and Master of the Wheels, [*1] Thou Ruler of us Elements, O Sire of them who stand beside Thee, from whom all things have the beginning of their increase and of their decrease, and into whom they cease again and have the end that is their due according to Necessity's decree, O greatly honoured One, the godless rout of men doth dance upon my bosom.

"I hold in my embrace as well the nature of all things; for I, as Thou didst give command, not only bear them all, but I receive them also when they're killed. But now am I dishonoured. The world upon the Earth though filled with all things [else] hath not a God.

[p. 121]

"For having naught to fear they sin in everything, and from my heights, O Lord, down [dead] they fall by every evil art. And soaking with the juices of their carcases I'm all corrupt. Hence am I, Lord, compelled to hold in me those of no worth. With all I bear I would hold God as well.

"Bestow on Earth, if not Thyself, for I could not contain Thee, yet some holy Emanation [*1] of Thyself. Make Thou the Earth more honoured than the rest of Elements; for it is right that she should boast of gifts from Thee, in that she giveth all."

35. Thus spake the Elements; and God, fullfilling all things with the sound of His [most] holy Voice, spake thus:

"Depart, ye Holy Ones, ye Children worthy of a mighty Sire, nor yet in any way attempt to innovate, nor leave the whole of [this] My World without your active service.

"For now another Efflux of My Nature is among you, and he shall be a pious supervisor of all deeds--judge incorruptible of living men and monarch absolute of those beneath the earth, not only striking terror [into them] but taking vengeance on them. And by his class of birth the fate he hath deserved shall follow every man."

And so the Elements did cease from their complaint,

[p. 122]

upon the Master's order, and they held their peace; and each of them continued in the exercise of his authority and in his rule.

36. And Horus thereon said:

How was it, mother, then, that Earth received God's Efflux?

And Isis said:

I may not tell the story of [this] birth [*1]; for it is not permitted to describe the origin of thy descent, O Horus, [son] of mighty power, lest afterwards the way-of-birth of the immortal Gods should be known unto men,--except so far that God the Monarch, the universal Orderer and Architect, sent for a little while thy mighty sire Osiris, and the mightiest Goddess Isis, that they might help the world, for all things needed them.

'Tis they who filled life full of life. 'Tis they who caused the savagery of mutual slaughtering of men to cease. 'Tis they who hallowed precincts to the Gods their ancestors and spots for holy rites. 'Tis they who gave to men laws, food, and shelter.

'Tis they who will, says Hermes, learn to know the secrets of my records all, and will make separation of them; and some they will keep for themselves, while those that are best suited for the benefit of mortal men, they will engrave on tablet and on obelisk.

[p. 123]

'Tis they who were the first to set up courts of law; and filled the world with justice and fair rule. 'Tis they who were the authors of good pledges and of faith, and brought the mighty witness of an oath into men's lives.

'Tis they who taught men how to wrap up those who ceased to live, as they should be. [*1]

'Tis they who searched into the cruelty of death, and learned that though the spirit which goes out longs to return into men's bodies, yet if it ever fail to have the power of getting back again, then loss of life results.

'Tis they who learned from Hermes that surrounding space was filled with daimons, and graved on hidden stones [the hidden teaching].

'Tis they alone who, taught by Hermes in God's hidden codes, became the authors of the arts, and sciences, and all pursuits which men do practise, and givers of their laws.

'Tis they who, taught by Hermes that the things below have been disposed by God to be in sympathy with things above, established on the earth the sacred rites o'er which the mysteries in Heaven preside.

'Tis they who, knowing the destructibility of [mortal] frames, devised the grade of prophets, in all things perfected, in order that no prophet who stretched forth his hands unto the Gods,

[p. 124]

should be in ignorance of anything, that magic and philosophy should feed the soul, and medicine preserve the body when it suffered pain.

38. And having done all this, my son, Osiris and myself perceiving that the world was [now] quite full, were thereupon demanded back by those who dwell in Heaven, but could not go above till we had made appeal unto the Monarch, that surrounding space might with this knowledge of the soul [*1] be filled as well, and we ourselves succeed in making our ascent acceptable [to Him]. . . . For that God doth in hymns rejoice.

Ay, mother, Horus said. On me as well bestow the knowledge of this hymn, that I may not remain in ignorance.

And Isis said: Give ear, O son! [*2]

*     *     *     *     *

Footnotes

^93:1 Or "Apple of the Eye of the World"--see Commentary. Referred to as K. K.,--i.e. Kore Kosmoy.

^93:2 Curiously enough, though the page-headings throughout have "Minerva Mundi," the heading of p. 28 still stands "Pupilla Mundi"--showing that Patrizzi himself was puzzled how to translate the Greek, and had probably in the first place translated it throughout "Pupilla Mundi," or "Apple of the Eye of the World." In his Introduction (p. 3), however, Patrizzi writes: "But there is extant also another [book of Hermes] with the title of 'The Sacred Book,' which we found in Cyprus, in a monastery called Enclistra, at the same time as the rest of the books, and which John Stobaeus has inserted in his Physical Eclogues together with other fragments." This would seem to suggest that Patrizzi had seen the original Sermon, and that its main title was "The Sacred Book."

^93:3 I have numbered the paragraphs for convenience of reference.

^94:1 to pruton ambrosias.

^94:2 Or contemplation, theurias.

^94:3 Sc. The weft and warp of stars.

^94:4 The planetary spheres.

^95:1 aporoiai, or emanations. Cf. R. 16, n. 4, for the conflation of the pure Egyptian emanation doctrine with astrological considerations.

^95:2 Radiance or light.

^95:3 Sc. the race of the Gods.

^96:1 For the restored text, see R. 122.

^96:2 Or Providence, pronoia.

^96:3 The masculine is here used, the writer forgetting for the moment that he had assumed the person of Isis.

^97:1 The text is here again hopeless. Meineke's emendation (Adnot., p. cxxx.) as . . . farmakui xrisas epikratui--which makes Hermes smear the books with some magical ointment--is ingenious, but hardly satisfactory, though Wachsmuth adopts it.

^97:2 This is purely conjectural; the text is utterly corrupt.

^98:1 Sc. Invention.

^98:2 Sc. the breaths or spirits.

^98:3 pur noeron--a term in frequent use subsequently among the Later Platonists; cf. Porphyry, ap. Euseb., Praep. Ev., XV. xi. 16

^99:1 Sc. the knowing and unknowing primal elements. Cf. P. S. A., vi.

^99:2 The text is very involved and obscure, and the meaning of the writer is by no means clear. Psychosis (psuxusis) means either animation (quickening) or "making cold" (cf. psuxu and psyxou); the name Psychosis is thus apparently supposed by the writer to have some connection with the term epsyxe ("freeze," or grow cold), which he has just employed in his description of the behaviour of the mixture. In its less auspicious sense epsyxe meant "grow cold"; in its more auspicious meaning it signified "breathe." But even so it must be said that the further reason (viz., similarity of behaviour) given for the choice of the term Psychosis is the exact opposite of what is stated in the description of the soul-stuff's nature; and this is all the more puzzling when we recall the theory of Origen and his predecessors that the soul (psyxe') was so-called precisely because it had grown cold and fallen away from the Divine heat and life. With the term cf. the sumatusis of Exx. viii. 5, vii. 2.

^100:1 Cf. Plato, Tim., 41: "He divided the whole mixture into souls equal in number to the stars, and assigned each soul to a star." So also Philo, who speaks of the souls as "equal in number to the stars"--De Som., i.  section 22; M. 642, P. 586 (Ri. iii. 244).

^100:2 Cf. Plato, ibid.: "They [the souls] were not, however, pure as before, but diluted to the second and third degrees.

^100:3 See  section 56 below.

^100:4 Of the Nature Above (teis anu fuseus); cf. the "Jerusalem Above" of the "Gnostics." Cf. also Tim., 41 D: "And having there [that is, among the stars] placed them as in a chariot, he showed them the nature of the universe, and declared to them the laws of destiny, according to which their first birth should be one and the same for all,--no one should suffer a disadvantage at his hands; they were to be sown in the instruments of time severally adapted to them, and to come forth the most religious of animals; and as human nature was of two kinds, the superior race would hereafter be called man." With the last sentence, cf. also 12 below.

^101:1 Cf. P. S. A., xix.

^101:2 Cf.  section 31 below.

^101:3 Cf. Hermes-Prayer, iii. 3, and note.

^102:1 We have had previous mention of fire, (aether) and air,--the psychosis being the quintessence.

^102:2 These are presumably the types of life in the upper world, symbolized by the zodiac.

^103:1 So Meineke in notes, following Cantor,--instead of the traditional "visible."

^104:1 Cf. Cyril, C. J., i. 15 (Frag. xvi.).

^105:1 Cf. Plat. Crit., 108.

^106:1 Sc. "signs of the zodiac," so-called.

^107:1 There is a lacuna in the text, which I have thus conjecturally completed.

^108:1 The reading of this sentence has not yet been properly emended, so that its translation is somewhat conjectural.

^109:1 An Orphic verse has here crept into the text from the margin. It runs: "By light it is we see; by eyes we naught behold." Fragm. Monad., x., p. 504, Herm.

^109:2 Cf. Plat., Men., 76; Seneca, Quaest. Nat., iv. 9.

^110:1 Cf. Tim. 42 A: "When they should be implanted in bodies by necessity . . . they should have . . . sensation . . . and love."

^110:2 Cf. Frag. xxiii.

^110:3 Cf. Tim., 42 B: "He who lived well during his appointed time was to return and dwell in his native star, and there he would have a blessed and congenial existence. But if he failed in attaining this, at the second birth, he would pass into a woman, and if, when in that state of being, he did not desist from evil, he would be continually changed into some brute who resembled him in the evil nature which he had acquired, and would not cease from his toils and transformations until he followed the revolution of the 'same' and the 'like' within him, and overcame by the help of reason the turbulent and irrational mob of later accretions, made up of fire and air and water and earth, and returned to the form of his first and better state." Notice the omission of any reference to the inferior status of woman in the Egyptian tradition.

^111:1 Lit. "their spirits"--which apparently link the souls with their bodies.

^111:2 Reading metabolas.

^112:1 Cf. Manetho, cited in the Orthography of Choeroboscus (Cramer, Anecd. Ox., ii. 235, 32; Aelian, H. A., v. 39, who follows Apion; R. 145, n. 3). But indeed this queer belief is a commonplace of the Mediaeval Bestiaries, which all go back to their second century Alexandrian prototype, the famous Physiologus, which was doubtless in part based on Aristotle's History of Animals and Pliny's Natural History.

^112:2 easei de kai gerasan. The reading is corrupt. But if we read geiras for gerasan, we have in the writer's ornate and somewhat strained style ean geiras for the usual geiras ekdunein found in Aristotle (H. V., 5. 7. 10; 8. 17. 11) for the changing of a serpent's skin. The phrase "as is the nature of the Gods" may then be explained as referring to the parallel between the anciently supposed rejuvenescence of the serpent and the perpetual growing young of the Gods.

^113:1 Cf. C. H., i. 27: "This when he'd said, the Shepherd mingled with the powers." Cf. Tim., 42 E: "When the Creator had made all these ordinances He remained in His own accustomed nature."

^116:1 Nemesis, the karmic deity, "she from whom none can escape, according to the generally accepted derivation of the name.

^119:1 Sc. as supplicants consulting an oracle.

^120:1 Or disks, presumably the world-wheels.

^121:1 tina ieran aporroian.

^122:1 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 3 (Com.).

^123:1 Sc. mummification.

^124:1 theuria, contemplative science, face to face knowledge.

^124:2 The Commentary begins at the end of the following excerpt.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 125]

EXCERPT XXVI.

 

THE VIRGIN OF THE WORLD [II.]

(Patrizzi (p. 32b) runs this on to the last without a break.

Text: Stob., Phys., ili. 45, under heading: "In the Same"; G. pp. 420-427; M. i. 299-304; W. i. 407-414.

Menard; Livre III., No. ii. of "Fragment," etc., as above, pp. 201-208.)

39. NOW if thou wouldst, O son of mighty soul, know aught beside, ask on!

And Horus said: O mother of great honour, I would know how royal souls are born?

And Isis said: Son Horus, the distinction which marks out the royal souls is somewhat of this kind.

Four regions are there in the universe which fall beneath a law and leadership which cannot be transgressed--Heaven, and the Aether, and the Air, and the most holy Earth.

Above in Heaven, son, the Gods do dwell, o'er whom with all the rest doth rule the Architect of all; and in the Aether [dwell] the Stars, o'er whom the mighty Light-giver the Sun holds sway; but

[p. 126]

in the Air [live] only souls, [*1] o'er whom doth rule the Moon; and on the Earth [do dwell] men and the rest of living things, o'er whom he who doth happen to be king holds sway.

40. The Gods engender, son, the kings it has deserved, to rule [the race] that lives on Earth. The rulers are the emanations of the king, of whom the nearer to him is more royal than the rest; for that the Sun, in that 'tis nearer than the Moon to God, is far more vast and potent, to whom the Moon comes second both in rank and power.

The king, then, is the last of all the other Gods, but first of men; and so long as he is upon the Earth, he is divorced from his true godship, but hath something that doth distinguish him from men and which is like to God.

The soul which is sent down to dwell in him, is from that space which is above those regions whence [the souls] descend to other men. Down from that space the souls are sent to rule for those two reasons, son.

41. They who have run a noble, blameless race throughout the cycle of their lives, and are about to be changed into Gods, [are born as kings,] in order that by exercise of kingship they may train themselves to use the power the Gods enjoy; while certain souls who are already Gods, but

[p. 127]

have in some slight way infringed the rule of life which God inspired, are born as kings, in order that they may not, in being clothed in bodies, undergo the punishment of loss of dignity as well as nature, and that they may not, when they are enfleshed, have the same lot as other men, but have when bound what they enjoyed when free.

42. The differences which are, however, in the dispositions shown by those who play the part of kings, are not determined by distinguishing their souls, for these are all divine, but by the constitution of the angels and the daimons who attend on them. For that such souls as these descending for such purposes do not come down without a guard and escort; for Justice up above knows how to give to each what is its due estate e'en though they be made exiles from their country ever fair.

When, then, my son, the angels and the daimons who bring down the soul are of a warlike kind, it has to keep firm hold of their proclivities, forgetting its own proper deeds, but all the more remembering the doings of the other host attached to it.

When they are peaceful, then the soul as well doth order its own course in peace.

When they love justice, then it too defends the right.

[p. 128]

When they are music-lovers, then it also sings.

And when they are truth-lovers, then it also doth philosophize.

For as it were out of necessity these souls keep a firm hold of the proclivities of those that bring them here; for they are falling down to man's estate, forgetting their own nature, and the farther they depart from it, the more they have in memory the disposition of those [powers] which shut them [into bodies].

43. Well hast thou, mother, all explained, said Horus. But noble souls,--how they are born, thou hast not told me yet.

As on the Earth, son Horus, there are states which differ one from other, so also is it in the case of souls. For they have regions whence they start; and that which starts from a more glorious place, hath nobler birth than one which doth not so. For just as among men the free is thought more noble than the slave--(for that which is superior in souls and of a ruling nature of necessity subjects what is inferior)--so also, son, . . . . [*1]

*     *     *     *     *

44. And how are male and female souls produced?

Souls, Horus, son, are of the self-same nature

[p. 129]

in themselves, in that they are from one and the same place where the Creator modelled them; nor male nor female are they. Sex is a thing of bodies, not of souls.

That which brings it about that some of them are stouter, some more delicate, is, son, that [cosmic] "air" in which all things are made. "Air" for the soul is nothing but the body which envelopes it, an element which is composed of earth and water, air and fire. [*1]

As, then, the composition of the female ones has more of wet and cold, but less of dry and warm, accordingly the soul which is shut in a plasm of this kind, becomes relaxed and delicate, just as the contrary is found to be in case of males.

For in their case there's more of dry and warm, and less of cold and wet; wherefore the souls in bodies such as these are sturdy and more active.

45. And how do souls become intelligent, O mother mine?

And Isis answered:

The organ of the sight, my son, is swathed in wrappings. When these are dense and thick, the eye is dim; but when they're thin and light, then is the sight most keen. So is it also for the soul. For it as well has envelopes incorporal appropriate to it, just as it is itself incorporal.

[p. 130]

[paragraph continues] These envelopes are "airs" which are in us. When these are light and thin and clear, then is the soul intelligent; but, on the contrary, when they are dense and thick and turbid, then [the soul], as in bad weather, sees not at distance but only things which lie about its feet.

46. And Horus said:

What is the reason, mother, that the men outside our holiest land are not so wise of mind as our compatriots?

And Isis said:

The Earth lies in the middle of the universe upon her back, like to a human being, with eyes turned up to heaven, and portioned out into as many regions as there are limbs in man.

She turns her eyes to Heaven as though to her own Sire, [*1] that with his changes she may also bring about her own.

She hath her head set to the south of all, right shoulder to south-east, left shoulder to south-west; her feet below the Bear, right foot beneath its tail, left under its head; her thighs beneath those that succeed the Bear; her waist beneath the middle [Stars].

47. A sign of this is that men in the south, who dwell upon her head, are fine about the head and have good hair.

[p. 131]

Those in the east are ready for a fight and archer folk--for this pertains to the right hand.

Those in the west are steadier and for the most part fight with the left hand, and what is done by others with the right, they for their part attribute to the left.

Those underneath the Bear excel in feet and have especially good legs.

Those who come after them a little way, about the zone which is our present Italy and Greece, they all have well-made thighs and backs. . . .

Moreover, all these [northern] parts being whiter than the rest bear whiter men upon them.

But since the holiest land of our forebears lies in the midst of Earth, and that the midst of a man's body serves as the precinct of the heart alone, and heart's the spot from which the soul doth start, the men of it not only have no less the other things which all the rest possess, but as a special thing are gifted with intelligence beyond all men and filled with wisdom, in that they are begotten and brought up above her heart.

48. Further, my son, the south being the receiver of the clouds which mass themselves together from the atmosphere . . . [*1]

[p. 132]

For instance, it is just because there is this concentration of them in the south, that it is said our river doth flow thence, upon the breaking up of the frost there.

For whensoe'er a cloud [*1] descends, it turns the air about it into mist, and sends it downward in a kind of fog; and fog or mist is an impediment not only to the eyes, but also to the mind.

Whereas the east, O Horus, great in glory, in that 'tis thrown into confusion and made overhot by the continual risings of the sun, and in like fashion too, the west, its opposite, in that it suffers the same things through its descents, [*2] afford the men born in them no conditions for clear observation. And Boreas with his concordant cold, together with their bodies doth congeal the minds of men as well.

Whereas the centre of all these being pure and undisturbed, foreknows both for itself and all that are in it. For, free from trouble, ever it brings forth, adorns and educates, and only with such weapons wars [on men], and wins the victory, and with consummate skill, like a good

[p. 133]

satrap, [*1] bestows the fruit of its own victory upon the vanquished.

49. This too expound, O lady, mother mine! For what cause is it that when men still keep alive in long disease, their rational part--their very reason and their very soul--at times becomes disabled?

And Isis answer made:

Of living things, my son, some are made friends with fire, and some with water, some with air, and some with earth, and some with two or three of these, and some with all.

And, on the contrary, again some are made enemies of fire, and some of water, some of earth, and some of air, and some of two of them, and some of three, and some of all.

For instance, son, the locust and all flies flee fire; the eagle and the hawk and all high-flying birds flee water; fish, air and earth; the snake avoids the open air. Whereas snakes and all creeping things love earth; all swimming things [love] water; winged things, air, of which they are the citizens; while those that fly still higher [love] the fire and have their habitat near it. Not that some of the animals as well do not love fire; for instance salamanders, for they even have their homes in it. It is because one or

[p. 134]

another of the elements doth form their bodies outer envelope.

50. Each soul, accordingly, while it is in its body is weighted and constricted by these four. Moreover it is natural it also should be pleased with some of them and pained with others.

For this cause, then, it doth not reach the height of its prosperity; still, as it is divine by nature, e'en while [wrapped up] in them, it struggles and it thinks, though not such thoughts as it would think were it set free from being bound in bodies.

Moreover if these [frames] are swept with storm and stress, or of disease or fear, then is the soul itself tossed on the waves, as man [*1] upon the deep with nothing steady under him.

Footnotes

^126:1 MS. A adds "of daimones."

^128:1 A lacuna, unfortunately, here occurs in the text, and must be of some extent, for the way of both of these souls is not given.

^129:1 Cf. 45 below.

^130:1 Cf. P. S. A., xxiv. 1.

^131:1 Something has evidently fallen out here, as the sentence is nowhere completed.

^132:1 Reading nefele for nefelei. The text is very faulty.

^132:2 These ideas of course spring from the conception of a flat earth and moving sun. The sun was thus thought to be nearer the earth at its rising and setting, and consequently those at the extremes of east and west were thought to be in danger of being burnt up by its heat.

^133:1 Some historical allusion may perhaps be suspected in this term; but I can find nothing appropriate to suggest.

^134:1 For anthrupos Meineke reads antherikos ("asphodel"), and compares Callimachus, H. in Del., 193: palirroiei epine'xetai antherikos us. But I see no necessity for this strained "emendation."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

COMMENTARY

ARGUMENT

1. The "Virgin of the World" is a sacred sermon of initiation into the Hermes-lore, the first initiation, in which the tradition of the wisdom is handed on by the hierophant to the neophyte, by word of mouth. The instructor, or revealer, is the representative of Isis-Sophia, and speaks in her name, pouring forth for her beloved son, the new-born Horus, the first draught of

[p. 135]

immortality, which is to purge away the poison of the mortal cup of forgetfulness and ignorance, and so raise him from the "dead."

This pouring-forth explains that the divine economy is perfect order, mystery transcending mystery,--each state of being, and each being, a mystery to those below that state.

This order no mortal intellect can ever grasp; nay, in the far-off ages, when as yet there were no men, but only Gods, those essences that know no death, the first creation of the World-creator,--even these Gods, these mysteries to us, were in amazement at the glories of the greater mysteries which decked the Heaven with their unveiled transcendent beauty. Even these Gods did not know God as yet.

2. The Gods were immortal, but unknowing; they were intoxicated with Heaven's beauty, amazed, nay awestruck, at the splendour of the mysteries of Heaven. Then came there forth another outpouring of the Father over all; He poured the Splendour of His Mind into their hearts and they began to know. [*1]

With this representation is blended a mythical historical tradition which suggests that all this was brought about for an "earth" on which our humanity had not as yet appeared, in far-off distant days when apparently our earth was not as now, ages ago, the purest Golden Age when there were Gods, not men. In that race of Gods, those of them in whom the ray was no low-burning spark, but a divine flame, were the instructors in the heavenly wisdom.

3. Of these was Hermes, a race or "being" rather

[p. 136]

than an individual; these "Sons of Fire" left the record of their wisdom engraved on "stone" in symbol, in charge of others of the same race but less knowing than themselves; and so they ascended to Heaven.

4. Those that succeeded them had not the flame so bright within their hearts; they were of the same race, but younger souls--the Tat-race. Hermes could not hand on the direct knowledge to them, the "perfect sight" (theuria), and so recorded the wisdom in symbol and myth. Still later the Asclepius-race joined themselves to the Tat-souls.

All this, however, took place many many ages ago, long even before the days of the men-gods Osiris and Isis; for the real wisdom of Hermes was so ancient that even Isis herself had had to search out the hidden records, and that too by means of the inner sight, when she herself had won the power to see, and the True Sun had risen for her mind.

5. But the strain of reconstructing the history of this far-distant past, as he conceived it to have been, is too much for the writer. He knows he is dealing with "myths," with what Plutarch would have called the "doings of the daimones;" he knows that in reality these primaeval "Books" of Hermes have no longer any physical existence, if indeed they ever had any; he knows that no matter what legends are told, or whatever the general priesthood may believe about ancient physical inscriptions of the primaeval Hermes,--all this has passed away, and that the real wisdom of Hermes is engraved on the tablets of the aether, and not hidden in the shrines of earth.

The "Books" are engraved in the "sacred symbols of the cosmic elements," and hidden away hard by the "secrets of Osiris"--the mysteries of creative fire, the light that speaks in the heart. The true Books of

[p. 137]

[paragraph continues] Hermes are hidden away in their own zones, the pure elements of the unseen world--the celestial Egypt.

6. This wisdom was held in safe keeping for the "souls" of men; it was a soul-gnosis, not a physical knowledge. Hereupon the writer begins the recital of his tradition [*1] of the creation of the "souls" of men in their unfallen state, all of which is derived from the "Books of Hermes." The soul-creation runs as follows:

The Watchers [*2] approach the Creator. The hour has struck for a new Cosmic Dawn, for a new Day. The time has come for Cosmos to awake after the Night. [*3] The Creative Mind of the universe turns His attention, His thought, to a new phase of things, a new world-period.

7. God smiled, and His laughter thrilled through space, [*4] and with His Word, called forth into the light the new dawn from out the primaeval darkness of the new world-space. His first creation, transcendental or intelligible Nature, stood before Him, in all the marvel of her new beauty, the primal pleroma, or potential fullness, of the new universe or system, the ideal cosmos of our world, for there were many others,--the Gods who marvelled at the mystery.

Straightway this Nature fell from one into three, herself and Toil and their fairest child Invention, to

[p. 138]

whom God gave the gift of being, themselves producing ideal form alone.

The first creation, then, was the bringing forth of potencies and types and ideas, to whom God gave the gift of being; it was as yet the world "above," the primaeval Heaven, in ultimate perfection, thus constituting the unchanging boundaries of the new universe that was to be. These things-that-are were filled with "mysteries," not "breaths" or "lives," for these were not as yet.

8. The next stage is the breathing of the spiritual (not the physical) breath of lives into the fairest blend of the primal elements that condition the world-area. This blend or soul-substance is called psychosis. The primal elements were not our mixed earth, water, fire, and air, but "knowing fire" (perhaps "fire in itself," as Hermes elsewhere calls it, or intelligible fire, perchance the "flower of fire" of the so-called "Chaldaean Oracles" [*1]) and unknowing air, if we may judge from the phrase (7): "Let heaven be filled with all things full, and air and aether [? = fire] too!" It is Heaven or the ideal world that is so filled; even earth-water was not yet manifested, much less earth and water.

It seems, then, that these souls (souls corresponding above with the subsequent man-stage below) were a blend of the three: spirit, knowing fire, and unknowing air,--triads, yet a unity called psychosis.

9. They were moreover all essentially equal, but differed according to some fixed law of numbering; they were also apparently definite in number, one soul perchance for every star, as with Plato, according to the law of similarity of less and greater, of within and without.

10. These souls, then, were "sacred (or typical) men,"

[p. 139]

a creation prior to that of the "sacred animals"; their habitat was in Upper Nature, the "all-fairest station of the aether"--the celestial cosmos.

11. They were appointed to certain stations and to the task of keeping the "wheel revolving,"--that is, as we shall see, they were to fashion forms for birth and death, and so provide means of transmission for the life-currents ever circulating in the great sphere. This was their appointed task, the law imposed on them, as obedient children of the Great King, their sire. So long as they kept their appointed stations they were to live for ever in surroundings of bliss and beauty, in full contemplation of the glories of the greater universe, throned amid the stars. But if they disobeyed the law, bonds and punishment await them.

12. We next come to a further creation of souls--a subject somewhat difficult to follow. These souls are of an inferior grade to the preceding, for they are composed of the primal water and earth, of "water in itself" and "earth in itself" we must suppose, and not of the compound elements we now call by these names. These are the souls of certain "sacred animals" or lives, which bear the same relationship to the souls which "keep the wheel revolving" as animals do to man on earth. They are, however, not shaped like the animals on earth, nor possess even typical animal forms, but bear the forms of men, though they are not men.

13. Still was the divine "water-earth" substance unexhausted, and so the residue was handed over to "those souls that had gone in advance and had been summoned to the land of Gods,"--that is to say, those stations near the Gods, in highest aether, of which mention has just been made. These souls are, of course, the man-souls proper.

Out of this residue these Builders were to fashion

[p. 140]

animals, after the models the Creator gave them,--certain types of life, below the "man" type proper, ranged in due order corresponding to the "motions of the souls." That is to say, there were various classes of Builders according to the types of animals which were to be copied. The Builders were to fashion the forms, the Creator was to breathe into them the life.

14. Thus these Builders fashioned the etheric doubles of birds, quadrupeds, fish and reptiles, and not their physical bodies, for as yet the earth was not solid.

15. And so the Builder-souls accomplished their task, and fashioned the primaeval copies of the celestial types of animals. Proud of their work, they grew restive at the restraints placed upon them by the law of their stations, and overstepped the limits decreed by the Creator. [*1]

Whereupon the punishment is pronounced, and the Creator resolves to make the human frame, therein to imprison the disobedient souls.

And here we learn incidentally that all of this

[p. 141]

psychogenesis which has gone before was the direct teaching of Hermes to the writer; of no physical Hermes, however, but of that Hermes whose "Books" are hidden in the zones (5), of the Hermes whom the writer, as he would have us believe, came to know face to face only after his inner vision was opened, and he had gazed with all-seeing eyes "upon the mysteries of that new dawn" (4).

16. For the new and mysterious fabrication of the man-form, all the seven obedient Gods, to whom the man-souls are kin (17), are summoned by the chief of them, Hermes himself, the beloved son and messenger of the Supreme, "soul of My Soul, and holy mind of My own Mind." [*1]

17. All of the seven promise to bestow the best they have on man.

18. The plasm out of which the man-form is to be modelled is the residue of the mixture out of which the Builders had already made the animal doubles. But the Builder of the man-frames was Hermes himself, who mixed the plasm with still more water.

19. Here the writer inserts a further piece of information concerning the source of his tradition. It is no longer as before what Hermes himself reveals to him in vision, but what the writer was told at a certain initiation called the "Black Rite." This rite was presided over by Kamephis, who is called the "earliest of all," or perhaps more correctly the "most primaeval of [us] all." Kamephis is thus conceived as the representative of a more ancient wisdom than that of Isis, and yet even he but hands on the tradition of Hermes. [*2]

20. The souls are "enfleshed," and utter loud complaints. Apparently not all at first can speak articulately; most of them can only groan, or scream,

[p. 142]

or hiss. The leading class of souls can, however, so far dominate the plasm as to speak articulately, and so one of their number utters a desperate appeal to Heaven.

21. They have now lost their celestial state, and Heaven is shut away from them; no longer can they see "without the light." They are shut down into a "heart's small compass"; the Sun of their being has become a light-spark only, hidden in the heart. This is, of course, the logos, the inmost reality in man.

22. The souls pray for some amelioration of their unhappy lot, and the conditions of the moral law are expounded to them. They who do rightly shall, on their body's dissolution, reascend to Heaven and be at rest; they who do ill, shall work out their redemption under the law of metempsychosis, or change from body to body, from prison to prison.

23. Details of this metempsychosis are then given with special reference to the incarnations of the "more righteous," who shall be kings, philosophers and prophets. Such souls apparently, for it is not expressly so stated, shall, in passing round the wheel of rebirth, when out of incarnation in a human body, have some sort of life with the souls of the leading types of animals, which are given as eagles, lions, dragons, and dolphins. Or, if we are unjustified in this speculation, such souls shall in their animal parts have intimate relation with the noblest types of animal essence (24).

25. There now comes upon the scene the mighty Intellect of the Earth, a veritable Erdgeist, in the form of Momus, who speaking out of affection for him (28), urges Hermes to increase ills and trials upon the souls of men, so that they shall not dare too much (25-27). And thereon Hermes sets in motion the instrument or engine of unerring fate and mechanical retribution (28, 29).

[p. 143]

29. Now all these things took place at the dawn of earth-life, when all as yet was inert, as far as our now solid earth is concerned. We must then suppose that as yet our present phase of existence on earth had not yet been manifested; that all was as yet in a far subtler or more primitive state of existence, when earth was still all "a-tremble," and had not yet hardened to its present state of solidity;--that is to say, that the man-plasm was in an etheric state (30).

31. The earth gradually hardens. Into the now more solid earth, the Creator and His obedient sons, the Gods who had not made revolt, poured forth the blessings of nature. This is described by the beautiful symbol of the hands of blessing, figured in Egypt as the sun-rays, each terminating in a hand for giving light and life. [*1]

The imprisoned souls, the kinsmen of the Gods obedient, continue their revolt; they are the leaders of mankind, of a mankind far weaker than themselves, a humanity, apparently evolved normally from the nature of things and as yet in its childhood. Instead of teaching them the lessons of love and wisdom, the Disobedient Ones use them for evil purposes, for war and conflict, for oppression and savagery.

32. Things go from bad to worse; the earth is befouled with the horrors of savage man, until in despair the pure elements complain to God. They pray that He will send a holy emanation of Himself to set things right (32-34).

35. Hereupon God sends forth the mystery of a new birth, a divine descent, or emanation, an avatara, as the Aryan Hindu tradition would call it, a dual manifestation. [*2] And so Osiris and Isis are born to help the

[p. 144]

world, to recall men from savagery, and restore the moral order (35-37).

It was they who were taught directly by Hermes (37) in all law and science and wisdom. Their mission meets with success, and the "world" is filled with a knowledge of the Path of Return. But before their ascension into Heaven they have a petition to make to the Father, that not only earth but also the surrounding spaces up to Heaven itself may be filled with a knowledge of the truth. Thus then they proceed to hymn the Sire and Monarch of all in a praise-giving which, unfortunately, Stobaeus did not think fit to copy.

The original text of the "Virgin of the World" treatise is obviously broken only by the omission of the Hymn of Osiris and Isis, and Excerpt ii. follows otherwise immediately on Excerpt i. The subject is the birth of royal souls, taken up from the instruction given in K. K., 23, 24 above.

39. There are four chief spaces: (i) Invisible Heaven, inhabited by the Gods, with the Invisible Sun as lord of all; (ii) Aether, inhabited by the Stars, of which for us the Sun is leader; (iii) Air, in which dwell non-incarnate souls, ruled by the Moon, as watcher o'er the paths of genesis; (iv) Earth, inhabited by men and animals, and over men the immediate ruler is the Divine King of the time.

40. The king-soul is the last of the Gods but the first of men [*1]; he is, however, on earth a demigod only, for his true divinity is obscured. His soul, or ka, comes from a soul-plane superior to that of the rest of mankind.

The ascending souls of normally evolving humanity are thought of, apparently, as describing ever widening

[p. 145]

circles in their wheelings in and out of incarnation, rising, as they increase in virtue and knowledge, at the zenith of their ascent in the intermediate state, before they turn to descend again into rebirth, ever nearer to the limits of the sensible world and, the frontiers of Heaven.

41. But there is also another class of descending royal souls, who have only slightly transgressed, and therefore descend only as far as this grade of humanity.

42. For the royal or ruling soul is not only a warrior monarch; his sovereignty may be also shown in arts of peace. He may be a righteous judge, a musician or poet, a truth-lover or philosopher. The activities of these souls are not determined, as is the case with souls of lower grades,--that is, those souls which have fallen deeper into material existence,--by what Basilides would have called the "appendages" of the animal nature; they are determined by a fairer taxis, an escort of angels and daimones, who accompany them into birth.

43. The description of their manner of birth, however, is, unfortunately, lost to us, owing either to the hesitation of Stobaeus to make it public, or to its being cut out by some subsequent copyist.

44. We are next told that sex is no essential characteristic of the soul. It is an "accident" of the body, but this body is not the physical, but the "aery" body, which air, however, is not a simple element, but already differentiated into four sub-elements. [*1]

45. Moreover the sight, or intelligence, of the soul also depends upon the purity of certain envelopes, which

[p. 146]

are called "airs,"--"airs" apparently more subtle even than the aery body (45). [*1]

46. Next follows a naive reason for the excellence of Egypt and the wisdom of the Egyptians (46-48). Here the writer seems to be no longer dependent directly on the Trismegistic tradition, but is inserting and expanding popular notions.

49. The remaining sections of the Excerpt are taken up with speculations as to the cause of delirium (49, 50), and Stobaeus brings his extract to a conclusion apparently without allowing the writer to complete his exposition.

SOURCES?

The discussion as to the meaning of the title, which has so far been invariably translated "The Virgin of the World," will come more appropriately later on.

How much of the original treatise has been handed on to us by Stobaeus we have no external means of deciding. Our two Extracts, however, plainly stand in immediate connection with each other, and the original text is broken only by the unfortunate omission of the Hymn of Osiris and Isis. The first Extract, moreover, is plainly not the beginning of the treatise, since it opens with words referring to what has gone before; while the second Extract ends in a very unsatisfactory manner in the middle of a subject.

What we have, however, gives us some very interesting indications of how the writer regarded his sources,--whether written or oral, whether physical or psychic. He of course would have us take his treatise as a literary unity; and indeed the subject is so worked up that it is very difficult to discover what the literary

[p. 147]

sources that lay before the writer may have been, for the story runs on straight enough in the same thought-mould and literary form, in spite of the insertion of somewhat contradictory statements concerning the sources of information.

When, however, Reitzenstein (p. 136) expressly states that the creation-story shows indubitable traces of two older forms, and that this is not a matter of surprise, as we find two (or more precisely four) different introductions,--we are not able entirely to follow him. It is true that these introductory statements are apparently at variance, but on further consideration they appear to be not really self-contradictory.

THE DIRECT VOICE AND THE BOOKS OF HERMES

The main representation is that the teacher of Isis is Hermes, who saw the world-creation, that is, the creation of our earth-system, and the soul-making, with his own spiritual sight (2). Isis has obtained her knowledge in two ways: either from the sacred Books of Hermes (4, 5); or by the direct spiritual voice of the Master (15). The intention here is plainly to claim the authority of direct revelation, for even the Books are not physical. They have disappeared, if indeed they ever were physical, and can only be recovered from the tablets of unseen nature, by ascending to the zones (5) where they are hidden; and these zones are plainly the same as the soul-spaces mentioned in S. I. H., 8.

At the same time there is mention of another tradition, which, though in later details purporting to be historic and physical, in its beginnings is involved in purely mythological and psychic considerations. When the first and most ancient Hermes ascended to Heaven, he left his Books in the charge of the Gods, his kinsmen,

[p. 148]

in the zones, and not on earth (3). On earth there succeeded to this wisdom a younger race, beloved of Hermes, and personified as his son Tat. These were souls as yet too young to understand the true science face to face. They were apparently regarded as the Tat (Thoth) priesthood of our humanity, who were subsequently joined by wisdom-lovers of another line of tradition, the Imuth (Asclepius) brotherhood, who had their doctrine originally from Ptah. [*1] This seems to hint at some ancient union of two traditions or schools of mystic science, perhaps from the Memphitic and Thebaic priesthoods respectively. [*2]

What, however, is clear is that the writer professes to set forth a higher and more direct teaching than either the received tradition of the Isiac mystery-cult or of the Tat-Asclepius school. This he does in the person of Isis as the face to face disciple of the most ancient Hermes, [*3] thus showing us that in the Hermes-circles of the Theoretics, or those who had the direct sight, though the Isis mystery-teaching was considered a tradition of the wisdom, it was nevertheless held to be entirely subordinate to the illumination of the direct sight.

[p. 149]

KAMEPHIS AND THE DARK MYSTERY

In apparent contradiction to all this we have the following statement: "Now give good heed, son Horus, for thou art being told the mystic spectacle which Kamephis, our forefather, was privileged to hear from Hermes, the record-writer of all deeds, and I from Kamephis when he did honour me with the Black [Rite] that gives perfection" (19). [*1]

Here Reitzenstein (p. 137) professes to discover the conflation of two absolutely distinct traditions of (i) Kamephis, a later god and pupil of Hermes, and (ii) Kamephis, an older god and teacher of Isis; but in this I cannot follow him. It all depends on the meaning assigned to the words para tou pantun progenesteroy, which Reitzenstein regards as signifying "the most ancient of all [gods]," but which I translate as "the most ancient of [us] all."

I take it to mean simply that, according to the general Isis-tradition, the founder of its mysteries was stated to be Kamephis, but that the Isis-Hermes circles claimed that this Kamephis, though truly the most ancient figure in the Isis tradition proper, was nevertheless in his turn the pupil of the still more ancient Hermes.

The grade of Kamephis was presumably represented in the mystery-cult by the arch-hierophant who presided at the degree called the "Dark Mystery" or "Black Rite." It was a rite performed only for those

[p. 150]

who were judged worthy of it (etimesen) after long probation in lower degrees, something of a far more sacred character, apparently, than the instruction in the mysteries enacted in the light.

I would suggest, therefore, that we have here a reference to the most esoteric institution of the Isiac tradition, the more precise nature of which we will consider later on; it is enough for the moment to connect it with certain objects or shows that were apparently made to appear in the dark. As Clement of Alexandria says in his famous commonplace book, called the Stromateis [*1]:

"It is not without reason that in the mysteries of the Greeks, lustrations hold the first place, analogous to ablutions among the Barbarians [that is, non-Greeks]. After these come the lesser mysteries, which have some foundation of instruction and of preliminary preparation for what is to follow; and then the great mysteries, in which nothing remains to be learned of the universe, but only to contemplate and comprehend nature [herself] and the things [which are mystically shown to the initiated]." [*2]

[p. 151]

KNEPH-KAMEPHIS

But who was Kamephis in the theology of the Egyptians? According to Reitzenstein, Kamephis or Kmephis, that is Kmeph, is equated by Egyptologists with Kneph, who, according to Plutarch, [*1] was worshipped in the Thebaid as the ingenerable and immortal God. Kneph, however, as Sethe has shown, [*2] is one of the aliases of Ammon, who is the "bull [or husband] of his mother," the "creator who has created himself." Kneph is, moreover, the Good Daimon, as Philo of Byblus says. [*3] He is the Sun-god and Heaven-god Ammon.

"If he open his eyes, he filleth all with light in his primaeval [*4] land; and if he close them all is dark." [*5]

Here we have Kneph-Ammon as the giver of light in darkness, and the opener of the eyes.

Moreover, Porphyry [*6] tells us that the Egyptians regarded Kneph as the demiurge or creator, and represented him in the form of a man, with skin of a blue-black tint, girt with a girdle, and holding

[p. 152]

a sceptre, and wearing a crown of regal wings. This symbolism, says Porphyry, signified that he was the representative of the Logos or Reason, difficult to discover, hidden, [*1] not manifest [*2]; it is he who gives light and also life [*3]; he is the King. The winged crown upon his head, he adds, signifies that he moves or energizes intellectually.

Kamephis, then, stands in the Isis-tradition for the representative of Agathodaimon, the Logos-creator. He is, however, a later holder of this office, and has had it handed on to him by Hermes, or at any rate he is instructed in the Logos-wisdom by Hermes.

HERMES I. AND HERMES II.

In this connection it is instructive to refer to the account which Syncellus [*4] tells us he took from the statement of Manetho.

Manetho, says Syncellus, states in his Books, that he based his replies concerning the dynasties of Egypt to King Ptolemy on the monuments.

"[These monuments], he [Manetho] tells us, were engraved in the sacred language, and in the characters of the sacred writing, by Thoth the First Hermes; after the Flood they were translated from the sacred language into the then common tongue, but [still written] in hieroglyphic characters, and stored away in books, by the Good Daimon's son, the Second Hermes, the father of Tat, in the inner shrines of the temples of Egypt."

[p. 153]

Here we have a tradition, going back as far as Manetho, which I have shown, in Chapter V. of the "Prolegomena" on "Manetho, High Priest of Egypt," cannot be so lightly disposed of as has been previously supposed,--dealing expressly with the Books of Hermes.

This tradition, it is true, differs from the account given in our Sermon (3-5), where the writer says nothing expressly of a flood, but evidently wishes us to believe that the most ancient records of Hermes were magically hidden in the zones of the unseen world, and that the flood, if there was one, was a flood or lapse of time that had utterly removed these records from the earth. For him they no longer existed physically.

Manetho's account deals with another view of the matter. His tradition appears to be as follows. The oldest records were on stone monuments which had survived some great flood in Egypt. These records belonged to the period of the First Hermes, the Good Daimon par excellence, the priesthood, therefore, of the earliest antediluvian Egyptian civilization. After the flood they were translated from the most archaic language into ancient Egyptian, and preserved in book-form by the Second Hermes, the priesthood, presumably, of the most ancient civilization after the flood, who were in time succeeded by the Tat priesthood.

That this tradition is elsewhere contradicted by the Isis-tradition proper, which in a somewhat similar genealogy places Isis at the very beginning prior even to Hermes I., [*1] need not detain us, since each tradition would naturally claim the priority of those whom it regarded as its own special founders, and we are for the moment concerned only with the claims of the Hermes-school.

[p. 154]

The main point of interest is that there was a tradition which explained the past on the hypothesis of periods of culture succeeding one another,--the oldest being supposed to have been the wisest and highest; the most archaic hieroglyphic language, which perhaps the priests of Manetho's day could no longer fully understand, [*1] was supposed to have been the tongue of the civilization before the Flood of Hermes I. It may even be that the remains of this tongue were preserved only in the magical invocations, as a thing most sacred, the "language of the gods."

The point of view, however, of the circle to which our writer belonged, was that the records of this most ancient civilization were no longer to be read even in the oldest inscriptions; they could only be recovered by spiritual sight. Into close relation with this, we must, I think, bring the statement made in  section 37, that Osiris and Isis, though they themselves had learned all the secrets of the records of Hermes, nevertheless kept part of them secret, and engraved on stone only such as were adapted for the intelligence of "mortal men."

The Kamephis of the Isis-tradition, then, apparently stands for Kneph as Agathodaimon, that is for Hermes, but not for our Hermes I., [*2] for he has no physical

[p. 155]

contact with the Isis-tradition, but for Hermes II., who was taught by Hermes I.

THE BLACK RITE

But what is the precise meaning of the "black rite" at which Kamephis presides? I have already suggested the environment in which the general meaning may be sought, though I have not been able to produce any objective evidence of a precise nature. Reitzenstein (pp. 139 ff.), however, thinks he has discovered that evidence. His view is as follows:

The key to the meaning, according to him, is to be found in the following line from a Magic Papyrus [*1]:

"I invoke thee, Lady Isis, with whom the Good Daimon doth unite, [*2] He who is Lord en tui teleiui melani."

Reitzenstein thinks that the Good Daimon here stands for Chnum, and works out (p. 140) a learned hypothesis that the "black" refers to a certain territory of black earth, between Syene and Takompso, the Dedocaschoenus, especially famed for its pottery, which was originally in the possession of the Isis priesthood, but was subsequently transferred to the priesthood of Chnum by King Dos'er. Reitzenstein would thus, presumably, translate the latter half of the sentence as "the Good Daimon who is Lord in the perfect black [country]," and so make it refer to Chnum, though indeed he seems himself to feel the inadequacy of this explanation to cover the word "perfect" (p. 144). But this seems to me to take all the dignified meaning out of both our text and that of the Magic Papyrus, and to introduce

[p. 156]

local geographical considerations which are plainly out of keeping with the context.

It is far more natural to make the Agathodaimon of the Papyrus refer to Osiris; for indeed it is one of his most frequent designations. Moreover, it is precisely Osiris who is pre-eminently connected with the so-called "under world," the unseen world, the "mysterious dark." He is lord there, while Isis remains on earth; it is he who would most fitly give instructions on such matters, and indeed one of the ancient mystery-sayings was precisely, "Osiris is a dark God." [*1]

"He who is Lord in the perfecting black," might thus mean that Osiris, the masculine potency [*2] of the soul, purified and perfected the man on the mysterious dark side of things, and completed the work which Isis, the feminine potency of the soul, had begun on him.

That, in the highest mystery-circles, this was some stage of union of the man with the higher part of himself, may be deduced from the interesting citations made by Reitzenstein (pp. 142-144) from the later Alchemical Hermes-literature; it clearly refers to the mystic "sacred marriage," [*3] the intimate union of the soul with the logos, or divine ray. Much could be written on this subject, but it will be sufficient to append two passages of more than ordinary interest. The Jewish over-writer of the Naassene Document contends that the chief mystery of the Gnosis was but the consummation of the instruction given in the various mystery-institutions of the nations. The

[p. 157]

[paragraph continues] Lesser Mysteries, he tells us, commenting on the text of the Pagan commentator, pertained to "fleshly generation," whereas the Greater dealt with the new birth, or second birth, with regeneration, and not with genesis. And speaking of a certain mystery, he says:

"For this is the Gate of Heaven, and this is the House of God, where the Good God [*1] dwells alone, into which [House] no impure [man] shall come; but it is kept under watch for the spiritual alone; where when they come they must cast away their garments, and all become bridegrooms obtaining their true manhood through the Virginal Spirit. For such a man is the Virgin big with child, conceiving and bearing a Son, not psychic, not fleshly, but a blessed Aeon of Aeons." [*2]

In the marvellous mystery-ritual of the new-found fragments of The Acts of John, lately discovered in a fourteenth century MS. in Vienna, disguised in hymn form, and hiding an almost inexhaustible mine of very early tradition, the "sacred marriage" is plainly suggested as one of the keys to part of the ritual. Compare, for instance, with the "casting away of their garments," in the above-quoted passage of the Naassene writer, the following: 

"[The Disciple.] I would flee.

[The Master.] I would [have thee] stay.

[The Assistants.] Amen!

[The Disciple.] I would be robed.

[The Master.] And I would robe [thee].

[The Assistants.] Amen!

[The Disciple.] I would be at-oned.

[p. 158]

[The Master.] And I would at-one. 

[The Assistants.] Amen!" [*1]

BLACK LAND.

But to return to the "mysterious black." Plutarch tells us: "Moreover, they [the Egyptians] call Egypt, inasmuch as its soil is particularly black, as though it were the black of the eye, Chemia, and compare it with the heart," [*2]--for, he adds, it is hot and moist, and set in the southern part of the inhabitable world, in the same way as the heart in the left side of a man. [*3]

Egypt, the "sacred land" par excellence, was called Chemia or Chem (Hem), Black-land, because of the nature of its dark loamy soil; it was, moreover, in symbolic phraseology the black of the eye, that is, the pupil of the earth-eye, the stars and planets being regarded as the eyes of the gods. [*4] Egypt, then, was the eye and heart of the Earth; the Heavenly Nile poured its light-flood of wisdom through this dark of the eye, or made the land throb like a heart with the celestial life-currents.

Nor is the above quotation an unsupported statement of Plutarch's, for in an ancient text from Edfu, [*5] we read: "Egypt (lit. the Black), which is so called after the eye of Osiris, for it is his pupil."

Ammon-Kneph, too, as we have seen, is black, or blue-black, signifying his hidden and mysterious

[p. 159]

character; and in the above-quoted passage he is called "he who holds himself hidden in his eye," or "he who veils himself in his pupil."

This pupil, then, concludes Reitzenstein (p. 145), is the "mysterious black." Is this, then, the origin of this peculiar phrase? If so, it would be connected with seeing, the spiritual sight, the true Epopteia.

THE PUPIL OF THE WORLD'S EYE

But Isis, also, is the black earth, and, therefore, the pupil of the eye of Osiris, and, therefore, also of the Chnum or Ammon identified with Osiris at Syene. Isis, therefore, herself is the "Pupil of the World's Eye"--the kore kosmoy. [*1]

Reitzenstein would, therefore, have it that the original type of our treatise looks back to a tradition which makes the mystery-goddess Isis the disciple and spouse of the mysterious Chnum or Ammon, or Kneph or Kamephis, as Agathodaimon; and, therefore, presumably, that the making of this Kamephis the disciple in his turn of Hermes is a later development of the tradition, when the Hermes-communities gained ascendancy in certain circles of the Isis-tradition.

This is very probable; but dare we, with Reitzenstein, cast aside the "traditional" translation of kore kosmoy, as "Virgin of the World," and prefix to our treatise as title the new version, "The Pupil of the Eye of the World"? It certainly sounds strange as a title to unaccustomed ears, and differs widely from any other titles of the Hermetic sermons known to us. But what does the "Virgin of the World" mean in connection with our treatise? Isis as the Virgin Mother is a

[p. 160]

familiar idea to students of Egyptology [*1]; she is kat' exoxen, the "World-Virgin."

THE SON OF THE VIRGIN

And here it will be of interest to turn to a curious statement of Epiphanius [*2]; it is missing in all editions of this Father prior to that of Dindorf (Leipzig, 1859), which was based on the very early (tenth century) Codex Marcianus 125, all previous editions being printed from a severely censured and bowdlerized fourteenth century MS.

Epiphanius is stating that the true birthday of the Christ is the Feast of Epiphany, "at a distance of thirteen days from the increase of the light [i.e. December 25]; for it needs must have been that this should be a figure of our Lord Jesus Christ Himself and of His twelve disciples, who make up the thirteen days of the increase of the Light." The Feast of the Epiphany was a great day in Egypt, connected with the "Birth of the Aeon,"--a phase of the "Birth of Horus." For Epiphanius thus continues:

"How many other things in the past and present support and bear witness to this proposition, I mean the birth of Christ! Indeed, the leaders of the idol-cults, [*3] filled with wiles to deceive the idol-worshippers who believe in them, in many places keep highest festival on this same night of Epiphany [= the Manifestation to Light], so that they whose hopes are in error may not seek the truth. For instance, at

[p. 161]

[paragraph continues] Alexandria, in the Koreion, [*1] as it is called--an immense temple, that is to say the Precinct of the Virgin--after they have kept all-night vigil with songs and music, chanting to their idol, when the vigil is over, at cock-crow, they descend with lights into an underground crypt, and carry up a wooden image lying naked on a litter, with the seal of a cross made in gold on its forehead, and on either hand two similar seals, and on either knee two others, all five seals being similarly made in gold. And they carry round the image itself, circumambulating seven times the innermost temple, to the accompaniment of pipes, tabors and hymns, and with merry-making they carry it down again underground. And if they are asked the meaning of this mystery, they answer: 'To-day at this hour the Maiden (Kore), that is, the Virgin, gave birth to the Aeon.'"

He further adds that at Petra, in Arabia, where, among other places, this mystery was also performed, the Son of the Virgin is called by a name meaning the "Alone-begotten of the Lord." [*2]

Here, then, at Alexandria, in every probability the very environment of our treatise, we have a famous mystery-rite, solemnized in the Temple of the Virgin, who gives birth to a Son, the Aeon. This, we shall not be rash in assuming, signifies not only the birth of the new year, but also still more profound mysteries, when we remember the words of the Naassene Document quoted above: "For such a man is the Virgin, big with child, conceiving and bearing a Son,--not psychic, not fleshly [nor, we may add, temporal], but

[p. 162]

a blessed Aeon of Aeons"--that is, an Eternity of Eternities, an immortal God.

We should also notice the crowing of the cock, which plays so important a part in the crucifixion-story in the Gospels, [*1] and above all things the stigmata on the image, the symbols of a cosmic and human mystery.

THE MYSTERY OF THE BIRTH OF HORUS

In our own treatise the mysterious Birth of Horus is also referred to (35, 36) as follows.

Isis has handed on the tradition of the Coming of Osiris, the Divine emanation, the descent of the efflux of the Supreme, and Horus asks: "How was it, mother, then, that Earth received God's efflux?"--where Earth may well refer to the "Dark Earth," a synonym of Isis herself.

And Isis answers: "I may not tell the story of [this] birth; for it is not permitted to describe the origin of this descent, O Horus, [son] of mighty power, lest afterward the way of birth of the immortal Gods should be known unto men."

Here I think we have a clear reference to the mysterious "Birth of Horus," the birth of the gods,--that is to say, of how a man becomes a god, becomes the most royal of all souls, gains the kingdom, or lordship over himself. This mystery was not yet to be revealed to the neophyte--Horus--and yet this Birth is suggested to Tat by Hermes--C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 2--when he says: "Wisdom that understands in silence [such is the matter and the womb from out which Man is born] and the True Good the Seed."

The womb is the mysterious Silence, the matter is

[p. 163]

[paragraph continues] Wisdom, Isis herself, the seed is the Good, the Agathodaimon, Osiris.

But in our treatise Horus has not yet reached to this high state; Isis, as the introductory words tell us, is pouring forth for him "the first draught of immortality" only, "which souls have custom to receive from gods"; he is being raised to the understanding of a daimon, but not as yet to that of a god.

All of this, moreover, seems to have been part and parcel of the Isis mystery-tradition proper, for as Diodorus (i. 25), following Hecataeus, informs us, it was Isis who "discovered the philtre of immortality, by means of which, when her son Horus, who had been plotted against by the Titans, and found dead (nekron) beneath the water, not only raised him to life (anasteisai) by giving him life (psyxe'n), but also made him sharer in immortality."

Here we have evidence to show that in the mystery-myth Horus was regarded as the human soul, and that there were two interpretations of the mystery. It referred not only to the "rising from the dead" in another body, or return to life in another enfleshment, but also to a still higher mystery, whereby the consciousness of immortality was restored to the memory of the soul. The soul had been cast by the Titans, or the opposing powers of the subtle universe, into the deep waters of the Great Sea, the Ocean of Generation, or Celestial Nile, for as the mysterious informant of Cleombrotus told him, [*1] these stories of Titans concerned daimons or souls proper, not bodies. [*2]

[p. 164]

From this death in the sea of matter, Isis, the Mother Soul, brings Horus repeatedly back to life, and finally bestows on him the knowledge of immortality, and so raises him from the "dead." [*1]

This birth of the "true man" within, the logos, was and is for man the chief of all mysteries. In the Chapter on "The Popular Theurgic Hermes-Cult," we have already, in elucidation of the sacramental formula, "Thou art I and I am thou," quoted the agraphon from the Gospel of Eve concerning the Great Man and the Little Man or Dwarf, and lovers of the Aupanishad literature of Hindu-Aryan theosophy need hardly be

[p. 165]

reminded of "the 'man,' of the size of a thumb," within, in the ether of the heart. [*1]

"ISHON"

But what is of more immediate interest is that the same idea is to some extent found in the Old Covenant documents, especially in the Prophetical and Wisdom literature, which latter was strongly influenced by Hellenistic ideas.

Ishon, which literally means "little man" or "dwarf," [*2] is in A.V. generally translated "apple of the eye." [*3]

Thus we read in a purely literal sense, referring to weeping: "Let not the apple of thine eye cease" (Lam. ii. 18).

It was, however, a common persuasion, that the intelligence or soul itself, not merely the reflection of the image of another person, resided in the eye, and was made manifest chiefly by the eye.

Thus the "apple of the eye" was used as a synonym for a man's most precious possession, the treasure-house as it were of the light of a man.

[p. 166]

And so we read: "He [Yahweh] kept him [Israel] as the apple of his eye" (Ps. xvii. 8)--where ishon is in the Hebrew further glossed as the "daughter of the eye"; and again: "Thus saith the Lord of Hosts: . . . He that toucheth you toucheth the apple of his eye" (Zech. ii. 8).

The "apple of the eye" (ishon) was, then, something of great value, something very precious, and, therefore, we read in the Wisdom-literature that the punishment of the man who curses his father and mother is that "his lamp shall be put out in obscure (ishon) darkness" (Prov. xx. 20)--that is, that he shall thus extinguish the lamp of his intelligence, or perhaps spiritual nature, "in the apple of his eye there will be darkness"; and this connects with a passage in the Psalms which shows traces of the same Wisdom-teaching. "In the hidden part [*1] [of man] thou shalt make me to know wisdom" (Ps. li. 6).

But the most striking passages are to be found in that pre-eminently Wisdom-chapter in the Proverbs-collection, where the true Israelite is warned to remain faithful to the Law (Torah), and to have no commerce with the "strange woman," the "harlot"--that is, the "false doctrines" of the Gentiles. [*2]

"Keep my law as the apple of thine eye" (Prov. vii. 2), says the writer, speaking in the name of Yahweh, for he has seen the young and foolish being led astray by the "strange woman." "He went the way to her house, in the twilight, in the evening; in the black (ishon) and dark night" (Prov. vii. 9). That is to say,

[p. 167]

his lamp was put out; there was dark night in his eye, in that little man of his, which should be his true light-spark understanding the wisdom of Yahweh.

Here, I think, we have additional evidence, that the idea, that the pupil of the eye was the seat of the spiritual intelligence in man, was widespread in Hellenistic circles. [*1] But even so, can we translate kore kosmoy as the "Apple of the World-Eye"? It is true that Isis is the instrument or organ of conveying the hidden wisdom to Horus, and that it is eventually Hermes or the Logos who is the true light itself, which shines through her, the pupil of Egypt's eye, [*2] out of that mysterious darkness, in which she found herself, when she received illumination at the hands of Kamephis; but is this sufficient justification for rejecting the traditional translation of the title, and adopting a new version?

On the whole I am inclined to think, that though the new rendering may at first sight appear somewhat strained, nevertheless in proportion as we become more familiarized with the idea and remember the thought-environment of the time, we may venture so to translate it. Isis, then, is the "Apple or Pupil of the Eye of Osiris." On earth the "mysterious black" is Egypt

[p. 168]

herself, the wisdom-land. Isis is the mysterious wisdom of Egypt, but in our treatise she is even more than this, for she is that wisdom but now truly illumined by the direct sight, the new dawn of the Trismegistic discipline of which she speaks (4).

To a Greek, however, the word kore would combine and not distinguish the two meanings of the title over which we have been labouring; but even as logos meant both "word" and "reason," so kore would mean both "virgin" and "pupil of the eye"; but as it is impossible to translate it in English by one word, we have followed the traditional rendering.

THE SIXTY SOUL-REGIONS

We now turn to a few of the most important points which require more detailed treatment than the space of a footnote can accommodate. There are, of course, many other points that could be elaborated, but if that were done, the present work would run into volumes.

The number of degrees into which the soul-stuff (psychosis) is divided, is given as three, and as sixty (10). If this statement stood by itself we should have been somewhat considerably puzzled to have known what to make of it, even when we remembered the mystic statement that 60 is par excellence the number of the soul, and that he who can unriddle the enigma will know its nature.

Fortunately, however, if we turn to S. I. H., 6 (Ex. xxvii.), we find that according to this tradition the soul-regions also were divided into 60 spaces, presumably corresponding to the types of souls.

They were in 4 main divisions and 60 special spaces, with no overlapping (7). These spaces were also called zones, firmaments or layers.

We are further told (6) that the lowest division, that

[p. 169]

is the one nearest to the earth, consists of 4 spaces; the second, of 8; the third, of 16; and the fourth, of 32.

And still further (7), that there were besides the 4 main divisions 12 intervallic ones. This introduces an element of uncertainty, for, as far as I am aware, we have no objective information which can enable us to determine how the intervallic divisions were located in the mind of the writer; speculation is rash, but a scheme has suggested itself to me, and I append it with all reservation.

First of all we have 4 main divisions or planes, separated from one another by 3 determinations of some sort, for the whole ordering pertains to the Air proper, and perhaps the 4 states of Air were regarded as earthy, watery, aery, and fiery Air. The 3 determinations may perhaps have been regarded as corresponding to the three main grades or florescences of the soul-stuff, which were apparently of a superior substance.

Each division of the 4 may further have been regarded as divided off by three intervallic determinations; so that we should have 3 such intervals in the lowest division, subdividing it into 4 spaces of 1 space each; 3 in the second, subdividing it into 4 spaces of 2 spaces each; 3 in the third, subdividing it into 4 spaces of 4 spaces each; and 3 in the fourth, subdividing it into 4 spaces of 8 spaces each. The sum of these intervals would thus be 12.

PLUTARCH'S YOGIN

In this connection, however, I cannot refrain from appending a pleasant story told by Plutarch. [*1]

[p. 170]

The speaker is Cleombrotus, a Lacedaemonian gentleman and man of means, who was a great traveller, and a greedy collector of information of all sorts to form the basis of a philosophical religion. He had spent much time in Egypt, and had also been a voyage beyond the Red Sea. On his travels Cleombrotus had heard of a philosopher-recluse, who lived in complete retirement, except once a year when he was seen by "the folk round the Red Sea"; then it was that a certain divine inspiration came upon him, and he came forth and "prophesied" to the nobles and royal scribes who used to flock to hear him. With great difficulty, and only after the expenditure of much money, Cleombrotus discovered the hermitage of this recluse, and was granted a courteous reception.

Our old philosopher was the handsomest man Cleombrotus had ever met, deeply versed in the knowledge of plants, and a great linguist. With Cleombrotus, however, he spoke Doric, and almost in verse, and "as he spake perfume filled the place from the sweetness of his breath."

His knowledge of the various mystery-cults was profound, and his intimate acquaintance with the unseen world remarkable; he explained many things to Cleombrotus, and especially the nature of the daimones, and the important part they played as factors in any satisfactory interpretation of ancient mythology, seeing that most of the great myths referred to the doings of the daimones and not of mortals.

Cleombrotus, however, has told his story merely as an introduction to the quotation of a scrap of information let fall by the old philosopher concerning the plurality of worlds [*1]; thus, then, he continues:

[p. 171]

"THE PLAIN OF TRUTH"

"He told me that the number of worlds was neither infinite, nor one, nor five, but that there were 183 of them, arranged in the figure of a triangle of which each side contained 60, and of the remaining 3 one set at each angle. And those on the sides touch each other, revolving steadily as in a choral dance. And the area of the triangle is the Common Hearth of all, and is called the 'Plain of Truth,' [*1] in which the logoi and ideas and paradigms of all things which have been, and which shall be, lie immovable; and the Aeon [or Eternity] being round them [sc. the ideas], time flows down upon the worlds like a stream. And the sight and contemplation (thean) of these things is possible for the souls of men only once in ten thousand years, should they have lived a virtuous life. And the highest of our initiations here below is only the dream of that true vision and initiation [*2]; and the discourses [sc. delivered in the mystic rites] have been carefully devised to awaken the memory of the sublime things above, or else are to no purpose."

[p. 172]

This statement I am inclined to regard as one of the most distinct pronouncements on the nature of the higher mysteries which has been preserved to us from antiquity, and the locus classicus and point of departure for any really fruitful discussion of the true nature of the philosophic mysteries, and yet I have never seen it referred to in this connection.

Our old philosopher was well acquainted with the Egyptian mystery-tradition, for Cleombrotus obtained information from him concerning the esoteric significance of Typhon and Osiris, and what I have quoted above falls naturally into place in the scheme of ideas of the tradition preserved in the treatise which we are discussing. [*1] It, indeed, pertains to a higher side of the matter, for it purports to be the highest theoria of all, and possible for the souls even of the most righteous only at long periods of time.

Of course the representation is symbolical. The triangle is no triangle; it is the "plain of truth," the "hearth of the universe." The triangle, then, pertained to the plane of Fire proper and not Air. Still, the ordering of the "worlds" is similar to that of our soul spaces. The triangle is shut off from the manifested world by the Aeon; it is out of space and time proper. Time flows down from it. The worlds proper are 3 worlds or cosmoi, each divided into 60 subordinate cosmoi, in choral dance, or orderly harmonious movement of one to the other. Our soul-spaces, then, may have been regarded as some reflection of these supernal conditions.

One is almost tempted to turn the plane triangle

[p. 173]

into a solid figure, a tetrahedron, [*1] and imagine the idea of a world or wheel, at each of the four angles, and to speculate on the Wheels of Ezekiel, the prototype of the Mercabah or Heavenly Chariot of Kabalism, the Throne of Truth of the Supreme, but I will not try the patience of my readers any further, for doubtless most of them will have cried already: Hold, enough!

THE BOUNDARIES OF THE NUMBERS WHICH PREEXIST IN THE SOUL

Perhaps, however, it would be as well, before dismissing the subject, to consider very briefly what Plato, following Pythagoras, [*2] has to say concerning the "boundaries" of all numbers which pre-exist in the soul. These soul-numbers are 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 27 (the combination of the two Pythagorean series 1, 2, 4, 8 and 1, 3, 9, 27), or 1, 2, 3, 2^2, 2^3, 3^2, 3^3. Of these numbers 1, 2, 3 are apportioned to the World-Soul itself, in its intellectual or spiritual aspect, and signify its abiding in (1), its proceeding from (2), and its returning to itself (3); this with regard to primary natures. But in addition, intermediate subtle natures or souls are "providentially" ordered in their evolution and involution, by the World-Soul; they proceed according to the power of the fourth term (4 or 2^2), "which possesses generative powers," and return according to that of the fifth (9 or 3^2), "which reduces them to one." Finally also solid or gross natures are also "providentially" ordered in their procession according to 8 (2^3), and in their conversion according to 27 (3^3). [*3]

[p. 174]

From all of which we get the following scheme of circular progression and conversion of the soul, the various main stages through which it passes:

With this compare the "Chaldaean Oracle" (ap. Psellus, 19): "Do not soil the spirit, nor turn the plane into the solid"--me pneuma moluneis mute bathuneis to epipedon (ed. Cory, Or. clii., p. 270); where the four stages correspond to the point, line, plane, and solid. It is also to be remembered that since x0 = 1, 20 = 1 and 30 = l.

That these are the boundary numbers of the soul, according to Pythagoreo-Platonic tradition, is of interest, but how this can in any way be made to agree with the ordering of the soul-spaces in our treatise is a puzzle. That by adding these numbers together (1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 8 + 9 + 27) we get 54, and by farther adding the numbers of the World-Soul proper (1 + 2 + 3) we get 6, and so total out the whole sum of the phases to 60, savours somewhat of "fudging," as we used to call it at school. It is by no means convincing, for we are here combining particulars with universals as though they were of equal dignity; still the ancients frequently resort to such combinations.

That, however, there is something more than learned trifling in these numbers of Plato may be seen by the brilliant study of Adam on the "nuptial number" of Plato, [*1] which was based upon the properties of the

[p. 175]

[paragraph continues] "Pythagorean triangle," a right-angled triangle to the containing sides of which the values of 3 and 4 were given, the value of its hypothenuse being consequently 5; and 3 * 4 * 5 = 60. The numbers 3, 4, 5, together with the series 1, 2, 4, 8, and 1, 3, 9, 27, were the numerical sequences which supplied those "canons of proportion" with which the Pythagoreans and Platonists chiefly busied themselves.

Still, as far as I can see, this does not throw any clear light on the ordering of the soul spaces as given in our treatise, and we are therefore tempted to connect it with the tradition of the mysterious 60's of Cleombrotus. But what that choral dance was which ordered the subordinate cosmoi into 60's, and whether they proceeded by stages which might correspond to 3's and 4's and 5's, we have, as far as I am aware, no data on which to base an argument. It may, however, have been connected with Babylonian ideas; the 3 may have been regarded as "falling into" 4, so making 12, and this stage in its turn have been regarded as "falling into" 5, and so making 60.

THE MYSTERIOUS CYLINDER

It is to be noticed, however, that before the souls revolted, the Demiurge "appointed for them limits and reservations [*1] in the height of Upper Nature, that they might keep the cylinder a-whirl in proper order and economy" (11).

They were, then, confined to certain orderings and spaces. But what is the mysterious "cylinder" which they were to keep revolving?

So far I have come across nothing that throws any

[p. 176]

direct light on the subject. However, Proclus [*1] says that Porphyry stated that among the Egyptians the letter x, surrounded by a circle, symbolized the mundane soul.

It is curious that Porphyry should have referred this idea to the Egyptians, when he must have known that Plato, to whom Porphyry looked as the corypheus of all philosophy, had treated of the significance of the symbol X (in Greek x) in perhaps the most discussed passage of the Timaeus (36B). [*2] This letter symbolized the mutual relation of the axes and equators of the sphere of the "same" (the "fixed stars") and the sphere of the "other" (the "seven planetary spheres"). Porphyry, however, may have believed that Plato, or Pythagoras, got the idea in the first place from Egypt--the common persuasion of his school.

This enigma of Plato is described as follows by Jowett in his Introduction to the Timaeus [*3]:

"The universe revolves round a centre once in twenty-four hours, but the orbits of the fixed stars take a different direction from that of the planets. The outer and the inner sphere cross one another and meet again at a point opposite to that of their first contact; the first moving in a circle from left to right along the side of a parallelogram which is supposed to be inscribed in it, the second also moving in a circle along the diagonal of the same parallelogram from right to left [*4]; or, in

[p. 177]

other words, the first describing the path of the equator, the second, the path of the ecliptic."

We should thus, just as the Egyptians, according to Porphyry, symbolized it, represent the conception by the figure of a circle with two diameters suggesting respectively the equator and the ecliptic.

But what is the rectangular figure to which Jowett refers, but which he does not further describe? The circles are spheres; and, therefore, the rectangular figure must be a solid figure inscribed in the sphere "of the same." If we now set the circle revolving parallel to the longer sides of the figure, this "parallelogram" will trace out a cylinder, while the seven spheres of the "other," the "souls" of the "planets," moving parallel to one of the diagonals of our figure, and in an opposite direction to the sphere of the "same," will, by their mutual difference of rates of motion, cause their "bodies" (the souls surrounding the bodies) to trace out spiral orbits.

All this in itself, I confess, seems very far-fetched, and I should have thrown my notes on the subject into the waste-paper basket, but for the following consideration:

Basil of Caesarea, in his Hexaemeron, or Homilies on

[p. 178]

the Six Days of Creation, declared it "a matter of no interest to us whether the earth is a sphere or a cylinder or a disk, or concave in the middle like a fan." [*1]

The cylinder-idea, then, was a favourite theory with regard to the earth-shape in the time of Basil, that is the fourth century.

This cylinder-idea, however, I am inclined to think was very ancient. In the domain of Greek speculation we first meet with it in what little is known of the system of Anaximander of Miletus, the successor of Thales.

Anaximander is reported to have believed that "the earth is a heavenly body, controlled by no other power, and keeping its position because it is the same distance from all things; the form of it is curved, cylindrical, like a stone column; it has two faces; one of these is the ground beneath our feet, and the other is opposite to it." [*2]

And again: "That the earth is a cylinder in form, and that its depth is one-third of its breadth." [*3]

Now I have never been able to persuade myself that the earliest philosophers of Greece "invented" the ideas ascribed to them. They stood on the borderland of mythology and mysticism, and, in every probability, took their ideas from ancient traditions.

[p. 179]

[paragraph continues] Anaximander himself was in every probability indirectly, for all we know even directly, influenced by Egyptian and Chaldaean notions; indeed, who can any longer doubt in the light of the Cnossus excavations?" [*1]

Anaximander is thus said to have regarded the earth-cylinder as fixed, whereas in our treatise the cylinder is not the earth and is not fixed; it is, on the contrary, a celestial cylinder and in constant motion. Can it, then, possibly be that this cylinder notion was associated with some Babylonian idea, and had its source in that country par excellence of cylinders? In Babylonia, moreover, the cylinder-shape was frequently used for seals, fashioned like a small roller, so that the characters or symbols engraved on them could be impressed on soft substance, such as wax. Further, the Babylonian and Egyptian civilizations were, as we know, closely associated, and pre-eminently so in the matter of sigils and seals. In the Coptic-Gnostic works, translated from Greek originals, and indubitably mainly of Egyptian origin, the idea of "characters," "seals," and "sigils," as types impressed on matter, is a commonplace.

Can our cylinder, then, have some connection with the circle of animal types, or types of life, of which so much is said in our treatise? The souls of the supernal man class would then have had the task of keeping this cylinder in motion, so that thereby the various types were continually impressed on the plasms in the sphere of generation, or ever-becoming--the wheel of genesis?

This may be so, for in P. S. A., 19, we read: "The air, moreover, is the engine, or machine, through which

[p. 180]

all things are made . . . mortal from mortal things and things like these."

So also in K. K., 28, Hermes says: "And I will skillfully devise an instrument, mysterious, possessed of power of sight that cannot err . . . an instrument that binds together all that's done."

Here again we have the same idea, all connected with the notion of Fate or Heimarmene; the instrument of Hermes is the Karmic Wheel, by which cause and effect are linked together, and that too with a moral purpose. [*1]

Finally, in connection with our cylinder, we may compare the Aryan Hindu myth of the "Churning of the Ocean," in the Vishnu Purana. The churning-staff or Pillar was the heaven-mountain, round which was coiled the cosmic serpent, to serve as rope for twirling it. The rope was held at either end by the Devas and Asuras, or gods and daemons. There is also a mystic symbol in India which probably connects with a similar range of ideas. It is two superimposed triangles (hourglass), with their apices touching, and round the centre a serpent is twined,--a somewhat curious resemblance to our X and cylinder-idea. And so much for this puzzling symbol.

THE EAGLE, LION, DRAGON AND DOLPHIN

We now pass to the four leading types of animals, connected with souls of the highest rank--namely, the eagle, lion, dragon, and dolphin (24, 25)--which it may be of interest to compare with the symbolism of some of the degrees of the Mithriac Mysteries. [*2]

[p. 181]

[paragraph continues] In one of the preliminary degrees of the rite, we are informed, some of the mystae imitated the voices of birds, others the roaring of lions. [*1] All of this was interpreted by the initiates as having reference to transmigration or metempsychosis. Thus Porphyry [*2] tells us that in the Mysteries of Mithras they called the mystae by the names of different animals, so symbolizing man's common lower nature with that of the irrational animals. Thus, for instance, they called some of the men "lions," and some of the women "lionesses," some were called "ravens," while the "fathers," the highest grade, were called "hawks" and "eagles." The "ravens" were the lowest grade; those of the "lion" grade were apparently previously invested with the disguises and masks of a series of animal forms before they received the lion shape.

Porphyry tells us, further, that Pallas, who had, prior to Porphyry's day, written an excellent treatise on the Mithriaca, now unfortunately lost, asserts that all this was vulgarly believed to refer to the zodiac, but that in truth it symbolized a mystery of the human soul, which is invested with animal natures of various kinds, [*3]

[p. 182]

according to the tradition of the Magi. Thus they call the sun (and therefore those corresponding to this nature) a bull, a lion, a dragon, and a hawk.

It is further to be remembered that Appuleius, [*1] in describing the robe with which he was invested after his initiation into the Mysteries of Isis, tells us that he was enthroned as the sun, robed in twelve sacramental stoles or garments; these garments were of linen with beautiful paintings upon them, so that from every side "you might see that I was remarkable by the animals which were painted round my vestment in various colours." This dress, he says, was called the "Olympic Stole."

MOMUS

Finally, it may perhaps be of service to make the reader a little better acquainted with Momus.

Among the Greeks Momus was the personification of the spirit of fault-finding. Hesiod, in his Theogony (214), places him among the second generation of the children of Night, together with the Fates. From the Cypria [*2] of Stasimus, [*3] we learn that, when Zeus, in answer to Earth's prayer to relieve her of her overpopulation of impious mankind, [*4] first sent the Theban War, and on this proving insufficient, bethought him of annihilating the human race by thunderbolts (fire) and floods (water), Momus advises the Father of gods and men to marry the goddess Thetis to a mortal, so that a beautiful daughter (Aphrodite-Helen) might be born to

[p. 183]

them, and so mankind, Greeks and Barbarians, on her account be involved in internecine strife--namely, the Trojan War. Further, the Scholiast on Il., i. 5, avers that it was Momus whom Homer meant to represent by the "will" or "counsel" of Zeus.

Sophocles, moreover, wrote a Satyric drama called "Momus," [*1] and so also Achaeus. [*2]

Both Plato [*3] and Aristotle [*4] refer to Momus. Callimachus, the chief librarian of the Alexandrian Library, from 260-240 B.C., in his Aetia, [*5] pilloried his critic and former pupil Apollonius Rhodius as Momus.

Momus, moreover, was a favourite figure with the Sophists and Rhetoricians, especially of the second century A.D. In Ael. Aristides, [*6] Momus, as he could find no fault with Aphrodite herself, found fault with her shoe. [*7] Lucian makes Aphrodite vow to oppose Momus tooth and nail, [*8] and makes Momus find fault with even the greatest works of the gods, such as the house of Athene, the bull of Zeus, and the men of Hephaestus,--the last because the god-smith had not put windows in their breasts so that their hearts might be seen. [*9]

And, interestingly enough in connection with our treatise, Lucian, in one of his witty sketches, [*10] makes

[p. 184]

[paragraph continues] Momus one of the persons of the dialogue with Zeus and Hermes. Momus finds fault because Bacchus is reckoned among the gods, and is commanded by Zeus to refrain from making ridicule of Hercules and Asclepius.

The popular figure of Momus was that of a feeble old man, [*1]--a very different representation from the grandiose Intelligence of our treatise, a true Lucifer.

Some representations give his one sharp tooth, and others wings. The story runs that Zeus finally banished him from Olympus for his fault-finding. [*2]

The Onomastica Vaticana [*3] connects Momus with Mammon; but this side-issue need not detain us. [*4]

THE MYSTIC GEOGRAPHY OF SACRED LANDS

With regard to the symbolic figure of the Earth of  section section 46-48 of the second K. K. Extract, and the persuasion that Egypt was the heart or centre thereof, we may append two quotations on the subject from widely different standpoints. The first is from Dr Andrew D. White's recent volumes [*5]:

"Every great people of antiquity, as a rule, regarded its own central city or most holy place as necessarily the centre of the earth.

"The Chaldeans held that their 'holy house of the gods' was the centre. The Egyptians sketched the world under the form of a human figure, in which Egypt was the heart, and the centre of it Thebes. For the Assyrians, it was Babylon; for the Hindus, it was Mount Meru; for the Greeks, so far as the civilized

[p. 185]

world was concerned, Olympus or the temple of Delphi; for the modern Mohammedans, it is Mecca and its sacred stone; the Chinese, to this day, speak of their empire as the 'middle kingdom.' It was in accordance, then, with a simple tendency of human thought that the Jews believed the centre of the world to be Jerusalem.

"The book of Ezekiel speaks of Jerusalem as in the middle of the earth, and all other parts of the world as set around the holy city. Throughout the 'ages of faith' this was very generally accepted as a direct revelation from the Almighty regarding the earth's form. St Jerome, the greatest authority of the early Church upon the Bible, declared, on the strength of this utterance of the prophet, that Jerusalem could be nowhere but at the earth's centre; in the ninth century Archbishop Kabanus Maurus reiterated the same argument; in the eleventh century Hugh of St Victor gave to the doctrine another scriptural demonstration; and Pope Urban, in his great sermon at Clermont urging the Franks to the crusade, declared, 'Jerusalem is the middle point of the earth'; in the thirteenth century an ecclesiastical writer much in vogue, the monk Caesarius of Heisterbach, declared, 'As the heart in the midst of the body, so is Jerusalem situated in the midst of our inhabited earth,'--'so it was that Christ was crucified at the centre of the earth.' Dante accepted this view of Jerusalem as a certainty, wedding it to immortal verse; and in the pious book of travels ascribed to Sir John Mandeville, so widely read in the Middle Ages, it is declared that Jerusalem is at the centre of the world, and that a spear standing erect at the Holy Sepulchre casts no shadow at the equinox.

"Ezekiel's statement thus became the standard of orthodoxy to early map-makers. The map of the world at Hereford Cathedral, the maps of Andrea Bianco,

[p. 186]

[paragraph continues] Marino Sanuto, and a multitude of others fixed this view in men's minds, and doubtless discouraged during many generations any scientific statements tending to unbalance this geographical centre revealed in Scripture."

So much for the righteous indignation of modern physical science; now for cryptology and mysticism. M. W. Blackden, in a recent article on "The Mysteries and the 'Book of the Dead,'" writes as follows [*1]:

"One other key there is . . . without which it is useless to approach The Book of the Dead with the idea of discussing any of those gems of wisdom for which old Egypt was so famous. . . . The knowledge of its existence is no recent discovery: it is simply that ancient nations such as the Egyptians, Chaldees, and Jews, had a system of symbolic geography. . . .

"The Jewish and Egyptian priestly caste endeavoured to map out their lands in accordance with their symbols of spiritual things, so far as the physical features would permit. This symbolism of mountain, city, plain, desert, and river extended from the various parts and furniture of the Lodge, to use Masonic phraseology, up to the spiritual anatomy, as it were, of both macrocosm and microcosm.

"Thus in the Jewish Scriptures it is not difficult to distinguish, in the prophetic battles of the nations that were to rage round about Jerusalem, the same symbolism as we have more directly expressed in a little old book called The Siege of Mansoul, the author of which was the John Bunyan of The Pilgrim's Progress, a man who could well grasp the excellence of geographical symbolism.

"I cannot, of course, here enter at length into the geographical symbols of Egypt, it would take too long; but as I have given Jerusalem as a symbol, I may say

[p. 187]

further that Jerusalem as a symbol corresponds to the Egyptian On, or Heliopolis, and so astronomically to the centre of the world and of the universe, and in the microcosm to the spiritual Heart of Man. [*1]

"But there is one difference between the Hebrew and Egyptian city; for whereas the actual Jerusalem corresponds among the Hebrew prophets to that Jerusalem that now is, and is in bondage with her children, Heliopolis corresponded among the Egyptian priesthood to that city which was to come, the Heavenly City, the New Heart, that should be given to redeemed mankind."

Here then we have a thesis that deserves a volume to itself; and so I leave it to him who has a mind to undertake the labour.

Footnotes

^135:1 The arising of the knowledge of God among the Gods, and the gradual descent of this knowledge down to man, reminds us somewhat of the method of the descent of the "Gospel" in the system of Basilides.

^137:1 Or rather apocalypse; see  section 15: "As Hermes says when he speaks unto me."

^137:2 Cf. the Egregores of The Book of Enoch; see Charles' Translation (Oxford; 1893), Index, under "Watchers."

^137:3 The new Manvantara following a periodical Pralaya, to use the terms of Indo-Aryan tradition.

^137:4 The creation is figured in one Egyptian tradition as the bursting forth of the Creator into seven peals of laughter,--a sevenfold "Ha!"

^138:1 Cf. the "florescence" of  section 10.

^140:1 Cf. the same idea as expressed by Basilides (ap. Hipp., Philos., vii. 27), but in reversed order, when, speaking of the consummation of the world-process, and the final ascension of the "Sonship" with all its experience gained from union with matter, he says of the remaining souls, which have not reached the dignity of the Sonship, that the Great Ignorance shall come upon them for a space.

"Thus all the souls of this state of existence, whose nature is to remain immortal in this state of existence alone, remain without knowledge of anything different from or better than this state; nor shall there be any rumour or knowledge of things superior in higher states, in order that the lower souls may not suffer pain by striving after impossible objects, just as though it were fish longing to feed on the mountains with sheep, for such a desire would end in their destruction. All things are indestructible if they remain in their proper condition, but subject to destruction if they desire to overleap and transgress their natural limits" (F. F. F., p. 270).

^141:1 Cf. Cyril, C. Jul., i. 35; Frag. xvi.

^141:2 Cf.  section section 29 and 37.

^143:1 Cf. Hermes-Prayer, iii. 3.

^143:2 This is of special interest as showing how the Egyptian tradition, in this pre-eminent above all others, did not limit the manifestation to the male sex alone.

^144:1 Cf. C. H., xviii. 8 ff.

^145:1 The "spirituous" or "aery" body, or vehicle, is composed of the sub-elements, but in it is a predominance of the sub-element "air," just as in the physical there is a predominance of "earth."--Philoponus, Prooem. in Aristot. de Anima; see my Orpheus (London, 1896), "The Subtle Body," pp. 276-281. Cf. also S. I. H., 15, 20.

^146:1 Compare this with the prana's of Indian theosophy; see C. H., x. (xi.) 13, Comment.

^148:1 Cf. Diog. Laert., Prooem., i.: "The Egyptians say that Hephaestus (Ptah) was the son of Neilus (the Nile), and that he was the originator of philosophy, of that philosophy whose leaders are priests and prophets"--that is to say, a mystic philosophy of revelation.

^148:2 Thus Suidas (s.v. "Ptah") says that Ptah was the Hephaestus of the Memphite priesthood, and tells us that there was a proverbial saying current among them: "Ptah hath spoken unto thee." This reminds us of our text: "As Hermes says when he speaks unto me."

^148:3 The type of Isis as utterer of "sacred sermons," describing herself as daughter or disciple of Hermes, is old, and goes back demonstrably to Ptolemaic times. R. 136, n. 4; 137, n. 1.

^149:1 opot' eme kai tui teleiui melani etimesen. This has hitherto been always supposed by the philological mind simply to refer to the mysteries of ink or writing, and that too without any humorous intent, but in all portentous solemnity. We must imagine, then, presumably, that it refers to the schooldays of Isis, when she was first taught the Egyptian equivalents for pothooks and hangers. This absurdity is repeated even by Meineke.

^150:1 The more correct title of this work should be "Gnostic Jottings (or Notes) according to the True Philosophy," as Clement states himself and as has been well remarked by Hort in his Ante-Nicene Fathers, p. 87 (London, 1895).

^150:2 Op. cit., v. 11. Sopater (Dist. Quaest., p. 123, ed. Walz) speaks of these as "figures" (sxe'mata), the same expression which Proclus (In Plat. Rep., p. 380) employs in speaking of the appearances which the Gods assume in their manifestations; Plato (Phaedr., p. 250) calls them "blessed apparitions," or beatific visions" (eydaimona fasmata); the author of the Epinomis (p. 986) describes them as "what is most beautiful to see in the world"; these are the "mystic sights" or "wonders" (mystika theamata) of Dion Chrysostom (Orat., xii., p. 387, ed. Reiske); the "holy appearances" (agia fantasmata) and "sacred shows" (iera deiknumena) of Plutarch (Wyttenbach, Fragm., vi. 1, t. v., p. 722, and De Profect. Virtut. Sent., p. 81, ed. Reiske); the "ineffable apparitions" (arreta fasmata) of Aristides (Orat., xix. p. 416, ed. Dindorf); the "divine apparitions" (theia fasmata) of Himerius (Eclog., xxxii., p. 304, ed. Wernsdorf),--those sublime sights the memory of which was said to accompany the souls of the righteous into the after-life, and when they returned to birth. Cf. Lenormant (F.) on "The Eleusinian Mysteries" in The Contemporary Review (Sept. 1880), p. 416, who, however, thinks that these famous philosophers and writers bankrupted their adjectives merely for the mechanical figures and stage-devices of the lower degrees. See my "Notes on the Eleusinian Mysteries" in The Theosophical Review (April, May, June, 1898), vol. xxii., p. 156.

^151:1 De Is. et Os., xxi.

^151:2 Berl phil. Wochenschr. (1896), p. 1528; R. 137, n. 3.

^151:3 R. 133, n. 2.

^151:4 protogonui--cf. the progenesteroy pantun above.

^151:5 Epeius, ap. Eusebius, Praep. Ev., i. 10, p. 41 D.

^151:6 Ap. Euseb., Praep., iii. 11, 45, p. 115.

^152:1 Cf. the epithet "utterly hidden" found in the "Words (Logoi) of Ammon," referred to by Justin Martyr, Cohort., xxxviii., and the note thereon in "Fragments from the Fathers."

^152:2 Typified by the dark-coloured body.

^152:3 zuopoios--typified, presumably, by the girdle (the symbol of the woman) and the staff (the symbol of the man).

^152:4 Chron., xl. (ed. Dind., i. 72).

^153:1 Varro, De Gente Pop. Rom., ap. Augustine, De Civ. Dei, xviii. 3, 8; R. 139, n. 3.

^154:1 It is said that with regard to ancient archaic texts which are still extant, modern Egyptology is able to translate them with greater accuracy than the priests of Manetho's day; but this one may be allowed to question, unless the ancient texts are capable solely of a physical interpretation.

^154:2 The Hermes, presumably, who was fabled to be the son of the Nile, not the physical Nile, but the Heaven Ocean, the Great Green, the Soul of Cosmos, and whom, we are told, the Egyptians would never speak of publicly, but, presumably, only within the circles of initiation. This Nile may be in one sense the Flood that hid the Books of Hermes in its depths or zones; but equally so the son of Nile may be the first Hermes after the Flood.

^155:1 Wessley, Denkschr. d. k. Akad. (1893), p. 37, l. 500.

^155:2 So R., though this is a meaning to which the lexicons give no support; the verb generally meaning "to defer" or "assent to."

^156:1 Compare also the mystery ritual in The Acts of John: "I am thy God, not that of the betrayer" (F. F. F., p. 434).

^156:2 As the Gnostic Marcus would have called it.

^156:3 On this ieros gamos or gamos pneymatikos, see Lobeck (C. A.), Aglaophamus (Konigsberg, 1829), 608, 649, 651.

^157:1 That is, the Agathodaimon.

^157:2 That is, the "Birth of Horus." Hippolytus, Philos., v. 8 (ed. Dunk, and Schneid, pp. 164, 166, ll. 86-94). see "Myth of Man in the Mysteries,"  section 28. The last clause is the gloss of the later Christian over-writer.

^158:1 The text is to be found in James (M. R.), Apocrypha Anecdota, ii. (Cambridge, 1897), in Texts and Studies; F. F. F., pp. 432, 433.

^158:2 De Is. et Os., xxxiii.

^158:3 Cf. this with K. K., 47, where Egypt is said to occupy the position of the heart of the earth.

^158:4 Cf. K. K., 20: "Ye brilliant stars, eyes of the gods."

^158:5 Cited by Ebers, "Die Korperteile in Altagyptischen," Abh. d. k. bayr. Akad. (1897), p. 111, where other references are given.

^159:1 Compare also the Naassene document,  section 8, in the "Myth of Man" chapter of the Prolegomena, where Isis is called "the seven-robed and black-mantled goddess."

^160:1 Cf. "Isis, the Queen of Heaven, whose most ancient and distinctive title was the Virgin Mother." Marsham Adams (F.), The Book of the Master, or the Egyptian Doctrine of the Light born of the Virgin Mother (London, 1898), p. 63.

^160:2 Haer., li. 22.

^160:3 And pre-eminently, therefore, for Epiphanius, the Egyptians.

^161:1 That is, the Temple of Kore. This can hardly be the Temple of Persephone, as Dindorf (iii. 729) suggests, but rather the Temple of Isis.

^161:2 Cf. D. J. L., pp. 407 ff.

^162:1 Though some have conjectured that the "cock" was the popular name for the Temple-watchman who called the hours.

^163:1 See below, where the story is given from Plutarch's Moralia.

^163:2 Compare The Book of the Dead, lxxviii. 31, 32; Budge's Trans. (London, 1901), ii. 255: "I shall come forth . . . into the House of Isis, the divine lady. I shall behold sacred things which are hidden, and I shall be led on to the secret and holy things, even as they have granted unto me to see the birth of the Great God. Horus hath made me to be a spiritual body through his soul, [and I see what is therein]." Compare the last sentence with C. H., i. 7, and xi. (xii.) 6, where the pupil "sees" by means of the soul of his Master.

^164:1 This passage, I believe, affords us an objective point of departure for the reconsideration of C. W. Leadbeater's statement, in his Christian Creed (London, 1898), p, 45, that "Pontius Pilate" is a pseudo-historical gloss for pontos piletos, the "dense sea" of "matter," into which the soul is plunged. See for a discussion of this hypothesis D. T. L., pp. 423 ff.

In connection with this a colleague has supplied me with an exceedingly interesting note from Texts and Studies, iv. 2, Coptic Apocryphal Gospels, p. 177, Frag. 4. The Sahidic text is found in Rendiconti della R. Accademia dei Lincei, vol. iii., sem. 2, pp. 381-384 (Frammenti Copti, Nota Via), by Ignazio Guidi (1887). The legend runs that the Devil taking "the form of a fisherman," goes fishing, and is met by Jesus as He was coming down from the Mount with His disciples. The Devil announces that "he who catcheth fish here, he is the Master. It is not a wonder to catch fish in the waters, the wonder is in this desert, to catch fish therein." They then have a trial of skill, but the MS. unfortunately breaks off before the result is told. It is in this Fragment that the following remarkable sentence occurs: "Now as Pilate was saying these things before the authorities of Tiberius, the king, Herod, could not refrain from setting Pilate at naught, saying, 'Thou art a Galilaean foreign Egyptian Pontus.'" The literal translation from the Coptic runs: "Thou art a Pontus Galilaean foreign Egyptian."

^165:1 Compare, for instance, Kathopanishad, Sec. ii., Pt. ii., iv. 11, 12: "The Man, of the size of a thumb, resides in the midst, within in the self, of the past and the future the lord; from him a man hath no desire to hide. This verily is That.

"The Man, of the size of a thumb, like flame free from smoke, of past and of future the lord, the same is to-day, to-morrow the same will he be. This verily is That."--Mead and Chattopadhyaya's Trans. (London, 1896), i. 68, 69.

Here "to-day" and "to-morrow" are said by some to refer to different incarnations; the "Man" (purusha) being the potential Self, destined finally to become, or grow into the stature of, the Great Self (Maha-purusha).

^165:2 See the article, "Theosophic Light on Bible Shadows," in The Theosophical Review (Nov. 1904), xxxv. 230, 231.

^165:3 The minute image of a person reflected in the pupil of the eye of another may to some extent account for the popular belief underlying this identification.

^166:1 The same idea which we found above in connection with Ammon.

^166:2 To go "a-whoring" after strange gods and strange doctrines was the graphic figure invariably employed by Hebrew orthodoxy; "to commit fornication" not unfrequently echoes the same idea in the New Testament.

^167:1 For the latest study on the subject, see Monseur (E.), "L'Ame Pupilline," Rev. de l'Hist. des Relig. (Jan. and Feb. 1905), who discusses the significance in primitive religion of the reflected image to be seen in the pupil of the eye. This "little man" of the eye was taken to be its soul, and to control all its functions.

^167:2 Cf., for the idea in the mind of the ancients, Tim. 45 B: "So much of the fire as would not burn, but gave a gentle light, they formed into a substance akin to the light of every-day life; and the pure fire which is within us and related thereto they made to flow through the eyes in a stream smooth and dense, compressing the whole eye, and especially the centre part, so that it kept out everything of a coarser nature, and allowed to pass only this pure element."

^169:1 De Defectu Oraculorum, xxi., xxii. (42lA-422C), ed. G. N. Bernardakis (Leipzig, 1891), iii. 97-101. See my paper, "Plutarch's Yogi," in The Theosophical Review (Dec. 1891), ix. 295-297.

^170:1 In this referring to the passage in the Timaeus, (55 C D), which runs: "Now, he who, duly reflecting on all this, enquires whether the worlds are to be regarded as indefinite or definite in number, will be of opinion that the notion of their indefiniteness is characteristic of a sadly indefinite and ignorant mind. He, however, who raises the question whether they are to be truly regarded as one or five, takes up a more reasonable position" (Jowett's Trans., 3rd ed., iii. 475, 476).

^171:1 Cf. S. I. H., 3: "Now as I chance myself to be as though initiate into the nature that transcendeth death, and that my feet have crossed the Plain of Truth"; and K. K., 22: "The Monarch came, and sitting on the Throne of Truth made answer to their prayers." The locus classicus is, of course, Plato, Phaedrus, 248 B.

^171:2 Cf. K. K., 37: "'Tis they who, taught by Hermes that the things below have been disposed by God to be in sympathy with things above, established on the earth the sacred rites o'er which the mysteries in heaven preside."

^172:1 Our difficulty, however, is that Plutarch, in the words of one of his characters, rejects the idea of this numbering being in any way Egyptian, and ascribes it to a certain Petron of Himera in Sicily,--thereby suggesting a probable Pythagorean connection.

^173:1 See the section, "Some Outlines of Aeonology," F. F. F., pp. 311-335.

^173:2 See my Orpheus (London, 1896), pp. 255-262.

^173:3 Cf. Taylor (T.), "Introd. to Timaeus," Works of Plato (London, 1804), p. 442.

^174:1 Rep., viii. 545C-547A. See Adam (J.), The Nuptial Number of Plato: Its Solution and Significance (London, 1891).

^175:1 Which may have been regarded as the prototypes of the soul-spaces.

^176:1 Comment. in Plat. Tim., 216C; ed. C. E. C. Schneider (Vratislaviae, 1847), p. 250.

^176:2 A passage which Proclus, op. cit., 213A (ed. Sch., p. 152) further explains by means of the "harmonic canon" or ruler.

^176:3 Jowett (B.), Dialogues of Plato (3rd ed., Oxford, 1892), iii. 403.

^176:4 Cf. text 36C: "The motion of the same he carried round by the side to the right, and the motion of the diverse diagonally to the left,"--that is the side of the rectangular figure supposed to be inscribed in the circle of the "same," and diagonally, across the rectangular figure from corner to corner; and 38D, 39A: "Now, when all the stars which were necessary to the creation of time [i.e. the spheres of the sun, moon, and five planets] had attained a motion suitable to them, and had become living creatures, having bodies fastened by vital chains, and learned their appointed task, moving in the motion of the diverse, which is diagonal, and passes through, and is governed by the motion of the same, they revolved, some in a larger and some in a lesser orbit. . . . The motion of the same made them turn all in a spiral." With these instruments of "time," surrounded by the sphere of the same, compare the idea of time flowing down on the worlds, from the Aeon, in the story of Cleombrotus.

^178:1 So quoted in Andrew Dickson White's History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom (New York, 1898), i. 92. Dr White, unfortunately, does not give the exact reference. The "fan" is, of course, the winnowing fan, a broad basket into which the corn mixed with chaff was received after threshing, and was then thrown up into the wind, so as to disperse the chaff and leave the grain.

^178:2 Alexander of Aphrodisias, Comment. on Aristotle in Meteor., 91r (vol. i., 268 I d); Diels, Doxographi Graeci (Berlin, 1879), p. 478. Cf. Aetius, De Placitis Reliquiae, iii. 10 (Diels, 579).

^178:3 Plutarch, Strom., 2 (Diels, 579). See Fairbanks (A.), The First Philosophers of Greece (London, 1898), pp. 13, 14.

^179:1 Delitzsch also, in his Babel und Bibel, states that the great debt of early Greece to Assyria will be made clear in a forthcoming work of German scholarship.

^180:1 I have also got a stray reference, "kulindros, Plut., 2, 682 C, Xylander's pages," but I have not been able to verify this.

^180:2 See Cumont (F.), Textes et Monuments figures relat. aux Mysteres de Mithra (Bruxelles, 1899), i. 315.

^181:1 Ps. Augustine, Quaestt. Vet. et Nov. Test. (Migne, P. L., tom, xxxiv. col. 2214 f.).

^181:2 De Abstinentia, iv. 16 (ed. Nauck, p. 253).

^181:3 Cf. Clement of Alexandria on the Basilidian theory of "appendages," remembering that the School of Basilides was strongly tinctured with Egyptian ideas. "The Basilidians are accustomed to give the name of appendages (or accretions) to the passions. These essences, they say, have a certain substantial existence, and are attached to the rational soul, owing to a certain turmoil and primitive confusion. On to this nucleus other bastard and alien natures of the essence grow, such as those of the wolf, ape, lion, goat, etc. . . . And not only do human souls thus intimately associate themselves with the impulses and impressions of irrational animals, but they even initiate the movements and beauties of plants, because they likewise bear the characteristics of plants appended to them. Nay, there are also certain characteristics [of minerals] shown by habits, such as the hardness of adamant" (F. F. F., p. 276).

^182:1 Metamorphoses, Book xi.

^182:2 Which Pindar and Herodotus ascribed to Homer himself.

^182:3 See Frag. I. from the Scholion on Hom., Il., i. 5 ff.

^182:4 See K. K., 34.

^183:1 Frag. 369-374B (ed. Dind.); the context of which some believe to be found in Lucian's Hermotimus, 20.

^183:2 Frag. 29, from the Scholion on Aristophanes, Pax, 357.

^183:3 Rep., vi. 487A: "Nor would even Momus find fault with this."

^183:4 De Partt. Animal., iii. 2.

^183:5 And also at the end of his Hymn to Apollo, ii. 112; also Epigram. Frag., 70.

^183:6 Or., 49; ed. Jebb, p. 497.

^183:7 Cf. Julian, Ep. ad Dionys.

^183:8 Dial. Deor., xx. 2.

^183:9 Hermot., xx.; cf. Nig., xxxii.; Dial. Deor., ix.; Ver. Hist., ii. 3; Bab. Fab., lix.; and Jup. Trag., xxii.

^183:10 Deor. Consil, iv.

^184:1 Philostratus, Ep. 21.

^184:2 For the above and other references, see Trumpel's art. "Momus," in Roscher's Lexicon.

^184:3 Lug., 194, 59.

^184:4 See Nestle's art. "Mammon," in Cheyne's Encyclopaedia Biblica.

^184:5 Op. supra cit., i. 98, 99.

^186:1 The Theosophical Review (July, 1902), vol. xxx. pp. 406, 407.

^187:1 "There is an old map of the world in the British Museum which demonstrates both these significations. See also Mappa Mundi, 'Ebsdorf,' 1284, and that in Hereford Cathedral made by Richard of Haldingham, one of the Prebends, 1290-1310."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 188]

EXCERPT XXVII.

 

FROM THE SERMON OF ISIS TO HORUS

(Patrizzi (p. 34b) runs this on to the last without a break.

Text: Stob., Phys., xli. 68, 69, under heading, "Of Hermes: A Sermon of Isis to Horus"; G. pp. 476-481; M. i. 342-352; W. i. 458-472.

Menard: Livre III., No. iii. of "Fragments," etc., as above, pp. 209-221.)

1. [*1] IN wondrous fashion--(Horus said)--hast thou explained to me, most mighty mother Isis, the details of God's wondrous soul-making, and I remain in wonder; but not as yet hast thou told me whereto the souls when freed from body go. I would then thank thee for being made initiate by word of mouth [*2] into this vision of the soul, [*3] O only mother, deathless one!

2. And Isis said:

Give ear, my son; most indispensable is this

[p. 189]

research. That which doth hold together, doth also have a place which doth not disappear. For this is what my sermon will set forth.

O wondrous, mighty son of mighty sire Osiris, [the souls] when they go forth from bodies, are not confusedly and in a rush dissolved into the air, and scattered in the rest of boundless Breath, so that they cannot any more as the same [souls] return again to bodies; nor is it possible, again, to turn them back unto that place from which they came at first--no more than water taken from the bottom of a jar can be poured [*1] [back again] into the self-same place whence it was taken; nor does the same when taken take a place peculiar to it, but is mixed up with the whole mass of water. [*2] Not thus is it [with souls], high-minded Horus!

3. Now as I chance myself to be as though initiate into the nature which transcendeth death, and that my feet have crossed the Plain of Truth, I will explain to thee in detail how it is; and preface this by telling thee that water is a body void of reason condensed from many compound things into a fluid mass, whereas the soul's a thing of individual nature, son, and of a royal kind, a work of God's [own] hands and mind, and of itself led by itself to mind.

[p. 190]

What then doth come from "one" and not from "other," cannot be mingled with a different thing; wherefore it needs must be that the soul's congress with the body is a concord wrought by God's necessity.

But that they are not [all] confusedly and [all] at random and by chance sent up again to one and the same place, but each to its own proper region, is clear from what [the soul] doth suffer while still it is in body and in plasm, when it has been made dense against its proper nature.

Now give good heed to the similitude recounted, Horus well-beloved!

4. Suppose in one and the same cage have been shut up both men and eagles, doves and swans, and swallows, hawks and sparrows, flies, and snakes, and lions, leopards, wolves, and dogs, and hares, and kine and sheep, and some amphibious animals, as seals and others, tortoises and our own crocodiles; then, that, my son, at one [and the same] moment they are [all] let out.

They [all] will turn instinctively--man to his gathering spots and roofs; the eagle to the ether, in which its nature is to spend its life; the doves into the neighbouring air; the hawks [to that] above [the doves]; the swallows where men dwell; the sparrows round the fruit-trees; the swans where they may sing; the flies about the earth, [but only] so far from it as they can

[p. 191]

with [-out their losing] smell of man (for that the fly, my son, is fond of man especially and tends to earth); the lions and the leopards towards the hills; the wolves towards desert spots; the dogs after men's tracks; the kine to stalls and fields; the sheep to pastures; the snakes to earth's recesses; the seals and tortoises, with [all] their kind, unto the deeps and streams, so that they neither should be robbed of the dry land nor taken from their cognate water--each one returning to its proper place by means of its internal means of judgment.

So every soul, both in a human form and otherwise incarnate on the earth, knows where it has to go,--unless some foolish person [*1] come and say, my son, that it is possible a bull should live in water and a tortoise up in air!

5. And if this be the case when they are plunged in flesh and blood--that they do nothing contrary to what's appointed them, e'en though they are being punished (for being put in body is a punishment for them)--how much the more [is it the case] when they possess their proper liberty [and are set free] from punishment and being plunged [in body]?

Now the most holy ordering of souls is on this wise. Turn thou thy gaze above, most noble-

[p. 192]

natured son, upon their orders. The space from height of heaven to the moon devotes itself unto the gods and stars and to the rest of providence; the space, my son, from moon to us is dwelling place of souls.

This so great air, however, has in it a belt to which it is our use to give the name of wind, a definite expanse in which it is kept moving to refresh the things on earth, and which I will hereafter tell about.

Yet in no manner by its motion on itself does it become an obstacle to souls; for though it keeps on moving, souls can dart up or dart down, [*1] just as the case may be, free from all let and hindrance. For they pass through without immixture or adhesion as water flows through oil.

6. Now of this interval, Horus, my son, there are four main divisions and sixty special spaces.

Of these [divisions] the first one upwards from the earth is of four spaces, so that the earth in certain of its mountain heights and peaks extends and comes so far, but beyond these it cannot in its nature go in height.

The second after this is of eight spaces, in which the motions of the winds take place.

Give heed, O son, for thou art hearing

[p. 193]

mysteries that must not be disclosed--of earth and heaven and all the holy air which lies between, in which there is the motion of the wind and flight of birds. For above this the air doth have no motion and sustains no life.

This [moving] air moreover hath of its own nature this authority--that it can circulate in its own spaces and also in the four of earth with all the lives which it contains, while earth cannot ascend into its [realm].

The third consists of sixteen spaces filled with subtle air and pure.

The fourth consists of two and thirty [spaces], in which there is the subtlest and the finest air; it is by means of this that [air] shuts from itself the heavens above which are by nature fiery.

7. This ordering is up and down in a straight line and has no overlapping; so that there are four main divisions, twelve intervallic ones and sixty spaces.

And in these sixty spaces dwell the souls, each one according to its nature, for though they are of one and the same substance, they're not of the same dignity. For by so much as any space is higher from the earth than any other, by so much do the souls in them, my son, surpass in eminence the one the other. [*1]

What souls, however, go to each of them, I

[p. 194]

will accordingly begin again to tell thee, Horus, [son] of great renown, taking their order from above down to the earth.

CONCERNING THE INBREATHING AND THE TRANSMIGRATION OF THE SOUL [*1]

8. The [air] between the earth and heavens, Horus, is spaced out by measure and by harmony.

These spaces have been named by some of our forefathers zones, by others firmaments, by others layers.

And in them dwell both souls which have been set free from their bodies, and also those which have as yet been never shut in body.

And each of them, my son, hath just the place it doth deserve; so that the godly and the kingly ones dwell in the highest space of all, those least in honour and the rest of the decadent ones [dwell] in the lowest space of all, while middling souls dwell in the middle space.

Accordingly, those souls which are sent down to rule, are sent down, Horus, from the upper zones; and when they are set free [again] they go back to the same or even still more lofty ones, unless it be they still have acted contrary

[p. 195]

to their own nature's dignity and the pronouncement of the Law of God.

Such souls as these the Providence above, according to the measure of their sins, doth banish down to lower spaces; just as with those which are inferior in dignity and power, it leads them up from lower [realms] to vaster and more lofty ones.

9. For up above [them all] there are two ministers of universal Providence, of whom one is the warder of the souls, the other their conductor. The warder [watches o'er the souls when out of body], while the conductor is dispatcher and distributor of souls into their bodies. The former keeps them, while the latter sends them forth according to the Will of God.

For this cause (logos) then, my son, nature on earth according to the change of deeds above doth model out the vessels and shape out the tents in which the souls are cast. [*1] Two energies, experience and memory, assist her.

And this is memory's task, [to see] that nature guards the type of every thing sent down out of its source and keeps its mixture as it is above; while of experience [the work is this, to see] conformably to every one of the descending souls it may have its embodiment, and that the

[p. 196]

plasms may be made effective [*1]--that for the swift ones of the souls the bodies also may be swift, for slow ones slow, for active active ones, for sluggish sluggish ones, for powerful powerful, and for crafty crafty ones, and in a word for every one of them as it is fit.

10. For not without intention hath she clad winged things with plumage; and tricked out with senses more than ordinary and more exact those which have reason; and some of the four-footed things made strong with horns, some strong with teeth, some strong with claws and hoofs; while creeping things she hath made supple with bodies clad in easy-moving scales, which easily can glide away.

And that the watery nature of their body may not remain entirely weak, she doth provide the sharpened fangs of some of them with power; so that by reason of the fear of death [they cause] they're stronger than the rest.

The swimming things being timorous, she gives to dwell within an element where light can exercise nor one nor other of its powers, for fire in water gives nor light nor heat. But each of them, swimming in water clad in scales or spines, flees from what frightens it where'er it will, using the water as a means of hiding it from sight.

[p. 197]

11. For souls are shut in each class of these bodies according to their similarity [to them]. Those which have power of judgment go down into men; and those that lack it into quadrupeds, whose [only] law is force; the crafty ones [go] into reptiles, for none of them attack a man in front, but lie in wait and strike him down; and into swimming things the timid ones or those which are not worthy to enjoy the other elements. In every class, however, there are found some which no longer use their proper nature.

How [meanest thou] again, my mother? Horus said.

And Isis answered:

A man, for instance, son, o'ersteps his power of judgment; a quadruped avoids the use of force; and reptiles lose their craftiness; and birds their fear of men. So much [then] for the ordering of [souls] above and their descent, and for the making of their bodies.

12. In every class and kind of the above, my son, there may be found some regal souls; others also descend with various natures, some fiery, and some cold, some overbearing, and some mild, some skilled, some unskilled, some idle, some industrious, some one thing, some another. And this results from the arrangement of the regions whence the souls leap down to their embodiment.

[p. 198]

For from the regal zone they leap down [into birth], the soul of the like nature ruling them [*1]; for there are many sovereignties. Some are of souls, and some of bodies, and some of arts, and some of sciences, and some are of ourselves.

How [meanest thou] again, my mother, "of ourselves"?

For instance, son, it is thy sire Osiris who is [the ruler] of the souls of them born after us up to this time [*2]; whereas the prince of every race [is ruler] of their bodies; [the king] of counsel is the father and the guide of all, Thrice-greatest Hermes; of medicine Asclepius, Hephaestus' son; of power and might again Osiris, and after him thyself, my son; and of philosophy Arnebeschenis; of poetry again Asclepius-Imuth.

13. For generally, my son, thou'lt find, if thou inquirest, that there are many ruling many things and many holding sway o'er many. And he who rules them all, my son, is from the highest space; while he who rules some part of them, doth have the rank of that particular realm from which he is.

Those who come from the regal zone, [have] a more ruling [part to play; those from the zone

[p. 199]

of fire [*1]] become fire-workers and fire-tenders; those from the watery one live out their life in waters; those from the [zone] of science and of art are occupied with arts and sciences; those from the [zone] of inactivity inactively and heedlessly live out their lives.

For that the sources of all things wrought on the earth by word or deed, are up above, and they dispense for us their essences by weight and measure; and there is naught which hath not come down from above, and will return again to re-descend.

14. What dost thou mean again by this, my mother? Tell me!

And Isis once again did make reply: Most holy Nature hath set in living creatures the clear sign of this return. For that this breath which we breathe from above out of the air, we send out up again, to take it in [once more].

And we have in us organs, son, to do this work, and when they close their mouths whereby the breath's received, then we no longer are as now we are, but we depart.

Moreover, son of high renown, there are some other things which we have added to us outside the weighed-out mixture [of the body].

15. What, then (said Horus), is this mixture, mother?

[p. 200]

It is a union and a blend of the four elements; and from this blend and union a certain vapour [*1] rises, which is enveloped by the soul, but circulates within the body, sharing with each, with body and with soul, its nature. And thus the differences of changes are effected both in soul and body.

For if there be in the corporeal make-up more of fire, thereon the soul, which is by nature hot, taking unto itself another thing that's hot, and [so] being made more fiery, makes the life more energetic and more passionate, and the body quick and active.

If [there be] more of air, thereon the life becomes both light and springy and unsteady both in the soul and body.

And if there's more of water, then the creature also doth become of supple soul and easy disposition, and ready of embrace, and able easily to meet and join with others, through water's power of union and communion with the rest of things; for that it finds a place in all, and when it is abundant, doth dissolve what it surrounds, while if [there's] little [of it], it sinks into and doth become what it is mingled with. As for their bodies, by dampness and by sponginess they are not made compact, but by a slight attack of sickness are dissolved, and fall away by

[p. 201]

little and by little from the bond which holds them severally together.

And if the earthy [element] is in excess, the creature's soul is dull, for it has not its body-texture loosely knit, or space for it to leap through, the organs of sensation being dense; but by itself it stays within, bound down by weight and density. As for its body, it is firm, but heavy and inert, and only moved of choice by [exercise of] strength.

But if there is a balanced state of all [the elements], then is the animal made hot for doing, light for moving, well-mixed for contact, and excellent for holding things together. [*1]

16. Accordingly those which have more in them of fire and air, these are made into birds, and have their state above hard by those elements from which they came.

While those which have more fire, less air, and earth and water equal, these are made into men, and for the creature the excess of heat is turned into sagacity; for that the mind in us is a hot thing which knows not how to burn, but has intelligence to penetrate all things.

And those which have in them more water and more earth, but moderate air and little fire,

[p. 202]

these are turned into quadrupeds, and those which have more heat are stronger than the rest. Those which have equal earth and water, are made into reptiles. These through their lack of fire lack courage and straightforwardness; while through their having water in them they are cold; and through their having earth they heavy are and torpid; yet through their having air, they can move easily if they should choose to do so.

Those which have in them more of wet, and less of dry, these are made into fish. These through their lack of heat and air are timorous and try to hide themselves, and through excess of wet and earthy elements, they find their home, through their affinity, in fluid earth and water.

17. It is according to the share [they have] in every element and to the compass of that share, that bodies reach full growth [in man]; according to the smallness of their share the other animals have been proportioned--according to the energy which is in every element. [*1]

Moreover, O my well-beloved, I say, that when, out of this state [of things], the blend based on the first commixture [of the elements in any case], and the resultant vapour [*2] from it,

[p. 203]

so far preserve their own peculiarity, that neither the hot part takes on another heat, nor [does] the aery [take] another air, nor [does] the watery part another wetness, nor [yet] the earthy [take] another density, then doth the animal remain in health.

18. But if they do not, son, remain in the proportions which they had from the beginning, but are too much increased--(I do not mean in energy according to their compass or in the change of sex and body brought about by growth, but in the blend, as we have said before, of the component elements, so that the hot, for instance, is increased too much or too much lessened, and so for all the rest)--then will the animal be sick.

19. And if this [increase] doth take place in both the elements of heat and air, the soul's tent-fellows, then doth the creature fall into symbolic dreams and ecstasies; for that a concentration of the elements whereby the bodies are dissolved has taken place. For 'tis the earthy element itself which is the condensation of the body; the watery element in it as well is a fluidity to make it dense. Whereas the aery element is that in us which has the power of motion, and fire is that which makes an end of all of them.

20. Just then as is the vapour [*1] which ariseth

[p. 204]

from the first conjunction and co-blending of the elements, as though it were a kindling or an exhalation,--whatever it may be, it mingles with the soul and draws it to itself, so that it shares its nature good or bad. And if the soul remains in its original relationship and common life with it, it keeps its rank.

But when there's added from without some larger share than what was first laid down for it,--either to the whole mixture, or to its parts, or to one part of it,--then the resulting change effected in the vapour doth bring about a change or in the disposition of the soul or of the body.

The fire and air, as tending upward, hasten upward to the soul, which dwells in the same regions as themselves; the watery and the earthy elements, as tending down, sink down upon the body, which doth possess the self-same seat.

*     *     *     *     *

Footnotes

^188:1 I have numbered the paragraphs for convenience of reference.

^188:2 mustes. The mystes, speaking generally, was initiated by word of mouth, the epoptes by sight or vision.

^188:3 theuria.

^189:1 Reading epixein for epexein.

^189:2 The construction of the whole of the above paragraph is exceedingly involved.

^191:1 tis tun tyfuniun--an interesting phrase as showing that Typhon was regarded as the enemy of Osiris (the Logos or Reason).

^192:1 Cf. the beginning of the Apocalypse of Thespesius (Aridaeus) in Plutarch, De Sera Num. Vind., xxii.

^193:1 For a consideration of this ordering, see p. 168 ff. above.

^194:1 This appears to be a heading inserted by Stobaeus (Phys., xli. 64) or some scribe; there seems to be no break in the text.

^195:1 The text is exceedingly imperfect, and in its present state quite untranslatable.

^196:1 The text is again very imperfect.

^198:1 The text is here very corrupt, and the reading of the last words of the two following sentences very doubtful.

^198:2 That is presumably since the time when Osiris and Isis lived on earth among men.

^199:1 The text is exceedingly defective.

^200:1 Cf. 17 and 20 below.

^201:1 The text is faulty, the language artificial, the analogy strained, and the sense accordingly obscure. Meineke reads: gennaion de eis the'xin.

^202:1 The text is utterly corrupt and has not yet been even plausibly emended.

^202:2 Cf. 15 and 20.

^203:1 Cf. 15 and 17.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

COMMENTARY

ARGUMENT

The Sermon from which this Extract is taken plainly belonged to the same class of literature as the K. K. Excerpts. The writer is an initiate of a higher degree, imparting instruction to his pupil by word of mouth.

[p. 205]

He himself, however, professes to have "seen," for he has been plunged in the Cup of Immortality, and his feet have crossed the Plain of Truth (3).

1. The subject is the excarnate state of souls (1-3). The instruction is given by an analogy and a similitude (4). Each soul seeks naturally its proper habitat in the unseen world.

5. The ordering of the spaces of the excarnate souls is then described. These spaces are all in the "great air," the sublunary region, extending from the earth surface to the moon.

6. Of this great interval there are 4 main divisions and 60 spaces, the divisions consisting respectively of 4, 8, 16 and 32 sub-spaces. Above the second division from below there is no motion of the "air"; the "wind," or "moving air" belt, belongs properly to this second division, but has also authority over the first or lowest division, which extends from the earth-surface to the tops of the highest mountains.

7. Besides these 4 divisions and 60 spaces, there is a further ordering into 12 "intervallic" divisions. [*1]

8. All is arranged by measure and harmony, and after death every soul goes to the space of its desert, ascending and descending according to an unerring law of Providence.

9. To carry out this economy there are two ministers of Providence, the warder and the conductor of souls. The one watches over souls who are out of body, and the other brings them back to suitable bodies. These bodies are made by nature in exact correspondence with their former deeds and characters; in this nature is aided by the energies of experience and memory (9-11).

12. The nature of the soul is conditioned by its habitat in the air-spaces or zones; and this is especially 

[p. 206]

the case with those of the regal type. The names of some of these royal souls and their offices are given.

13. In brief all is ordered from above; the source of all is above in the soul-spaces, and as all souls come thence, so will all return thither.

14. How this is effected is explained as being conditioned by a certain link between soul and body, a sort of quintessence, or exhalation, or vapour, of the blend of sub-elements which compose the body (14-20). [*1] It is a sort of etheric link between soul and body; it circulates in the body, but also shares with the soul, which is not thought of as being in the body, but as a sphere enveloping the body; or at any rate the body is in the soul, and not the soul in the body. Health is said to depend upon the maintenance of the due proportion of the "vapours" [*2] of this "etheric double" (18).

Not only so, but the increase of vitality or intensity in these elements in the "vapour," is the means of remembering symbolic dreams and passing into a state of ecstasy; finally it is the fiery element of this "vapour" which dissolves this "spirituous body" (19).

It is by means of this link that changes are effected from soul to body, and from body to soul (20); and here, unfortunately, Stobaeus ends his excerpt.

TITLE AND ORDERING

The "Sermon of Isis to Horus" extract is, in both style and context, so similar to the K. K. excerpts that we might almost take it to be part and parcel of the very same treatise; but if this had been the case, Stobaeus, following his custom, would have presumably headed it with a simple "from the same." He may,

[p. 207]

however, have made a mistake, for that the good Joannes sometimes nods, may be seen from the short Excerpt xxi., which he says is also taken from "The [Sermon] of Isis to Horus" [*1]; but this cannot be the case, since Isis is here addressing a certain king as her pupil, and not Horus.

Moreover, at the very beginning of our excerpt Horus distinctly states that Isis has already explained to him "the details of God's wondrous soul-making," and thanks her "for being made initiate by word of mouth into the vision of the soul,"--all of which is a precise reference to the contents of the K. K. excerpts. I am, therefore, inclined to think that not only is it a further tractate of instruction following immediately on K. K., but that even if it were supposed to be part and parcel of the same sermon, and that "The [Sermon] of Isis to Horus" was simply a sub-title or alternative title of the "Virgin of the World," the hypothesis could not be easily set aside. [*2]

In any case it is quite certain that S. I. H. belongs to precisely the same type as K. K.; and that it pertains to the same special class of Trismegistic literature, and to a somewhat similar type as the treatise from which Cyril quotes Fragg. xix., xx., xxi., in which Osiris figures as the disciple of the Good Daimon, Trismegistus.

THE BOOKS OF ISIS AND HORUS

Here also, as in K. K., Isis comes forward as "initiated into the nature that transcendeth death," her "feet

[p. 208]

have crossed the Plain of Truth" (3) that is as we have shown in the Comments on K. K., 10, the writer claims to have reached the degree of illumination which bestows on men the consciousness of the gods. "Isis," then, is not "common to all priests," as Jamblichus says of "Hermes," without the honorific qualification "Thrice-greatest," but rather of a certain grade of initiation; the teacher of that lower grade, or Horus-grade, being Hermes' representative. Isis was commonly regarded as the Lady of all wisdom and teacher of all magic. Already in the earliest Hellenistic period she had attributes similar to those of Thoth-Hermes, and thus comes forward as the Orderer of the world [*1]; and not only so, but, like Thoth, she is called Lady of the heart and of the tongue; that is to say, her attributes were those of the Logos. [*2]

That there was a secret theosophic and apocalyptic literature ascribed to Isis and Horus may be seen from Lucian, who, in one of his humorous sketches, puts into the mouth of Pythagoras the following sentence:

"I also journeyed to Egypt that I might make the acquaintance of the prophets of wisdom, and I descended into the shrines of the temples and learned the Books of Isis and Horus." [*3]

Here again, then, as Manetho tells us, these Books, as the Books of Hermes, were kept secret in the holy of holies of the Temples; and these shrines were evidently

[p. 209]

underground for Pythagoras is said to have "descended" to them.

This is the Horus who is not only, after Osiris, the lord of power and might, that is, king, but lord of philosophy, as Arnebeschenis (12). For Arnebeschenis, that is Har-nebeschenis, is, as Spiegelberg has shown, [*1] an Egyptian proper name, meaning "Horus lord of Letopolis," at one time an important city in the Delta. In the Alchemical literature also we meet with Horus as a writer of books, as for instance in the superscription "Horus the Gold-miner to Cronus who is Ammon." [*2]

Here we see that Horus stands to Isis as Asclepius to Hermes; Asclepius wrote books to Ammon, and so Horus wrote books to Ammon; but whereas the Trismegistic tradition proper looked back to Cronus (Ammon) as one of its earliest teachers, the later writings converted Ammon into a king who was taught by Asclepius or by Horus.

THE WATERY SPHERE AND SUBTLE BODY

The writer of S. I. H. tells us that the soul in its royal state, that is while lord of itself, is a divine creature, but in incarnation it is united with the watery plasm or subtle body, of K. K., 18, where Hermes says that in making it he "used more water than was required"; and to which the soul in its complaint ( section 21) refers as a "watery sphere." This union makes it dense "against its proper nature" (3), and it is further densified by a certain "vaporous" nature which unites it with the physical frame (15, 17, 20); concerning all of which it is of interest to refer to Philoponus, who tells us that:

[p. 210]

"They [the ancients] further add, that there is something of a plantal and plastic life [*1] also, exercised by the soul, in those spirituous and airy bodies after death; they being nourished too, though not after the same manner, as these gross earthly bodies of ours are here, but by vapours; and that not by parts or organs, but throughout the whole of them (as sponges), [*2] they imbibing everywhere those vapours. For which cause, they who are wise will in this life also take care of using a thinner and dryer diet, that so that spirituous body (which we have also at this present time within our grosser body) may not be clogged and incrassated, but attenuated. Over and above which these ancients made use of catharms, or purgations, to the same end and purpose also: for as this earthly body is washed with water, so is that spirituous body cleansed by cathartic vapours; some of these vapours being nutritive, others purgative. Moreover, these ancients further declared concerning this spirituous body, that it was not organized, but did the whole of it, in every part throughout, exercise all functions of sense, the soul hearing and seeing, and perceivng all sensibles, by it everywhere." [*3]

THE HABITAT OF EXCARNATE SOULS

But to return to our treatise; the dwelling-place of excarnate souls is the Air, the sublunary region of four main layers, which are successively subtler and finer as they are more removed from the earth; the uppermost limit of the Air is coterminous with the fiery or aetheric realms (6), the habitat of the gods.

[p. 211]

In the different zones, or firmaments, or layers of this Air, dwell not only excarnate souls, during the period between their incarnations, but also those which have never yet been shut in body--that is, presumably, the daimones (8).

With regard to the manner in which souls are kept in their appropriate spaces after the death of the body, and the way in which they are brought back to appropriate bodies, and the two ministers of Providence (9), it is of value to note that in this we have a simple outline of what is explained at great length and in much detail in the Coptic Gnostic work called Pistis Sophia. It would, however, occupy too much space here to deal with the representations of the Egyptian Gnostic work on this subject in a satisfactory manner, and as the text is now accessible in English, it can easily be consulted by the reader. [*1]

Footnotes

^205:1 See Comments on K. K., 10.

^206:1 This bears a curious resemblance to the pranamaya kosha, or "vital sheath," of the Vedantins.

^206:2 Vedantic prana's, of which there are five.

^207:1 Of which Schow gives the alternative heading: "From the Intercession (or Supplication) of Isis," which Gaisford (in a note) thinks is from the Vienna Codex. This, however, is not the case, for the Vindobonensis preserves the usual reading except that the last word is missing. See R. 134, n. 3.

^207:2 R. (p. 135, n. 3), however, thinks this impossible.

^208:1 See Reitzenstein, Zwei religionsgesch. Fragen, 104 ff.

^208:2 Plutarch, De Is. et Os., lxviii.: "They say that of the trees in Egypt the persea is especially dedicated to her, and that its fruit resembles a heart, and its leaf a tongue. For nothing that men have is more divine than the word (logos), and especially the [word] concerning the gods." The fruit of the persea grew from the stem.

^208:3 Gallus, 18.

^209:1 Demotische Studien, i., "Agyptische u. griechische Eigennamen," p. 28 (cf. also p. 41); R. 135.

^209:2 Berthelot, p. 103.

^210:1 teis fytikeis zueis,--that is, vegetative.

^210:2 Endosmosis and exosmosis.

^210:3 Philoponus, Prooem. in Aristot. de Anima, as given in Cudworth's Intellectual System (ed. 1820), iii. 506 ff.; see my Orpheus, pp. 278, 279.

^211:1 For Melchizedek, the "Receiver of light and Guide of souls," see P. S., passim, and especially 35-37, 292, 327; for Zorokothora-Melchizedek and Ieou, see "The Books of the Saviour," ibid., 365 ff.; and for Gabriel and Michael, ibid., 138.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 212]

[p. 213]

II

References and Fragments in the Fathers

[p. 214]

[p. 215]

I.

JUSTIN MARTYR

i. Cohortatio ad Gentiles, xxxviii.; Otto (J. C. T.), ii. 122 (2d ed., Jena, 1849). [*1]

THE MOST ANCIENT OF PHILOSOPHERS

NOW if any of you should think that he has learnt the doctrine concerning God from those of the philosophers who are mentioned among you as most ancient, let him give ear to Ammon and Hermes. For Ammon in the Words (Logoi) concerning himself [*2] calls God "utterly hidden"; while Hermes clearly and plainly declares:

To understand God is difficult; to speak [of Him] impossible, even for one who can understand. [*3]

THE "WORDS OF AMMON"

This passage occurs at the very end of the treatise. Justin will have it that the most ancient of all the philosophers are on his side.

[p. 216]

These are Ammon and Hermes. Justin, moreover, knows of certain Words (Logoi), or Sermons, or Sacred Utterances of Ammon, which must have been circulating in Greek, otherwise it is difficult to see how Justin was acquainted with them. They were evidently of an apocalyptic nature, in the form of a self-revelation of Ammon or God.

These "Words of Ammon" have clearly nothing to do with the Ammonian type of the surviving Trismegistic literature, where Ammon is a hearer and not an instructor, least of all the supreme instructor or Agathodaimon. In them we may see an intermediate stage of direct dependence of Hellenistic theological literature on Egyptian originals, for we have preserved to us certain Hymns from the El-Khargeh Oasis which bear the inscription "'The Secret Words of Ammon' which were found on Tables of Mulberry-wood." [*1]

THE INEFFABILITY OF GOD

The sentence from Hermes is from a lost sermon, a fragment of which is preserved in an excerpt by Stobaeus. It was probably the opening words of what Stobaeus calls "The [Sermon] to Tat," [*2] that is to say, probably one of the "Expository Sermons to Tat," as Lactantius calls them. [*3]

The idea in the saying was a common place in

[p. 217]

[paragraph continues] Hellenistic theological thought, and need not be always directly referred to the much-quoted words of Plato: "To find the Father and the Maker of this universe is a [great] work, and finding [Him] it is impossible to tell [Him] unto all." [*1] Indeed, it is curious to remark that Justin reproduces the text of the Hermetic writer far more faithfully than when he refers directly to the saying of Plato. [*2]

ii. I. Apologia, xxi.; Otto, i. 54.

HERMES AND ASCLEPIUS SONS OF GOD

And when we say that the Word (Logos) which is the first begetting of God, was begotten without intercourse,--Jesus Christ, our Master,--and that he was crucified, and was dead, and rose again and ascended into heaven, we bring forward no new thing beyond those among you who are called Sons of Zeus. For ye know how many Sons the writers who are held in honour among you ascribe to Zeus:--Hermes, the Word (Logos), who was the interpreter and teacher of all; and Asclepius, who was also [*3] a healer, [*4] and was smitten by the bolt [of his sire] and ascended into heaven . . . [and many others] . . .

iii. Ibid., xxii.; Otto, i. 58. 

HERMES THE WORD WHO BRINGS TIDINGS FROM GOD

But as to the Son of God called Jesus,--even though he were only a man [born] in the common way, [yet] because of [his] wisdom is he worthy to be called Son

[p. 218]

of God; for all writers call God "Father of men and gods." And if we say [further] that he was also in a special way, beyond his common birth, begotten of God [as] Word (Logos) of God, let us have this in common with you who call Hermes the Word (Logos) who brings tidings [*1] from God.

THE SONS OF GOD IN HELLENISTIC THEOLOGY

It is remarkable that Justin heads the list of Sons of God--Dionysus, Hercules, etc.--with Hermes and Asclepius. Moreover, when he returns to the subject he again refers to Hermes and to Hermes alone. This clearly shows that the most telling parallel he could bring forward was that of Hermes, who, in the Hellenistic theological world of his day, was especially thought of under the concept of the Logos.

The immediate association of the name of Asclepius with that of Hermes is also remarkable, and indicates that they were closely associated in Justin's mind; the indication, however, is too vague to permit of any positive deduction as to an Asclepius-element in the Trismegistic literature current in Rome in Justin's time. Justin, in any case, has apparently very little first-hand knowledge of the subject, for he introduces the purely Hellenic myth of Asclepius being struck by a thunderbolt, which, we need hardly say, is entirely foreign to the conception of the Hellenistic Asclepius, the disciple of Hermes.

AN UNVERIFIABLE QUOTATION

To these quotations Chambers (p. 139) adds the following passage from II. Apologia, vi.,--which in date may be placed some four or five years after the First.

[p. 219]

"Now to the Father of all no name can be given; seeing that He is ingenerable; for by whatsoever name one may be called, he has as his elder the one who gives the name. But 'Father,' and 'God,' and 'Creator,' and 'Lord,' and 'Master' are not names, but terms of address [derived] from His blessings and His works."

 

It is quite true that this passage might be taken verbally from a Hermetic tractate, but I can find no authority in the text of Justin for claiming it as a quotation. For the same idea in Hermes compare C. H., v. (vi.) 10, and Lact., D. I., i. 6.

Footnotes

^215:1 The Exhortation is considered by most pseudepigraphic, but is supposed by others to be the earliest work of Justin, which may be placed conjecturally about 130 A.D.; the First Apology is generally ascribed to the year 148 A.D.

^215:2 Taking the reading peri eaytou (Otto, n. 13), adopted in R. 138.

^215:3 Quoted also by Lactantius, D. I. Epit., 4; Cyril Alex., Con. Jul., i. 31; and Stobaeus, Flor., lxxx. [lxxviii.], 94 (Ex. ii. 1).

^216:1 R. 138. The connection between this Ammon and Hermes was probably the same as that which is said to have existed between the king-god Thamus-Ammon and the god of invention Theuth-Hermes. Thamus-Ammon was a king philosopher, to whom Theuth brought all his inventions and discoveries for his (Ammon's) judgment, which was not invariably favourable. See the pleasant story told by Plato, Phaedrus, 274 C. Cf. also the notes on Kneph-Ammon, K. K., 19, Comment.

^216:2 Stob., loc. infra cit.

^216:3 See Fragg. xi., xii., xiii., xv., xx., xxii., xxiii., xxiv. (?).

^217:1 Timaeus, 28 C.

^217:2 See Cohort., xxii.; II. Apol., x. Clemens Alex., Origen, Minutius Felix, Lactantius, and other of the Fathers also quote this saying of Plato.

^217:3 That is, like Jesus.

^217:4 therapeyten (therapeut).

^218:1 ton para theou aggeltikon. Compare Plutarch, De Is. et Os., xxvi. 5.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 220]

II.

ATHENAGORAS

Libellus pro Christianis, [*1] xxviii.; Schwartz (E.), p. 57, 24 (Leipzig, 1891). [*2]

ATHENAGORAS was acquainted with a Greek literature circulated under the name of Hermes Trismegistus, to whom he refers as authority for his euhemeristic contention that the gods were once simply men. [*3]

Footnotes

^220:1 Written probably about 176-177 A.D.

^220:2 In Texte u. Untersuchungen (von Gebhardt and Harnack), Bd. iv.

^220:3 Cf. R, pp. 2 and 160.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 221]

III.

CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA [*1]

i. Protrepticus, ii. 29; Dindorf (G.), i. 29, (Oxford, 1869)--(24 P., 8 S.).

MANY HERMESES AND ASCLEPIUSES

(AFTER referring to the three Zeuses, five Athenas, and numberless Apollos of complex popular tradition, Clement continues:)

But what were I to mention the many Asclepiuses, or the Hermeses that are reckoned up, or the Hephaestuses of mythology?

 

Clement lived in the very centre of Hellenistic theology, and his grouping together of the names of Asclepius, Hermes and Hephaestus, the demiurgic Ptah, whose tradition was incorporated into the Poemandres doctrine, is therefore not fortuitous, but shows that these three names were closely associated in his mind, and that, therefore, he was acquainted with the Trismegistic literature. This deduction is confirmed by the following passage.

[p. 222]

ii. Stromateis, I. xxi. 134; Dindorf, ii. 108 (399 P., 144 S.).

THE APOTHEOSIS OF HERMES AND ASCLEPIUS

Of those, too, who once lived as men among the Egyptians, but who have been made gods by human opinion, [are] Hermes of Thebes and Asclepius of Memphis.

(To this we may appropriately append what Clement has to tell us about the "Books of Hermes," when, writing in the last quarter of the second century, he describes one of the sacred processions of the Egyptians as follows:)

iii. Ibid., VI. iv. 35; Dind., iii. 156, 157.

THE BOOKS OF HERMES

First comes the "Singer" bearing some one of the symbols of music. This [priest], they tell us, has to make himself master of two of the "Books of Hermes," one of which contains (1) Hymns [in honour] of the Gods, [*1] and the other (2) Reflections [*2] on the Kingly Life.

After the "Singer" comes the "Time-watcher" bearing the symbols of the star-science, a dial after a hand and phoenix. He must have the division of the "Books of Hermes" which treats of the stars ever at the tip of his tongue--there being four of such books. The first of these deals with (3) the Ordering of the

[p. 223]

apparently Fixed Stars, [*1] the next [two] (4 and 5) with the conjunctions and variations of Light of the Sun and Moon, and the last (6) with the Risings [of the Stars].

Next comes the "Scribe of the Mysteries," with wings on his head, having in either hand a book and a ruler [*2] in which is the ink and reed pen with which they write. He has to know what they call the sacred characters, and the books about (7) Cosmography, and (8) Geography, (9) the Constitution of the Sun and Moon, and (10) of the Five Planets, (11) the Survey of Egypt, and (12) the Chart of the Nile, (13) the List of the Appurtenances of the Temples and (14) of the Lands consecrated to them, (15) the Measures, and (16) Things used in the Sacred Rites.

After the above-mentioned comes the "Overseer [*3] of the Ceremonies," bearing the cubit of justice and the libation cup [as his symbols]. He must know all the books relating to the training [of the conductors of the public cult], and those that they call the victim-sealing [*4]

[p. 224]

books. There are ten of these books which deal with the worship which they pay to the gods, and in which the Egyptian cult is contained; namely [those which treat] of (17) Sacrifice, (18) First-fruits, (19) Hymns, (20) Prayers, (21) Processions, (22) Feasts, and (23-26) the like.

After all of these comes the "Prophet" clasping to his breast the water-vase so that all can see it; and after him follow those who carry the bread that is to be distributed. [*1] The "Prophet" as chief of the temple, learns by heart the ten books which are called "hieratic"; these contain the volumes (27-36) treating of the Laws, and the Gods, and the whole Discipline of the Priests. For you must know that the "Prophet" among the Egyptians is also the supervisor of the distribution of the [temple] revenues.

Now the books which are absolutely indispensable [*2]

[p. 225]

for Hermes [*1] are forty-two in number. Six-and-thirty of them, which contain the whole wisdom-discipline [*2] of the Egyptians, are learned by heart by the [grades of priests] already mentioned. The remaining six are learned by the "Shrine-bearers" [*3]; these are medical treatises dealing with (37) the Constitution of the Body, with (38) Diseases, (39) Instruments, (40) Drugs, (41) Eyes, [*4] and finally (42) with the Maladies of Women.

THE GENERAL CATALOGUE OF THE EGYPTIAN PRIESTLY LIBRARY

This exceedingly interesting passage of Clement gives us the general catalogue of the Egyptian priestly library and the background of the Greek translations and adaptations in our Trismegistic writings.

The whole of these writings fall into this frame, and the oldest deposit or "Poemandres" type fits in excellently with the content of the hieratic books (the titles of which Clement has unfortunately omitted), or with those that were kept secret. These hieratic books were evidently the more important and were in charge of the "Prophet," that is to say, of those high priests of the temples who were directors of the prophetic discipline, the very subject of our "Poemandres" treatises. [*5]

Footnotes

^221:1 Fl., 175-200 A.D.

^222:1 I have numbered the books and used capitals for greater clearness.

^222:2 eklogismon; I do not know what this term means in this connection. The usual translation of "Regulations" seems to me unsatisfactory. Some word such as "Praise" (? read eylogismon) seems to be required, as may be seen from the title of C. H., (xviii.), "The Encomium of Kings."

^223:1 tun aplanun fainomenun astrun.

^223:2 kanona.; this must mean a hollow wooden case shaped like a ruler.

^223:3 stoliste's, called also ierostolos. This priestly office is usually translated as the "keeper of the vestments," the "one who is over the wardrobe." But such a meaning is entirely foreign to the contents of the books which are assigned to him. He was evidently the organiser of the ceremonies, especially the processions.

^223:4 mosxosfragistika--that is to say, literally, books relating to the art of one who picks out and "seals calves" for sacrifice. The literal meaning originally referred to the selection of the sacred Apis bull-calf, into which the power of the god was supposed to have re-incarnated, in the relic of some primitive magic rite which the conservatism of the Egyptians still retained in the public cult. Its meaning, however, was later on far more general, as we see by the nature of the books assigned to this division. Boulage, in his Mysteres d'Isis (Paris, 1820, p. 21), says that "the seal of the priests which marked the victims was a man kneeling with his hands bound behind his back, and a sword pointed at his throat, for it was in this attitude that the neophyte received the first initiation, signifying that he agreed to perish by the sword if he revealed any of the secrets revealed to him." This he evidently deduced from Plutarch's De Is. et Os., xxxi. 3.

^224:1 oi ten ekpempsin tun artun bastazontes. The "Prophet" belonged to the grade of high priests who had practical knowledge of the inner way. As the flood of the Nile came down and irrigated the fields and brought forth the grain for bread, and so gave food to Egypt, so did the living stream of the Gnosis from the infinite heights of space pour into the Hierophant, and he in his turn became Father Nile for the priests, his disciples, who in their turn distributed the bread of knowledge to the people. A pleasing symbolism, of which the bread and water of the earlier ascetic schools of Christendom, who rejected wine, was perhaps a reminiscence. Nor has even the General Church in its older forms forgotten to sprinkle the people from the water-vase and distribute among them the bread.

^224:2 This seems to suggest that there were others, the knowledge of which was optional, or rather reserved for the few. There may perhaps have been forty-nine in all.

^225:1 That is, the priesthood.

^225:2 Lit. philosophy.

^225:3 pastoforoi, those who carried the pastos as a symbol; this apparently symbolized the shrine or casket of the soul; in other words, the human body. These Pastophors were the priests who were the physicians of the body, the higher grades being presumably physicians of the soul.

^225:4 This seems to be an error of the copyist.

^225:5 As to the hieroglyphic inscription at Edfu, which was thought by Jomasd to contain references to the titles of these forty-two books, see Parthey, Uber Isis und Osiris, p. 255.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 226]

IV.

TERTULLIAN [*1]

i. Contra Valentinianos, xv.; Oehler (F.), ii. 402 (Leipzig, 1844).

HERMES THE MASTER OF ALL PHYSICS

(WRITING sarcastically of the Gnostic Sophia-myth, Tertullian exclaims:)

Well, then, let the Pythagoreans learn, the Stoics know, [yea,] Plato even, whence matter--which they [sc. the Pythagoreans and the rest] would have to be ingenerable--derived its source and substance to [form] this pile of a world,--[a mystery] which not even the famous Thrice-greatest Hermes, the master of all physics, has thought out.

 

The doctrine of Hermes, and of Hellenistic theology in general, however, is that matter comes from the One God. It is remarkable that Tertullian keeps his final taunt for that school which was evidently thought the foremost of all--that of the "famous Thrice-greatest Hermes."

[p. 227]

ii. De Anima, ii.; Oehler, ii. 558.

HERMES THE WRITER OF SCRIPTURE

(Inveighing against the wisdom of the philosophers, Tertullian says:)

She [philosophy] has also been under the impression that she too has drawn from what they [the philosophers] consider "sacred" scriptures; because antiquity thought that most authors were gods (deos), and not merely inspired by them (divos),--as, for instance, Egyptian Hermes, with whom especially Plato had intercourse, [*1] . . . [and others] . . . .

 

Here again, as with Justin, Hermes heads the list; moreover, in Tertullian's mind, Hermes belongs to antiquity, to a more ancient stratum than Pythagoras and Plato, as the context shows; Plato, of course, depends on Hermes, not Hermes on Plato; of this Tertullian has no doubt. There were also "sacred scriptures" of Hermes, and Hermes was regarded as a god.

iii. Ibid., xxviii.; Oehler, ii. 601.

HERMES THE FIRST TEACHER OF REINCARNATION

What then is the value nowadays of that ancient doctrine mentioned by Plato, [*2] about the reciprocal migration of souls; how they remove hence and go thither, and then return hither and pass through life, and then again depart from this life, made quick again from the dead? Some will have it that this is a doctrine of Pythagoras; while Albinus [*3] will have it to

[p. 228]

be a divine pronouncement, perhaps of Egyptian Hermes.

iv. Ibid., xxxiii.; Oehler, ii. 610.

HERMES ON METEMPSYCHOSIS

(Arguing ironically against the belief in metempsychosis, Tertullian writes:)

Even if they [souls] should continue [unchanged] until judgment [is pronounced upon them] . . . a point which was known to Egyptian Hermes, when he says that the soul on leaving the body is not poured back into the soul of the universe, but remains individualized [*1]:

FRAGMENT I.

That it may give account unto the Father of those things which it hath done in body.

 

This exact quotation [*2] is to be found nowhere in the existing remains of the Trismegistic literature, but it has every appearance of being genuine.

Oehler (note c) refers to C. H., x. (xi.) 7, but this passage of "The Key" is only a general statement of the main idea of metempsychosis.

A more appropriate parallel is to be found in P. S. A., xxviii. 1: "When, [then,] the soul's departure from the body shall take place,--then shall the judgment and the weighing of its merit pass into its highest daimon's power"--a passage, however, which retains far stronger traces of the Egyptian prototype of the idea than does that quoted by Tertullian.

Footnotes

^226:1 Fl., c. 200-216 A.D.

^227:1 Adsuevit.

^227:2 Cf. Phaedo, p. 70.

^227:3 A Platonic philosopher, and contemporary of Galen (130-?200 A.D.).

^228:1 Determinatam.

^228:2 Tertullian marks it by an "inquit."

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 229]

V.

CYPRIAN [*1]

i. De Idolorum Vanitate, vi.; Baluze, p. 220 (Paris, 1726).

GOD IS BEYOND ALL UNDERSTANDING

THRICE-GREATEST Hermes speaks of the One God, and confesses Him beyond all understanding and all appraisement.

 

This is evidently a reference to the most quoted sentence of Hermes. See Justin Martyr i. below, and other references.

Chambers (p. 140), after this notice in Cyprian, inserts a passage from Eusebius (c. 325 A.D.), which he says is "a clear quotation from the 'Poemandres' of Hermes, whom, however, he [Eusebius] probably confounds with the Shepherd of Hermas."

Eusebius (Hist. Ecc., v. 8), however, quotes Irenaeus (iv. 20, 2), who quotes literally The Shepherd of Hermas (Mand., i.). Indeed, it is the most famous sentence in that early document. See the list of its quotations by the Fathers in the note to Gebhardt and Harnack's text (Leipzig, 1897), p. 70. Such verbal exactitude is not to be found in the remaining Trismegistic literature; the idea, however, is the basis of the whole Trismegistic theology.

Footnotes

^229:1 About 200-258 A.D.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 230]

VI.

ARNOBIUS [*1]

i. Adversus Nationes, ii. 13; Hildebrand (G. F.), p. 136 (Halle, 1844).

THE SCHOOL OF HERMES

(ARNOBIUS complains that the followers of the philosophic schools laugh at the Christians, and selects especially the adherents of a certain tradition as follows:) 

You, you I single out, who belong to the school of Hermes, or of Plato and Pythagoras, and the rest of you who are of one mind and walk in union in the same paths of doctrine. [*2]

Footnotes

^230:1 He was a converted philosopher, and the teacher of Lactantius; flourished about 304 A.D.

^230:2 Here again, as elsewhere, Hermes comes first; he was evidently regarded as the leader of philosophic theology as contrasted with popular Christian dogmatics. See R. 306.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 231]

VII.

LACTANTIUS [*1]

i. Divinae Institutiones, i. 6, 1; Brandt, p. 18; Fritzsche, i. 13. [*2]

THOYTH-HERMES AND HIS BOOKS ON THE GNOSIS

LET us now pass to divine testimonies; but, first of all, I will bring into court testimony which is like divine [witness], both on account of its exceeding great age, and because he whom I shall name was carried back again from men unto the gods.

In Cicero, [*3] Caius Cotta, [*4] the Pontifex, arguing against the Stoics about faiths and the diversity of opinions which obtain concerning the gods, in order that, as was the way of the Academics, [*5] he might bring all things into doubt, declares that there were five Hermeses; and after enumerating four of them in succession, [he adds] that the fifth was he by whom

[p. 232]

[paragraph continues] Argus was slain, [*1] and for that cause he fled into Egypt, and initiated the Egyptians into laws and letters.

The Egyptians call him Thoyth, and from him the first month of their year (that is, September) has received its name. He also founded a city which even unto this day is called Hermopolis. The people of Pheneus, [*2] indeed, worship him as a god; but, although

[p. 233]

he was [really] a man, still he was of such high antiquity, and so deeply versed in every kind of science, that his knowledge of [so] many things and of the arts gained him the title of "Thrice-greatest."

He wrote books, indeed many [of them], treating of the Gnosis [*1] of things divine, in which he asserts the greatness of the Highest and One and Only God, and calls Him by the same names as we [do]--God and Father. [*2] And [yet], so that no one should seek after His name, he has declared that He cannot be named, in that He doth not need to have a name, owing, indeed, unto the very [nature of His] unity. [*3] His words are these [*4]:

FRAGMENT II.

But God [is] one; and He who's one needs not a name, for He [as one] is The-beyond-all-names.

 

THE HISTORICAL ORIGINS OF THE HERMETIC TRADITION

For Lactantius, then, Hermes was very ancient; moreover, he was one who descended from heaven and had returned thither. When, however, Firmianus attempts the historical origins of the Hermetic tradition, as was invariably the case with the ancients, he can do nothing better than refer us to a complex though

[p. 234]

interesting myth, and to a legend of it devised to flatter the self-esteem of its Hellenic creators: A Greek god, whose cult, moreover, was known to be intimately connected with an ancient mystery-tradition, was the originator of the wisdom of Egypt. Of course; and so with all nations who had any ancient learning--their special tradition was oldest and best and originator of all others!

For the rest, Lactantius knows nothing historically of the tradition which he esteemed so highly, and the mention of the Latinized name Thoyth [*1] and of Hermopolis [*2] does but throw the paucity of his knowledge into deeper relief. What Lactantius does know is a large literature in Greek and its general tendency.

The sentence he quotes is not found textually in any of the extant Trismegistic literature. [*3]

ii. Ibid., i. 11, 61; Brandt, p. 47; Fritzsche, i. 29, 30.

URANUS, CRONUS AND HERMES, ADEPTS OF THE PERFECT SCIENCE

And so it appears that he [Cronus] was not born from Heaven (which is impossible), but from that man who was called Uranus; and that this is so, Trismegistus bears witness, when, in stating that there have been very few in whom the perfect science has been found,

[p. 235]

he mentioned in their number Uranus, Cronus and Hermes, his own kinsfolk. [*1]

iii. Ibid., ii. 8, 48; Brandt, p. 138; Fritzsche, i. 89.

DIVINE PROVIDENCE

For the World was made by Divine Providence, not to mention Thrice-greatest, who preaches this. [*2]

iv. Ibid., ii. 8, 68; Brandt, p. 141; Fritzsche, i. 91.

ON MORTAL AND IMMORTAL SIGHT

His [God's] works are seen by the eyes; but how He made them, is not seen even by the mind, "in that," as Hermes says:

FRAGMENT III.

Mortal cannot draw nigh [*3] to the Immortal, nor temporal to the Eternal, nor the corruptible to That which knoweth no corruption. [*4]

And, therefore, hath the earthly animal not yet capacity to see celestial things, in that it is kept shut within the body as in a prison house, lest with freed sense, emancipate, it should see all.

[p. 236]

The first part of this citation (which Lactantius gives in Latin) is identical in idea with a sentence in Frag. iv.--that favourite source of quotation, which Stobaeus, Ex. ii. (Flor. lxxx. [lxxviii.] 9), excerpted from "The [Sermon] to Tat." [*1] It might, then, be thought that this was simply a paraphrase of Lactantius', or that he was quoting from memory, and that the second sentence was not quotation but his own writing. But the second sentence is so thoroughly Trismegistic that it has every appearance of being genuine. [*2]

v. Ibid., ii. 10, 13; Brandt, p. 149; Fritzsche, i. 96.

MAN MADE AFTER THE IMAGE OF GOD

But the making of the truly living man out of clay [*3] is of God. And Hermes also hands on the tradition of this fact,--for not only has he said that man was made by God after the Image of God, [*4] but also he has attempted to explain with what skilfulness He has formed every single member in the body of man, since there is not one of them which is not admirably suited not only for what it has to do, but also adapted for beauty. [*5]

 

Man made after the Image of God is one of the fundamental doctrines of the Trismegistic tradition. For instance, P. S. A., vii. 2: "The [man] 'essential,' as say the Greeks, but which we call the 'form of the

[p. 237]

[paragraph continues] Divine Similitude'"; and x. 3: "Giving the greatest thanks to God, His Image reverencing,--not ignorant that he [man] is, too, God's image, the second [one]; for that there are two images of God--Cosmos and man." [*1]

vi. Ibid., ii. 12, 4; Brandt, p. 156; Fritzsche, i. 100.

HERMES THE FIRST NATURAL PHILOSOPHER

Empedocles [*2] . . . [and others] . . . laid down four elements, fire, air, water, and earth,--[in this] perchance following Trismegistus, who said that our bodies were composed of these four elements by God.

"For that they have in them something of fire, something of air, something of water, and something of earth,--and yet they are not fire [in itself], nor air, nor water, nor earth."

 

All this about the elements is, of course, a commonplace of ancient physics, and we may, therefore, dismiss the naive speculation of Lactantius, who evidently thought he had the very words of the first inventor of the theory before him; for he renders into Latin word for word the same text which Stobaeus has preserved to us in an excerpt from "The [Sermons] to Tat"--Ex. iii. I. [*3]

vii. Ibid., ii. 14, 5; Brandt, p. 163; Fritzsche, i. 105.

THE DAIMON-CHIEF

Thus there are two classes of daimons,--the one celestial, and the other terrestrial. The latter are impure spirits, the authors of the evils that are done, [*4]

[p. 238]

of whom the same Diabolus is chief. Whence Trismegistus calls him the "Daimon-chief." [*1]

viii. Ibid., ii. 15, 6; Brandt, p. 166; Fritzsche, i. 106.

DEVOTION IS GOD-GNOSIS

In fine, Hermes asserts that those who have known God, not only are safe from the attacks of evil daimons, but also that they are not held even by Fate. [*2] He says:

FRAGMENT IV.

The one means of protection is piety. For neither doth an evil daimon nor doth Fate rule o'er the pious man. [*3] For God doth save the pious [man] from every ill. The one and only good found in mankind is piety.

And what piety means, he witnesses in another place, saying:

"Devotion is God-Gnosis." [*4]

Asclepius, his Hearer, has also explained the same idea at greater length in that "Perfect Sermon" which he wrote to the King.

Both, then, assert that the daimons are the enemies and harriers of men, and for this cause Trismegistus

[p. 239]

calls them "evil 'angels'," [*1]--so far was he from being ignorant that from celestial beings they had become corrupted, and so earthly.

 

This passage is given in Greek, and is quoted, but with numerous glosses, also by Cyril (Contra Julianum, iv. 130); it is also practically the same as the sentence in P. S. A., xxix.: "The righteous man finds his defence in serving God and deepest piety. For God doth guard such men from every ill."

Now we know that Lactantius had the Greek of this "Perfect Sermon" before him, and we know that our Latin translation is highly rhetorical and paraphrastic.

The only difficulty is that Lactantius' quotation ends with the sentence: "The one and only good found in mankind is piety"; and this does not appear in the Latin translation of P. S. A. On the other hand, Firmianus immediately refers by name to a Perfect Sermon, which, however, he says was written by Asclepius, and addressed to the King. Our Fragment is, therefore, probably from the lost ending of C. H., xvi. (see Commentary on the title).

ix. Ibid., iv. 6, 4; Brandt, p. 286; Fritzsche, i. 178.

THE COSMIC SON OF GOD

Hermes, in that book which is entitled the "Perfect Sermon," uses these words:

FRAGMENT V.

The Lord and Master of all things (whom 'tis our custom to call God), when He had made the

[p. 240]

second God, the Visible and Sensible, [*1]--I call Him sensible, not that He hath sensation in Himself (for as to this, whether or no He hath Himself sensation, we will some other time enquire), but that He is object of senses and of mind,--when, then, He'd made Him First, and One and Only, [*2] He seemed to Him most fair, and filled quite full of all things good. At Him he marvelled, and loved Him altogether as His Son. [*3]

 

Lactantius here quotes from the lost Greek original of "The Perfect Sermon," viii. 1. We have thus a means of controlling the old Latin translation which has come down to us.

It is, by comparison, very free and often rhetorical; inserting phrases and even changing the original, as, for instance, when in the last clause it says: "He fell in love with him as being part of His Divinity."

It is, however, possible that the translator may have had a different text before him, for there is reason to believe that there were several recensions of the P. S. A. [*4]

x. Ibid., iv. 6, 9; Brandt, p. 291; Fritzsche, i. 179. 

THE DEMIURGE OF GOD

(Speaking of the Son of God and identifying Him with the pre-existent Wisdom spoken of in Proverbs viii. 22, Lactantius adds:)

[p. 241]

Wherefore also Trismegistus has called Him the "Demiurge of God." [*1]

xi. Ibid., iv. 7, 3; Brandt, p. 292; Fritzsche, i. 179. 

THE NAME OF GOD

Even then [when the world shall be consummated], [*2] it [God's Name] will not be able to be uttered by the mouth of man, as Hermes teaches, saying:

FRAGMENT VI.

But the Cause of this Cause is the Divine and the Ingenerable Good's Good-will, which [*3] first brought forth the God whose Name cannot be spoken by the mouth of man. [*4]

xii. Ibid., iv. 7, 3; Brandt, p. 293; Fritzsche, i. 179, 180.

THE HOLY WORD ABOUT THE LORD OF ALL. 

And a little after [he says] to his son:

FRAGMENT VII.

For that there is, [my] son, a Word [Logos] of wisdom, that no tongue can tell,--a Holy [*5]

[p. 242]

[paragraph continues] [Word] about the only Lord of all, the God before all thought,--whom to declare transcends all human power. [*1]

xiii. Ibid., iv. 8, 5; Brandt, p. 296; Fritzsche, i. 181.

HIS OWN FATHER AND OWN MOTHER

But Hermes also was of the same opinion when he says:

"His own father and His own mother." [*2]

xiv. Ibid., iv. 9, 3; Brandt, p. 300; Fritzsche, i. 182, 183.

THE POWER AND GREATNESS OF THE WORD

Trismegistus, who has tracked out, I know not how, almost all truth, has often described the power and greatness of the Word (Logos), as the above quotation [*3] from him shows, in which he confesses the Word to be Ineffable and Holy, and in that its telling forth transcends the power of man.

xv. Ibid., iv. 13, 2; Brandt, p. 316; Fritzsche, i. 190. 

THE FATHERLESS AND MOTHERLESS

For God, the Father, and the Source, and Principle of things, in that He hath no parents, is very truly called by Trismegistus "father-less" and "mother-less" [*4] in that He is brought forth from none. [*5]

[p. 243]

xvi. Ibid., v. 14, 11; Brandt, p. 446; Fritzsche, i. 256.

PIETY THE GNOSIS OF GOD

But "piety is nothing else than Gnosis of God," [*1] as Trismegistus has most truly laid down, as we have said in another place. [*2]

xvii. Ibid., vi. 25, 10; Brandt, p. 579; Fritzsche, ii. 60.

THE ONLY WAY TO WORSHIP GOD

Concerning justice, he [Trismegistus, who in this (namely concerning sacrifice) "agrees substantially and verbally with the prophets"] has thus spoken:

"Unto this Word (Logos), my son, thy adoration and thy homage pay. There is one way alone to worship God,--[it is] not to be bad."

 

Here Lactantius translates literally from C. H., xii. (xiii.) 23, a sermon which now bears the title, "About the Common Mind to Tat." Hermes, however, in the context of the quoted passage, is not writing "about justice," and much less could the whole sermon be so entitled, if indeed Lactantius intended us so to understand it. But see the Commentary, C. H., xii. (xiii.) 6, and Ex. xi., "On Justice."

xviii. Ibid., v. 25, 11; Brandt, p. 579; Fritzsche, ii. 60.

THE WORTHIEST SACRIFICE TO GOD

Also in that "Perfect Sermon," when he heard Asclepius enquiring of his son, [*3] whether it would be pleasing to his [*4] father, that incense and other perfumes

[p. 244]

should be offered in their holy rite to God, [Hermes] exclaimed:

FRAGMENT VIII.

Nay, nay; speak more propitiously, O [my] Asclepius! For very great impiety is it to let come in the mind any such thought about that One and Only Good.

These things, and things like these, are not appropriate to Him. For He is full of all things that exist and least of all stands He in need [of aught].

But let us worship pouring forth our thanks. The [worthiest] sacrifice to Him is blessing, [and blessing] only.

 

With this compare the passage in P. S. A., xli. 2 (p. 61, 16, Goldb.). Here again we have the means of controlling the old Latin translator, but not with such exactitude as before, for Lactantius has also turned the Greek text into Latin. But not only from the other specimens of Lactantius' Hermes translations, but also from his present close reproduction of the ordinary wording of the Trismegistic treatises, we may be further confident that the Old Latin translation is free, paraphrastic, and rhetorical, as we have already remarked.

xix. Ibid., vii. 4, 3; Brandt, p. 593; Fritzsche, ii. 69.

MAN MADE IN THE IMAGE OF GOD

But Hermes was not ignorant that man was made by God and in the Image of God. [*1]

[p. 245]

xx. Ibid., vii. 9, 11; Brandt, p. 612; Fritzsche, ii. 82.

CONTEMPLATION

(Speaking of man being the only animal that has his body upright, and face raised to heaven, looking towards his Maker, Lactantius says:)

And this "looking" Hermes has most rightly named contemplation. [*1]

xxi. Ibid., vii. 13, 3; Brandt, p. 624 Fritzsche, ii. 90.

THE DUAL NATURE OF MAN

Hermes, in describing the nature of man, in order that he might teach how he was made by God, brings forward the following:

FRAGMENT IX.

From the two natures, the deathless and mortal, He made one nature,--that of man,--one and the self-same thing; and having made the self-same [man] both somehow deathless and somehow mortal, He brought him forth, and set him up betwixt [*2] the godlike and immortal

[p. 246]

nature and the mortal, that seeing all he might wonder at all.

 

WONDER THE BEGINNING OF PHILOSOPHY

This idea of "wondering" was, doubtless, a commonplace in Hellenistic philosophical circles and looked back to the Platonic saying: "There is no other beginning of Philosophy than wondering." Compare also one of the newest found "Logoi of Jesus," from the rubbish heaps of Oxyrhynchus, which runs: "Let not him that seeketh . . . cease until he find, and when he finds he shall wonder; wondering he shall reign, and reigning he shall rest." [*1]

Wondering is the beginning of Gnosis; this makes a man king of himself, and thus master of gods and men, and so he has peace. The translation of basileusei by Grenfell and Hunt as "reach the kingdom" seems to me to have no justification.

Lactantius here quotes the Greek text of P. S. A., viii. 3, and so once again we can control the Old Latin version. The Church Father is plainly the more reliable, reproducing as he does familiar Hermetic phrasing and style; and we thus again have an insight into the methods of our rhetorical, truncated, and interpolated Latin Version.

xxii. Ibid., vii. 18, 3; Brandt, p. 640; Fritzsche, ii. 99. 

THE COSMIC RESTORATION

And Hermes states this [the destruction of the world] [*2] plainly. For in that book which bears the title

[p. 247]

of "The Perfect Sermon," after an enumeration of the evils of which we have spoken, he adds:

FRAGMENT X.

Now when these things shall be, as I have said, Asclepius, then will [our] Lord and Sire, the God and Maker of the First and the One God, [*1] look down on what is done, and, making firm His Will,--that is the Good,--against disorder, recalling error, and purging out the bad, either by washing it away with water-flood, or burning it away with swiftest fire, or forcibly expelling it with war and famine,--He [then] will bring again His Cosmos to its former state, and so achieve its Restoration. [*2]

xxiii. Ibid., Epitome, 4, 4; Brandt, p. 679; Fritzsche, ii. 117.

OF HERMES AND HIS DOCTRINE CONCERNING GOD

Hermes,--who, on account of his virtue and knowledge of many arts, gained the title of Thrice-greatest, who also in the antiquity of his doctrine preceded the philosophers, and who is worshipped as god among the Egyptians,--declaring the greatness of the One and Only God with unending praises, calls Him God and Father, [and says] He has no name, for that He has no need for a distinctive name, [*3] inasmuch as He alone is,

[p. 248]

nor has He any parents, in that He is both from Himself and by Himself. [*1]

In writing to his son [Tat] he begins as follows:

"To comprehend God is difficult, to speak [of Him] impossible, even for one who can comprehend; for the Perfect cannot be comprehended by the imperfect, nor the Invisible by the visible." [*2]

xxiv. Ibid., Ep., 14; Brandt, p. 685; Fritzsche, ii. 121. 

A REPETITION

(Lactantius repeats in almost identical words what he has written in i. 11.)

xxv. Ibid., Ep., 37 (42), 2; Brandt, p. 712; Fritzsche, ii. 140.

PLATO AS PROPHET FOLLOWS TRISMEGISTUS

By means of him [the Logos] as Demiurge, [*3] as Hermes says, He [God the Father] hath devised the beautiful and wondrous creation of the world. . . .

Finally Plato has spoken concerning the first and second God, not plainly as a philosopher, but as a prophet, perchance in this following Trismegistus, whose words I have added in translation from the Greek.

(Lactantius then translates verbally from the Greek text he has quoted in iv. 6, 4, omitting, however, the last clause and the parenthesis in the middle.)

Footnotes

^231:1 A pupil of Arnobius; flourished at the beginning of the fourth century.

^231:2 Brandt (S.), L. Caeli Firmiani Lactanti Opera Omnia,--Pars I., Divinae Institutiones et Epitome (Vienna, 1890). Pars II., to be edited by G. Laubmann, has not yet appeared. Fritzsche (O. F.), Div. Institt. (Leipzig, 1842), 2 vols.

^231:3 De Natura Deorum, iii. 22, 56.

^231:4 C. Aurelius Cotta, 124-76 (?) B.C.

^231:5 Cicero makes Cotta maintain the cause of this school both here and in the De Oratore.

^232:1 Argos, according to the many ancient myths concerning him, was all-seeing (panoptes), possessed of innumerable eyes, or, in one variant, of an eye at the top of his head. Like Hercules, he was of superhuman strength, and many similar exploits of his powers are recorded. In the Io-legends, Hera made Argos guardian of the cow into which the favourite of Zeus had been metamorphosed. Zeus accordingly sent Hermes to carry off his beloved. Hermes is said to have lulled Argos to sleep by means of his syrinx, or pipe of seven reeds, or by his caduceus, and then to have stoned him or cut off his head. See Reseller's Ausfuhr. Lex. d. griech. u. rom. Myth., s.v. "Argos." It is to be noticed that instead of Argum, four MSS. read argentum, which is curious as showing a Medieval Alchemical influence. See n. 4 to Ciceronis Opera Philosophica (Delph. et Var. Clas.), vol. ii. (London, 1830).

^232:2 Pheneatae,--Pheneus was a town in Arcadia, that country of ancient mysteries. (It is remarkable that Hermas is taken by the "Shepherd" in spirit to a mountain in Arcadia. See Shepherd of Hermas, Sim. ix. 1.) Cicero begins his description of the fifth Hermes with this statement, and Lactantius has thus awkwardly misplaced it. Pausanias (viii. 14, 6) tells us that Pheneus itself was considered as a very ancient city, and that its chief cult was that of Hermes. This cult of Hermes, moreover, was blended with an ancient mystery-tradition, for Pausanias (ibid., 15, 1) tells us that:

"The Pheneatians have also a sanctuary of Demeter sumamed Eleusinian, and they celebrate mysteries in her honour, alleging that rites identical with those performed at Eleusis were instituted in their land. . . . Beside the sanctuary of the Eleusinian goddess is what is called the Petroma, two great stones fitted to each other. Every second year, when they are celebrating what they call the Greater Mysteries, they open these stones, and taking out of them certain writings which bear on the mysteries, they read them in the hearing of the initiated, and put them back in their place that same night. I know, too, that on the weightiest matters most of the Pheneatians swear by the Petroma." Frazer's Translation, i. 393 (London, 1898).

^233:1 Cognitionem.

^233:2 Cf. P. S. A., xx. (p. 42, 16, Goldb.) et pass.; C. H., v. (vi.) 2.

^233:3 Compare with Epitome 4 below.

^233:4 Lactantius here quotes in Greek. Cf. P. S. A., xx. (p. 42, 27-43, 3, Goldb.).

^234:1 Was, however, this the spelling found in Cicero, for Firmianus takes it from the text of Tully? It is a pity we have no critical apparatus of the text of Lactantius, for the MSS. of Cicero present us with the following extraordinary list of variants: Then, Ten, Their, Thoyt, Theyt, Theyn, Thetum, Them, Thernum, Theutatem, Theut, Thoyth, Thoth. See n. 5 to the text of Cicero, cited above. Cf. R. 117, n. 2.

^234:2 Which he probably took from P. S. A., xxxvii. 4: "Whose home is in a place called after him."

^234:3 Chambers (p. 41, n. 1), in referring it to C. H., v. (vi.) 10, is mistaken.

^235:1 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 5; P. S. A., xxxvii. 1. Also Lact., Epit., 14. In my commentary on the first passage I have shown that Lactantius is probably here referring to a lost Hermetic treatise.

^235:2 Cf. Fragg. ap. Stob., Ecl., i. 5, 16, 20. It is to be noticed from the context that Lactantius places Trismegistus in a class apart together with the Sibylline Oracles and Prophets, and then proceeds to speak of the philosophers, Pythagoreans, Platonists, etc. He also repeats the same triple combination in iv. 6.

^235:3 Propinquare. L. glosses this as meaning "come close to and follow with the intelligence."

^235:4 Cf. Frag. ap. Cyril, C. I., i. (vol. vi., p. 31 C).

^236:1 Compare also Lact., Epit., 4.

^236:2 It is interesting to note, in the history of the text-tradition, that the received reading seme'nai ("be expressed") in Stobaeus stands in one MS. (A) symbeinai, which seems to be a transference from the original of L.'s propinquare.

^236:3 Limo,--slime or mud.

^236:4 Lact. repeats this in vii. 4. Cf. C. H., i. 12.

^236:5 Cf. C. H., v. (vi.) 6.

^237:1 Cf. also Hermes-Prayer, iii. 11. R. 21, n. 11.

^237:2 Date c. 494-434 B.C.

^237:3 See also Ex. vii. 3; C. H., ii. (iii.) 11.

^237:4 Cf. C. H., ix. (x.) 3; C. H., xvi. 10.

^238:1 daimoniarxen. This term is not found in the extant texts; "Diabolus" is, of course, not to be referred to Hermes, but to the disquisition of Lactantius at the beginning of 14.

^238:2 Cf. Cyril, C. J., iv. (vol. vi. 130 E, Aub.).

^238:3 For the same idea, see C. H., xii. (xiii.) 9.

^238:4 e gar eysebeia gnusis esti tou theou,--which Lactantius in another passage (v. 14) renders into Latin as "Pietas autem nihil aliud est quam dei notio,--is given in C. H., ix. (x.) 4 as: eysebeia de esti theou gnusis (where Parthey notes no various readings in MSS.).

^239:1 aggeloys ponerous,--these words do not occur in our extant Greek texts; but the Lat. trans, of P. S. A., xxv. 4, preserves "nocentes angeli."

^240:1 Sc. the Logos as Cosmos.

^240:2 Cf. Frag. x.

^240:3 For last clause, see C. H., i. 12. Cf. also Ps. Augustin., C. Quinque Haereses, vol. viii., Append, p. 3 E, Maur.

^240:4 Lactantius himself also gives a partial translation of this passage in his Epitome, 42 (Fritz., ii. 140).

^241:1 demioyrgon tou . The exact words do not occur in our extant texts, but the idea is a commonplace of the Trismegistic doctrine; see especially P. S. A., xxvi.: "The Demiurgus of the first and the one God," and Lact., ibid., vii. 18, 4: "God of first might, and Guider of the one God." See also C. H., i. 10, 11, xvi. 18; Cyril, C. Jul., i. 33 (Frag. xiii.), and vi. 6 (Frag. xxi.); and Exx. iii. 6, iv. 2. Cf. also Ep. 14 below.

^241:2 Cf. vii. 18 below.

^241:3 Sc. will (boulesis). Cf. especially P. S. A., Commentary.

^241:4 This is plainly from the same source as the following Fragment.

^241:5 Cf. C. H., i. 5; and Lact. and Cyril, passim (e.g. Fragg. xxi., xxii.).

^242:1 This passage and the preceding, then, are evidently taken from "The Sermons to Tat." Lactantius quotes in Greek, and again refers to the passage in iv. 9.

^242:2 aytopatora kai aytome'tora--not found in the extant texts; but for the idea see C. H., i. 9. See also iv. 13, and Ep. 4 below.

^242:3 Ibid., iv. 7.

^242:4 apatur et ame'tur. Cf. Lact., D. I., i. 7, 2 (Brandt).

^242:5 Terms not found in our extant texts; probably taken from the same source as the terms in iv. 8 above.

^243:1 Notio dei.

^243:2 Namely ii. 15, 6; q.v. for comment.

^243:3 That is, Hermes' son Tat.

^243:4 That is, Tat's father, Hermes.

^244:1 See above, ibid., ii. 10, 13, Comment.

^245:1 theoptian = theurian. See, for instance, C. H., xiv. (xv.) 1, and K. K., 1, 38, 51; also Frag. ap. Stob., Flar., xi. 23; and also compare C. H., iv. (v.) 2: "For contemplator (theate's) of God's works did man become." It is also of interest to note that Justin Martyr (Dial. c. Tryph., 218 c) enumerates the Theoretics or Contemplatives, among the most famous sects of Philosophers, naming them in the following order: Platonics, Stoics, Peripatetics, Theoretics, Pythagorics.

^245:2 Compare the "setting up betwixt" (en mesui . . . idrysen) with the "setting up" of the mind "in the midst" of C. H., iv. (v.) 3.

^246:1 Grenfell (B. P.) and Hunt (A. S.), New Sayings of Jesus, p. 13 (London, 1904).

^246:2 Cf. iv. 7 above.

^247:1 Cf. Frag. v.

^247:2 Lactantius quotes the original Greek of P. S. A., xxvi. 1 (p. 48, 24, Goldb.), so that we can thus once more remark the liberties which the Old Latin translation has taken with the text.

^247:3 Cf. Frag. ii.

^248:1 See i. 6 and iv. 8 above.

^248:2 The first clause is a verbatim translation of the text of the Stobaean Extract ii., while the second is a paraphrase even of L.'s own version from the Greek (see ii. 8 above). We learn, however, the new scrap of information that the quotation is from the beginning of the sermon.

^248:3 The reference to the "Demiurge" looks back to iv. 6, 9.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 249]

VIII.

AUGUSTINE

i. De Civitate Dei, xxiii.; Hoffmann (E.), i. 392 (Vienna, 1899-1900). [*1]

THREE QUOTATIONS FROM THE OLD LATIN VERSION OF THE "PERFECT SERMON"

AUGUSTINE is arguing against the views of Appuleius (first half of the second century) on the cult of the "daimones," and in so doing introduces a long disquisition on the doctrine of "Egyptian Hermes, whom they call Thrice-greatest," concerning image-worship, or the consecrated and "ensouled," or "animated," statues of the gods.

In the course of his remarks the Bishop of Hippo quotes at length from a current Latin version [*2] of "The Perfect Sermon" or "Asclepius" (though without himself giving any title), which we see at once must have been the very same text that has come down to us in its entirety. It is precisely the same text, word for word, with ours; the variants being practically of the most minute character.

[p. 250]

First of all Augustine quotes from P. S. A., xxiii. 3, xxiv. 2. This "prophecy" of the downfall of the Egyptian religion Augustine naturally takes as referring to the triumph of Christianity, and so he ridicules Hermes "[qui] tam impudenter dolebat, quam imprudentur sciebat."

ii. Ibid., xxiv.; Hoffmann, i. 396.

The Bishop of Hippo begins his next chapter with a quotation from P. S. A., xxxvii. 1, 2, on the same subject, and proceeds scornfully to criticise the statements of the Trismegistic writer.

iii. Ibid., xxvi.; Hoffmann, i. 402.

After quoting the sentence, from P. S. A., xxiv. 3, in which Hermes says that the pure temples of Egypt will all be polluted with tombs and corpses, Augustine proceeds to contend that the gods of Egypt are all dead men, and in support of his contention he quotes P. S. A., xxxvii. 3, 4.

Footnotes

^249:1 Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Latinorum, vol. xxx. (Imp. Acad. of Vienna). The date of the writing of the treatise, De Civitate Dei, is fixed as being about 413-426 A.D.

^249:2 Hujus Aegyptii verba, sicut in nostram linguam interpretata sunt.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 251]

IX.

CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA [*1]

i. Contra Julianum, i. 30; Migne, col. 548 A. [*2]

CYRIL'S CORPUS OF XV. BOOKS

(CYRIL, after claiming that Pythagoras and Plato obtained their wisdom in Egypt from what, he professes, they had heard of Moses there, proceeds:)

And I think the Egyptian Hermes also should be considered worthy of mention and recollection--he who, they say, bears the title of Thrice-greatest because of the honour paid him by his contemporaries, and, as some think, in comparison with Hermes the fabled son of Zeus and Maia.

This Hermes of Egypt, then, although an initiator into mysteries, [*3] and though he never ceased to cleave to the shrines of idols, is [nevertheless] found to have grasped the doctrines of Moses, if not with entire correctness, and beyond all cavil, yet still in part.

[p. 252]

For both [Hermes] himself has been benefitted [by Moses], and reminder of this [fact] has also been made in his own writings by [the editor] at Athens who put together the fifteen books entitled "Hermaica." [This editor] writes concerning him [Hermes] in the first book, putting the words into the mouth of one of the priests of the sacred rites:

"In order then that we may come to things of a like nature (?),--have you not heard that our Hermes divided the whole of Egypt into allotments and portions, measuring off the acres with the chain, [*1] and cut canals for irrigation purposes, and made nomes, [*2] and named the lands [comprised in them] after them, and established the interchange of contracts, and drew up a list of the risings of the stars, and [the proper times [*3]] to cut plants; and beyond all this he discovered and bequeathed to posterity numbers, and calculations, and geometry, and astronomy, and astrology, and music, and the whole of grammar?"

 

This Corpus of XV. Books is evidently the source of Cyril's information, and he takes the above quotation from the Introduction, which purported to be written by an Egyptian priest (as is also the case in the treatise De Mysteriis, traditionally ascribed to Jamblichus), but which Cyril says was written at Athens, by presumably some Greek editor. [*4]

[p. 253]

ii. Ibid., i. 31; Migne col. 549 B.

THE INCORPOREAL EYE 

Thrice-greatest Hermes says somewhat as follows:

(Cyril then quotes, with four slight verbal variants, the first four paragraphs of the passage excerpted by Stobaeus, Ex. ii., and then proceeds without a break:)

FRAGMENT XI.

If, then, there be an incorporeal eye, [*1] let it go forth from body unto the Vision of the Beautiful; let it fly up and soar aloft, seeking to see not form, nor body, nor [even] types [*2] [of things], but rather That which is the Maker of [all] these,--the Quiet and Serene, the Stable and the Changeless One, the Self, the All, the One, the Self of self, the Self in self, the Like to Self [alone], That which is neither like to other, nor [yet] unlike to self, and [yet] again Himself. [*3]

 

Though Cyril runs this passage on to the four paragraphs which in the Stobaean Extract are continued by three other paragraphs, I am quite persuaded that the Archbishop of Alexandria took the above from the same "Sermon to Tat" [*4] as the Anthologist. [*5]

[p. 254]

iii. Ibid., i. 33; Migne, col. 552 D.

THE HEAVENLY WORD PROCEEDING FORTH

And Thrice-greatest Hermes thus delivers himself concerning God:

FRAGMENT XII.

For that His Word (Logos) proceeding forth, [*1]--all-perfect as he was, and fecund, and creative in fecund Nature, falling on fecund [*2] Water, made Water pregnant. [*3]

THE PYRAMID 

And the same again [declares]:

FRAGMENT XIII.

The Pyramid, then, is below [both] Nature and the Intellectual World. [*4] For that it [*5] hath above it ruling it the Creator-Word [*6] of the Lord of all,--who, being the First Power after

[p. 255]

[paragraph continues] Him, [both] increate [and] infinite, leaned forth [*1] from Him, and has his seat above, and rule o'er all that have been made through him. He is the First-born of the All-perfection, His perfect, fecund and true Son. [*2]

THE NATURE OF GOD'S INTELLECTUAL WORD

And again the same [Hermes], when one of the Temple-folk [*3] in Egypt questions him and says:

FRAGMENT XIV.

But why, O most mighty Good Daimon, was he [*4] called by this name [*5] by the Lord of all?--replies:

Yea, have I told thee in what has gone before, but thou hast not perceived it.

The nature of His Intellectual Word (Logos) is a productive and creative Nature. This is as though it were His Power-of-giving-birth, [*6] or [His] Nature, or [His] Mode of being, or call it

[p. 256]

what you will,--only remembering this: that He is Perfect in the Perfect, and from the Perfect makes, and creates, and makes to live, perfect good things.

Since, then, He hath this nature, rightly is He thus named. [*1]

THE WORD OF THE CREATOR

And the same [Hermes], in the First Sermon of the "Expository [Sermons] to Tat," [*2] speaks thus about God:

FRAGMENT XV.

The Word (Logos) of the Creator, O [my] son, transcends all sight; He [is] self-moved; He cannot be increased, nor [yet] diminished; Alone is He, and like unto Himself [Alone], equal, identical, perfect in His stability, perfect in order; for that He is the One, after the God alone beyond all knowing.

 

The first two Fragments (xi. and xii.) seem to be taken from the same sermon, the contents of which resembled the first part of the "Shepherd of Men" treatise; it has all the appearance of a discourse addressed to Tat, and probably came in "The Expository Sermons."

[p. 257]

The third Fragment (xiii.) belongs to the more frankly Egyptian type, the Agathodaimon literature, in which Hermes, as the Good Spirit, figures as the teacher of the Mystery-god Osiris. [*1]

The last Fragment (xv.) is so similar in its phrasing to Fragment xi., already given by Cyril (i. 31), that I am strongly inclined to think the Archbishop took both from the same source. If so, we can reconstruct part of "The First Sermon of the Expository [Sermons] to Tat," the beginning of which (see Lact., Ep., 4) is also given by Stobaeus, Ex. ii., with the heading from "The [Book] to Tat," while he heads other extracts "From the [pl.] to Tat." [*2]

v. Ibid., ii. 35; Migne, col. 556 A. 

MIND OF MIND

And Hermes also says in the Third Sermon of those to Asclepius:

FRAGMENT XVI.

It is not possible such mysteries [as these] should be declared to those who are without initiation in the sacred rites. But ye, lend [me] your ears, [ears] of your mind!

There was One Intellectual Light alone,--nay, Light transcending Intellectual Light. He is for ever Mind of mind [*3] who makes [that] Light to shine.

[p. 258]

There was no other; [naught] save the Oneness of Himself [alone]. For ever in Himself [alone], for ever doth He compass all in His own Mind,--His Light and Spirit. [*1]

HE IS ALL 

And after some other things he says:

FRAGMENT XVII.

Without Him [*2] [is] neither god, nor angel, nor daimon, nor any other being. For He is Lord of all, [their] Father, and [their] God, and Source, and Life, and Power, and Light, and Mind, and Spirit. For all things are in Him and for His sake. [*3]

CONCERNING SPIRIT

And again, in the same Third Sermon of those to Asclepius, in reply to one who questions [him] concerning the Divine Spirit, the same [Hermes] says as follows:

FRAGMENT XVIII.

Had there not been some Purpose [*4] of the Lord of all, so that I should disclose this word

[p. 259]

[paragraph continues] (logos), ye would not have been filled with so great love [*1] to question me about it. Now give ye ear unto the rest of the discourse (logos).

Of this same Spirit, of which I have already spoken many times, all things have need; for that it raises up all things, each in its own degree, and makes them live, and gives them nourishment, and [finally] removes them from its holy source, [*2] aiding the spirit, [*3] and for ever giving life to all, the [one] productive One."

 

THE "TO ASCLEPIUS" OF CYRIL'S CORPUS

From the above statements of Cyril we learn that in addition to "The Expository Sermons to Tat," he had also before him a collection of "Sermons to Asclepius"; of these there were at least three. Was "The Perfect Sermon" one of this collection? It may have been; for the style of it is cast in the same mould as that of these Fragments in Cyril.

Hermes, in the Third Sermon of Cyril's collection, is addressing several hearers, for he uses the plural; so also in P. S. A., i. 2. Hermes addresses Asclepius, Tat, and Ammon.

In the Third Sermon, Hermes also says: "It is not possible such mysteries should be declared to those

[p. 260]

who are without initiation in the sacred rites"; in P. S. A., i. 2, Hermes declares: "It is a mark of an impious mind to publish to the knowledge of the crowd [*1] a tractate [*2] brimming o'er with the full grandeur of divinity." The numinis majestas (grandeur of divinity) is precisely the same idea as the Spirit, the "Divine supremacy and power," as Cyril says referring to Hermes.

Finally, in the Third Sermon, Hermes makes the striking remark that the Love (erus) of the Gnosis which urges on the disciples, is inspired by the Providence or Foresight of God--that is, by His Spirit; P. S. A., i. 28, ends with the words: "To them, sunk in fit silence reverently, their souls and minds pendent on Hermes' lips, thus Love (erus) Divine [*3] began to speak."

The setting of the mode of exposition is then identical in the two Sermons, and we may thus very well refer them to the same collection.

v. Ibid., ii. 52; Migne, col. 580 B.

FROM "THE MIND"

To this I will add what Thrice-greatest Hermes wrote "To his own Mind,"--for thus the Book is called.

(Cyril then quotes, with very slight verbal variants, the last question and answer in C. H., xi. (xii.) 22.)

 

In our Corpus the treatise is not written by Hermes to the Mind, but, on the contrary, it is cast in the mould of a revelation of "The Mind to Hermes," and is so

[p. 261]

entitled. Cyril thus seems to have been mistaken. [*1] It may, then, have been that in the copy which lay before the Church Father, the title read simply: "The Mind."

vi. Ibid., ii. 55; Migne, col. 586 D. [*2]

OSIRIS AND THRICE-GREATEST AGATHODAIMON

But I will call to mind the words of Hermes the Thrice-greatest; in "The Asclepius" [*3] he says:

FRAGMENT XIX.

Osiris said: How, then, O thou Thrice-greatest, [thou] Good Spirit, [*4] did Earth in its entirety appear?

The Great Good Spirit made reply:

By gradual drying up, as I have said; and when the many Waters got commandment . . . [*5] to go into themselves again, the Earth in its entirety appeared, muddy and shaking.

Then, when the Sun shone forth, and without ceasing burned and dried it up, the Earth stood compact in the Waters, with Water all around. [*6]

[p. 262]

"LET THERE BE EARTH"

Further, in yet another place [he writes]:

FRAGMENT XX.

The Maker and the Lord of all thus spake: Let there be Earth, and let the Firmament appear [*1]!

And forthwith the beginning of the [whole] creation, Earth, was brought into existence. [*2]

THE GENERATION OF THE SUN

So much about the Earth; as to the Sun, he again says as follows:

FRAGMENT XXI.

Then said Osiris: O thou Thrice-greatest, [thou] Good Spirit, whence came this mighty one?

Would'st thou, Osiris, that we tell to thee the generation of the Sun, whence he appeared?

He came from out the Foresight of the Lord of all; yea, the Sun's birth proceedeth from

[p. 263]

the Lord of all, through His Creative Holy Word. [*1]

"LET THE SUN BE!"

In like manner also in the "First Expository Sermon to Tat," he says:

FRAGMENT XXII.

Straightway the Lord of all spake unto His own Holy and Intelligible--to His Creative Word (Logos): Let the Sun be!

And straightway with His word (logos), the Fire that hath its nature tending upward, [*2]--I mean pure [Fire], that which gives greatest light, has the most energy, and fecundates the most,--Nature embraced [*3] with her own Spirit, and raised it up aloft out of the Water. [*4]

(After referring to Genesis i. 6: "And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters,"--Cyril proceeds:)

vii. Ibid., ii. 57; Migne, col. 588 C. 

THE FIRMAMENT 

Moreover the Hermes who is with them [*5] Thrice-

[p. 264]

greatest mentions this [that is, the firmament] again. For he describes God as saying to His creations:

FRAGMENT XXIII.

I will encompass you with this Necessity, you who are disobedient to me, [*1] which hath been laid on you as a Command through My own Word (Logos); for him ye have as Law.

 

This quotation also is probably taken from the same source as the previous passage--that is, from the "First Expository Sermon to Tat." The idea and setting, however, should also be compared with the parallel in the K. K. Excerpt (Stob., Phys., xli. 44; Gaisf., p. 408): "O Souls, Love and Necessity shall be your lords, they who are lords and marshals after me of all,"--where the "after me" (met' eme) might perhaps confirm the "up to me" in the preceding note as the more correct rendering.

viii. Ibid., ii. 64; Migne, col. 598 D.

FROM THE "TO ASCLEPIUS"

For Hermes, who is called Thrice-greatest, writes thus to Asclepius about the nature of the universe:

(Here follows with a few slight verbal variants the text of C. H., xiv. (xv.) 6, 7, beginning: "If, then, all things have been admitted to be two.")

[p. 265]

And some lines after he proceeds in warmer language, setting forth a striking argument, and says:

(Then follows  section section 8, 9 of the same sermon, except the third sentence, and  section 10 omitting the last sentence.) [*1]

 

The same treatise must have lain before Cyril as that contained in our Corpus in the form of a letter with the heading, "Unto Asclepius good health of soul!"--for the Archbishop says that Hermes "writes thus to Asclepius." [*2]

ix. Ibid., iv. 130; Migne, col. 702.

THE SOLE PROTECTION

(After quoting Porphyry as warning against participation in blood-rites for fear of contamination from evil daimons, Cyril proceeds:)

And their Thrice-greatest Hermes seems also to be of the same opinion; for he, too, writes as follows, in the [sermon] "To Asclepius," concerning those unholy daimons against whom we ought to protect ourselves, and flee from them with all the speed we can:

"The sole protection--and this we must have--is piety. For neither evil daimon, yea nor Fate, can ever overcome or dominate a man who pious is, and pure, and holy. For God doth save the truly pious man from every ill." [*3]

[p. 266]

x. Ibid., viii. 274; Migne, col. 920 D. 

THE SUPREME ARTIST

Moreover, their Thrice-greatest Hermes has said somewhere about God, the Supreme Artist [*1] of all things:

FRAGMENT XXIV.

Moreover, as perfectly wise He established Order and its opposite [*2]; in order that things intellectual, as being older and better, might have the government of things and the chief place, and that things sensible, as being second, might be subject to these.

Accordingly that which tends downward, and is heavier than the intellectual, has in itself the wise Creative Word (Logos). [*3]

xi. Ibid. (?).

AN UNREFERENCED QUOTATION

(Chambers (p. 154) gives the following, "Cyrill. Contra Julian., citing Hermes" but without any reference, and I can find it nowhere in the text:)

FRAGMENT XXV.

If thou understandest that One and Sole God, thou wilt find nothing impossible; for It is all virtue.

[p. 267]

Think not that It may be in some one; say not that it is out of some one.

It is without termination; it is the termination of all.

Nothing contains It; for It contains all in Itself.

What difference is there then between the body and the Incorporeal, the created and the Uncreated; that which is subject to necessity, and what is Free; between the things terrestrial and things Celestial, the things corruptible and things Eternal?

Is it not that the One exists freely and that the others are subject to necessity?

Footnotes

^251:1 The date of Cyril's patriarchate is 412-444 A.D.

^251:2 Migne (J. P.), Patrologiae Cursus Completus, Series Graeca, tom. lxxvi. (Paris, 1859). S. P. N. Cyrilli . . . Pro Christiana Religione adversus Julianum Imperatorem Libri Decem. The text is also given R. 211, n. 1.

^251:3 teleste's.

^252:1 "Acres," lit. = areas 100 Egyptian cubits square; and "chain," lit. = measuring cord.

^252:2 Or provinces; Migne's Latin translator gives this as "laws"!

^252:3 Sc. of the moon.

^252:4 y syntetheikus Athe'nesi,--a phrase which Chambers (p. 149) erroneously translates by "which he [Hermes] having composed for Athenians"! R. (p. 211, n. 1) thinks this redactor was some Neoplatonist.

^253:1 Sc. the soul.

^253:2 Sc. ideas.

^253:3 Masc., not neut., as are all the preceding "self's." There is also throughout a play on "self" and "same" which is unreproducible in English.

^253:4 That is, presumably, the "First Sermon of the Expository [Sermons] to Tat" (see Comment to the Stobaean Excerpt).

^253:5 See also Fragg. xii., xiii., xv., xx., xxii., xxiii., xxiv. (?).

^254:1 R. (p. 43) glosses this with "out of the month of God," but I see no necessity for introducing this symbolism.

^254:2 The adjective gonimos ("fecund") is applied to both Logos and Physis (Nature); it might thus be varied as seedful and fruitful, or spermal and productive. Cf. Frag. xiii. Text reproduced R. 43.

^254:3 Compare C. H., i. 8, 14, 15. This Fragment is also quoted, but plainly reproduced from Cyril, by Suidas (q.v.).

^254:4 That is, the Logos.

^254:5 Sc. the Pyramid, in physics the symbol of fire. See Frag. xxii.

^254:6 demioyrgon logon. Compare Lact., D. I., iv. 6, 9.

^255:1 prokupsasa--is, projected, presumably with the idea of emanation. Compare the hymn: "O Heavenly Word proceeding forth, Yet leaving not the Father's side." Compare the parekypsen of C. H., i. 14, and note.

^255:2 Compare C. H., i. 6, 9, 10; xiii. (xiv.) 3; xiv. (xv.) 3. For slightly revised text, see R. 243, n. 3. Reitzenstein thinks that the image which the writer had in his mind was the pyramid, or obelisk, with the sun-disk on the top.

^255:3 temenitun. The questioner was undoubtedly Osiris (see Frag. xix. below). Cyril then knows that "Osiris" was understood to stand for a grade of Egyptian priests. Cf. R. 131.

^255:4 Presumably the Logos.

^255:5 Presumably "Soul" (Psyche).

^255:6 genesis.

^256:1 This passage seems to refer to the identity of Soul and Logos. For revised text see R. 131, and the reference there to Plato, Cratylus, 400 B, where psyxe', soul, is explained by the word-play fysexe, that is, that which has physis, or nature, or the power of production.

^256:2 tun pros ton Tat diexodikun.

^257:1 See Frag. xix. below, where Cyril (ii. 56) says that this type was found in the "Sermon to Asclepius," that is, was put with the Asclepius-books in the collection which lay before him.

^257:2 See also Fragg. xi., xii., xiii., xx., xxii., xxiii., xxiv. (?).

^257:3 Cf. K. K., 16.

^258:1 That is, Light and Life. See C. H., i. 9: "God, the Mind, . . . being Life and Light."

^258:2 Lit. outside of Him.

^258:3 For a fuller statement of the idea in this paragraph, see C. H., ii. (iii.) 14. Cyril thinks that the above two Fragments refer to the Father, Son (Mind of mind and Light of light) and Holy Ghost (the Divine supremacy and power), and is thus the source of the statement in Suidas (s.v. "Hermes") that Trismegistus spoke concerning the Trinity.

^258:4 Or Providence, pronoia. R. (203, n. 2) refers this to a belief that only when some internal prompting gave permission to the master to expand the teaching, could he do so. Cf. Appul., Metam., xi. 21, 22; P. S. A., i.

^259:1 erus toioutos.

^259:2 That is, presumably, causing their seeming death.

^259:3 That is, the individual life-breath, unless the reading epikoyron pneumati is corrupt. The Latin translator in Migne goes hopelessly wrong, as, indeed, is frequently the case. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 13, Comment; P. S. A., vi. 4; Exx. iv. 2, xv. 2, xix. 3.

^260:1 That is, the uninitiated, the profanum vulgus.

^260:2 Tractatus; presumably logos in the original Greek.

^260:3 Cf. also P. S. A., xx. 2 and xxi. 1, 3.

^261:1 Cf. R. 128, n. 1.

^261:2 Texts of quotations reproduced in R. 127, n. 1.

^261:3 From the quotations we can see that this could not have been the special heading of the treatise from which Cyril quotes, and which plainly belongs to the Agathodaimon type. Cyril probably means that the treatise, in his collection, came under the general title, "The Asclepius."

^261:4 Agathos daimun.

^261:5 The reading is an untranslatable apo tou, where the lacuna is probably to be completed with "from the Lord of all."

^261:6 A distinction is evidently drawn between the (heavenly) Water and water (the companion element of earth). The text is immediately continued in Frag. xxi. below.

^262:1 See C. H., i. 18, Commentary.

^262:2 This seems to be taken not from a different place in the "To Asclepius," but from another sermon, or group of sermons, most probably from the "First Expository Sermon to Tat"--as may be seen by comparing its phrasing with Frag. xxii. See also Fragg. xi., xii, xiii., xv., xxii., xxiii., xxiv. (?).

^263:1 This is evidently an immediate continuation of Frag. xix. above. Cf. R. 126, n. 1, where the texts are reproduced.

^263:2 See Frag. xiii. below, concerning the pyramid.

^263:3 Embraced the Fire.

^263:4 Sc. the Water-Earth, one element, not yet separated, according to C. H., i. 5. For other probable quotations from this "First Expository Sermon to Tat," see Fragg. xi., xii., xiii., xv., xx., xxiii., xxiv. (?).

^263:5 Sc. the philosophers.

^264:1 tois ep' eme,--lit. "against me," or it may perhaps be "up to me." Migne's Latin translator gives "qui in mea potestatis estis," and Chambers (p. 153), "those from me"; neither of which can be correct.

^265:1 Cyril also twice omits the words "ignorance and jealousy" after "arrogance and impotence" in 8, and also the words "and yet the other things" in 9.

^265:2 Cf. Frag. iv., Comment.

^265:3 Cf. P. S. A., xxix. 1. A comparison of this with Frag. iv., quoted by Lactantius (ii. 15), and the Commentary thereon, shows clearly that Cyril has strengthened the original text by interpolations. Cyril's quotation (v. 176) from Julian, in which the Emperor refers to Hermes, is given under "Julian."

^266:1 aristotexnou,--an epithet applied by Pindar (Fr. 29) to Zeus.

^266:2 ataxian.

^266:3 This seems somewhat of a piece with the contents of the "First Expository Sermon to Tat." See Fragg. xi., xii., xiii., xv , xx., xxii., xxiii.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 268]

X.

 

SUIDAS [*1]

Lexicon, s.v. Ermeis o trismegistos; Im. Bekker (Berlin 1854).

HERMES SPEAKS OF THE TRINITY

Hermes the Thrice-greatest.--He was an Egyptian sage, and flourished before Pharaoh. He was called Thrice-greatest because he spoke of the Trinity, declaring that in the Trinity there is One Godhead, as follows:

"Before Intellectual Light was Light Intellectual; Mind of mind, too, was there eternally, Light-giving. There was naught else except the Oneness of this [Mind] and Spirit all-embracing.

"Without this is nor god, nor angel, nor any other being. For He is Lord and Father, and the God of all; and all things are beneath Him, [all things are] in Him. [*2]

(The source of Suidas, or of his editor, is manifestly

[p. 269]

[paragraph continues] Cyril, C. J., i. 35 (Fragg. xvi., xvii.), of which a very garbled edition is reproduced. The same statement and passage is also quoted by Cedrenus, John Malalas, and the author of the Chronicum Alexandrinum. See Bernhardy's edition of Suidas (Halle, 1853), i. 527, notes.) Suidas then continues without a break:)

"His Word (Logos), all-perfect as he was, and fecund, and creative, falling in fecund Nature, yea in fecund Water, made Water pregnant." [*1]

After saying this he has the following prayer:

AN ORPHIC HYMN

"Thee, Heaven, I adjure, wise work of mighty God; thee I adjure, Word [*2] of the Father which He spake first, when He established all the world!

"Thee I adjure, [O Heaven], by the alone-begotten Word (Logos) himself, and by the Father of the Word alone-begotten, yea, by the Father who surroundeth all,--be gracious, be gracious!"

 

This is not a prayer from Hermes, but three verses (the last somewhat altered) of an Orphic hymn excerpted from Cyril, ibid., i. 33 (Migne, col. 552 C),--lines also attributed to "Orpheus" by Justin Martyr. The last half of the prayer seems to be a pure invention of Suidas, or of his editor, based partially on Cyril's comments.

Footnotes

^268:1 Date uncertain; some indications point to as late as the twelfth century; if these, however, are due to later redaction, others point to the tenth century.

^268:2 He is above them as Lord and Father, as Mind and Light; and they are in Him as Lady and Mother, as Spirit and Life.

^269:1 This is again, and this time almost verbally, taken from Cyril ibid., i. 33; Frag. xii.

^269:2 fune'n.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 270]

XI.

 

ANONYMOUS

AND here we may conveniently append a reference to the Dialogue of an ancient Christian writer on astrology--a blend of Platonism, Astrology, and Christianity--entitled Hermippus de Astrologia Dialogus, [*1] from the name of the chief speaker.

This writer was undoubtedly acquainted with our Corpus, for he quotes (p. 9. 3) from C. H., i. 5; (p. 21, 5) from C. H., x. (xi.) 12; (p. 70, 17) from C. H., x. (xi.) 6; in a general fashion (p. 24, 25) from C. H., xvi.; and phrases (p. 12, 21 and p. 14, 13) from C. H., xviii.

Footnotes

^270:1 Kroll (G.) and Viereck (P.), Anonymi Christiani de Astrologia Dialogus (Leipzig, 1895). Cf. R. p. 210.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 271]

III

References and Fragments in the Philosophers

[p. 272]

[p. 273]

I.

 

ZOSIMUS

ON THE ANTHROPOS-DOCTRINE

(ZOSIMUS flourished somewhere at the end of the third and beginning of the fourth century A.D. He was a member of what Reitzenstein (p. 9) calls the Poimandres-Gemeinde, and, in writing to a certain Theosebeia, a fellow-believer in the Wisdom-tradition, though not as yet initiated into its spiritual mysteries, he urges her to hasten to Poimandres and baptize herself in the Cup. [*1] The following quotation is of first importance for the understanding of the Anthropos-Doctrine or Myth of Man in the Mysteries.

In one of the Books of his great work distinguished by the letter Omega, and dedicated to Oceanus as the "Genesis and Seed of all the Gods,"--speaking of the uninitiated, those still beneath the sway of the Heimarmene or Fate, who cannot understand his revelations,--he writes [*2]:)

THE PROCESSIONS OF FATE.

1. Such men [our] Hermes, in his "Concerning Nature," hath called mind-less,--naught but "processions" [*3] of

[p. 274]

[paragraph continues] Fate,--in that they have no notion [*1] of aught of things incorporal, or even of Fate herself who justly leads them, but they blaspheme her corporal schoolings, and have no notion of aught else but of her favours.

"THE INNER DOOR"

2. But Hermes and Zoroaster have said the Race of Wisdom-lovers is superior to Fate, by their neither rejoicing in her favours,--for they have mastered pleasures,--not by their being struck down by her ills,--for ever living at the "Inner Door," [*2] and not receiving [*3] from her her fair gift, in that they look unto the termination of [her] ills. [*4]

3. On which account, too, Hesiod doth introduce Prometheus counselling Epimetheus, and doth tell him [*5] not to take the Gift [*6] from Zeus who rules Olympus, but send it back again,--[thus] teaching his own brother through philosophy [*7] to return the Gifts of Zeus,--that is, of Fate.

4. But Zoroaster, boasting in knowledge of all things Above, and in the magic of embodied speech, [*8]

[p. 275]

professes that all ills of Fate,--both special [ills] and general [ones],--are [thus] averted.

AGAINST MAGIC

5. Hermes, however, in his "About the Inner Door," doth deprecate [this] magic even, declaring that:

The spiritual man, [the man] who knows himself, [*1] should not accomplish any thing by means of magic, e'en though he think it a good thing, nor should he force Necessity, but suffer [her to take her course], according to her nature and decree [*2]; [he should] progress by seeking only, through the knowledge of himself and God, to gain the Trinity [*3] that none can name, and let Fate do whate'er she will to her own clay--that is, the body.

FRAGMENT XXVI.

6. And being so minded (he says), and so ordering his life, he shall behold the Son of God becoming all things for holy souls, that he may draw her [*4] forth from out the region of the Fate into the Incorporeal [Man].

7. For having power in all, He becometh all things, whatsoever He will, [*5] and, in obedience to the Father['s nod], through the whole Body doth He penetrate, and, pouring forth His Light into the mind of every [soul], He starts it [*6]

[p. 276]

back unto the Blessed Region, [*1] where it was before it had become corporal,--following after Him, yearning and led by Him unto the Light.

THOTH THE FIRST MAN

8. And [there] shall it see the Picture [*2] that both Bitos hath described, and thrice-great Plato, and ten-thousand-times-great Hermes, for Thoythos translated [*3] it into the first sacred [*4] tongue,--Thoth the First Man, the Interpreter of all things which exist, and the Name-maker [*5] for all embodied things. [*6]

 

[p. 277]

THE LIBRARIES OF THE PTOLEMIES

9. The Chaldaeans and Parthians and Medes and Hebrews call Him [*1] Adam, which is by interpretation virgin Earth, and blood-red [*2] Earth, and fiery [*3] Earth, and fleshly Earth.

10. And these indications were found in the book-collections [*4] of the Ptolemies, which they stored away in every temple, and especially in the Serapeum, when they invited Asenas, the chief priest of Jerusalem, to send a "Hermes," [*5] who translated the whole of the Hebrew into Greek and Egyptian. [*6]

11. So the First Man is called by us Thoyth and by them Adam,--not giving His [true] name in the Language of the Angels, but naming Him symbolically according to His Body by the four elements [or letters] out of His whole Sphere, [*7] whereas his Inner Man, the

[p. 278]

spiritual, has [also] both an authentic name and one for common use. [*1]

NIKOTHEOS

12. His authentic [name], however, I know not, owing to the so long [lapse of time [*2]]; for Nikotheos [*3] who-is-not-to-be-found alone doth know these things.

[p. 279]

But that for common use is Man (Phos), [*1] from which it follows that men are called photas.

FROM THE BOOK OF THE CHALDAeANS

13. [*2] "When Light-Man (Phos) was in Paradise, exspiring [*3] under the [presence of] Fate, they [*4] persuaded Him to clothe himself in the Adam they had made, the [Adam] of Fate, him of the four elements,--as though [they said] being free from [her [*5]] ills and free from their [*6] activities.

"And He, on account of this 'freedom from ills' did

[p. 280]

not refuse; but they boasted as though He had been brought into servitude [to them]." [*1]

14. For Hesiod said that the outer man was the "bond" [*2] by which Zeus bound Prometheus.

Subsequently, in addition to this bond, he sends him another, Pandora, [*3] whom the Hebrews call Eve.

For Prometheus and Epimetheus [*4] are one Man, according to the system of allegory,--that is, Soul and Body.

MAN THE MIND

And at one time He [*5] bears the likeness of soul, at another of mind, at another of flesh, owing to the imperfect attention which Epimetheus paid to the counsel of Prometheus, his own mind. [*6]

15. For our Mind [*7] saith:

FRAGMENT XXVII.

For that the Son of God having power in all things, becoming all things that he willeth, appeareth as he willeth to each. [*8]

[p. 281]

16. Yea, unto the consummation of the cosmos will He come secretly,--nay, openly associating with His own,--counselling them secretly, yea through their minds, to settle their account with their Adam, the blind accuser, [*1] in rivalry with the spiritual man of light. [*2]

THE COUNTERFEIT DAIMON

17. And these things come to pass until the Counterfeit Daimon [*3] come, in rivalry with themselves, and wishing to lead them into error, declaring that he is Son of God, being formless in both soul and body.

But they, becoming wiser from contemplation of

[p. 282]

[paragraph continues] Him who is truly Son of God, give unto him [*1] his own Adam for death, [*2] rescuing their own light spirits for [return to] their own regions where they were even before the cosmos [existed]. [*3] . . .

18. And [it is] the Hebrews alone and the Sacred Books of Hermes [which tell us] these things about the man of light and his Guide the Son of God, and about the earthy Adam and his Guide, the Counterfeit, who doth blasphemously call himself Son of God, for leading men astray. [*4]

19. But the Greeks call the earthy Adam Epimetheus, who is counselled by his own mind, that is, his brother, not to receive the gifts of Zeus. Nevertheless being both deceived [*5] and repenting, [*6] and seeking the Blessed Land. . . . [*7]

But Prometheus, that is the mind, interprets all things and gives good counsel in all things to them who have understanding and hearing. But they who have only fleshly hearing are "processions of Fate."

[p. 283]

HIS ADVICE TO THEOSEBEIA

To the foregoing we may append a version of Zosimus' advice [*1] to the lady Theosebeia, to which we have already referred, as offering an instructive counterpart to C. H., xiii. (xiv.). After a sally against the "false prophets," through whom the daimones energize, not only requiring their offerings but also ruining their souls, Zosimus continues:

"But be not thou, O lady, [thus] distracted, as, too, I bade thee in the actualizing [rites], and do not turn thyself about this way and that in seeking after God; but in thy house be still, and God shall come to thee, He who is everywhere and not in some wee spot as are daimonian things.

"And having stilled thyself in body, still thou thyself in passions too--desire, [and] pleasure, rage [and] grief, and the twelve fates [*2] of Death.

"And thus set straight and upright, call thou unto thyself Divinity; and truly shall He come, He who is everywhere and [yet] nowhere.

"And [then], without invoking them, perform the sacred rites unto the daimones,--not such as offer things to them and soothe and nourish them, but such as turn them from thee and destroy their power, which Mambres [*3] taught to Solomon, King of Jerusalem, and all that Solomon himself wrote down from his own wisdom.

"And if thou shalt effectively perform these rites,

[p. 284]

thou shalt obtain the physical conditions of pure birth. And so continue till thou perfect thy soul completely.

"And when thou knowest surely that thou art perfected in thyself, then spurn . . . from thee [*1] the natural things of matter, and make for harbour in Poemandres' [*2] arms, and having dowsed thyself within His Cup, [*3] return again unto thy own [true] race." [*4]

This was how Zosimus understood the teaching of the Trismegistic tradition, for he had experienced it.

Footnotes

^273:1 Op. sub. cit., p. 245.

^273:2 Berthelot, Les Alchimistes grecs, pp. 229 ff. For a revised text, see R. pp. 102-106.

^273:3 pompas,--processions, shows, or pageants. Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 7: "Just as processions pass by in the middle of the way without being able to do anything but take the road from others, so do such men move in procession through the world led by their bodies' pleasures."

^274:1 Or "in that they display naught"--fantazomenoys.

^274:2 Codd. enaylia. R. reads en enayliai, which is supported by the title of the Trismegistic treatise mentioned in the next paragraph but one. I feel almost tempted to propose to read en auliai--(fr. aulos--"immaterial," the being in a state free from yle or "matter"), and so to translate it "for ever living in the immaterial."

^274:3 Codd. katadexomenoi. R. reads katadexesthai. I suggest katadexomenoys.

^274:4 Codd. kakun, which I prefer to R.'s kakon.

^274:5 Op. et. Dies, 86.

^274:6 Sc. Pandora; cf.  section section 14 and 19 below.

^274:7 Or wisdom-loving.

^274:8 Presumably what the Vaidic theurgist would call mantravidya.

^275:1 Cf. C. H., i. 21.

^275:2 Or decision or judgment.

^275:3 triada.

^275:4 Sc. the soul.

^275:5 Cf.  section 15 below. Zosimus is apparently condensing from the original.

^275:6 Sc. the soul or mind.

^276:1 Cf. S.,  section 9 in the Naassene Document.

^276:2 pinaka--or tablet.

^276:3 Lit. translates.

^276:4 Priestly or hieratic. With this compare Syncellus' (Chron., xl.) quotation, from Manetho's Sothis, which declares that the first monuments recording the wisdom-mystery of most ancient Egypt "were engraved in the sacred language by Thoth, the first Hermes; after the Flood they were translated from the sacred language into the common tongue." Cf. vol. i., ch. v., on "Hermes according to Manetho."

^276:5 onomatopoios,--referring specially to the making of names or words corresponding to natural cries and sounds. Compare the Adam of Genesis.

^276:6 Cf. Plato, Philebus, 18 B: "Some god, or rather some godlike man, who in Egypt their tradition says was Theuth, observing that sound was infinite, first distinguished in this infinity a certain number of pure sounds [or vowels], and then other letters [or sound elements] which have sound, but are not pure sounds [the semi-vowels]; these two exist [each] in a definite number; and lastly he distinguished a third class of letters, which we now call mutes; and divided these, and likewise the two other classes of vowels and semi-vowels, into their individual elements, and told the number of them, and gave to each and all of them the names of letters." (Cf. Jowett's Trans., 3rd ed., iv. 583, 584.)

According to the number-system of the Gnostic Marcus, there are: seven vowels, eight semi-vowels, and nine mutes (F. F. F., p. 368). It is also of interest to notice that these elements of sound are applied to what Marcus calls the "Configuration of the Element"--? Sound--(to sxeima tou stoixeioy); they constitute the Glyph (or Character, or Impression, or Expression) of the Figure (or Diagram) of the Man of Truth. In the phrase "Glyph of the Figure" (o xarakter tou grammatos), the word gramma means either (i) a letter of the alphabet, or (ii) a note of music, or (iii) a mathematical figure or diagram (ibid., p. 367). Is there then any connection between the Pinax of Bitos and the Diagram of the Ophites referred to by Celsus?

^277:1 Sc. the First Man.

^277:2 Or of the nature of blood.

^277:3 Codd. pyra--? pyria.

^277:4 Or libraries.

^277:5 That is, a learned priest or scribe.

^277:6 Much translation of this kind was done at that period. Compare the Arabic translation of a "Book of Ostanes" (Berthelot, La Chimie au Moyen Age, iii. 121), in which an old inscription on an Egyptian stele is quoted: "Have you not heard the story that a certain philosopher [i.e. Egyptian priest] wrote to the Magi in Persia, saying: 'I have found a copy of a book of the ancient sages; but as the book is written in Persian, I cannot read it. Send me then one of your wise men who can read for me the book I have found'?" R. 363.

^277:7 Presumably referring to the whole Body of the Heavenly Man, to whose Limbs all the letters were assigned by Marcus.

^278:1 prosegorikon,--this signifies generally the proenomen as opposed to the nomen proper.

^278:2 dia to teus,--lit. "because of the so long"; otherwise I cannot translate the phrase. This would, then, presumably refer to the length of time since the physical tradition of the ancient Thoyth initiates had disappeared; or the length of time the soul of Zosimus had been revolving in Genesis.

^278:3 Lit. God-victor,--symbolizing the victory of the Inner God, or of a man who had raised himself to the status of a god. For Nikotheos, see the Gnostic "Untitled Apocalypse" of the Codex Brucianus (C. Schmidt, Gnos. Schrift. in kop. Sprach. aus d. C. B., p. 285), p. 12a: "Nikotheos hath spoken of Him [namely, the Alone-begotten,--see ibid., p. 601], and seen Him; for he is one [sc. of those who have seen Him face to face]. He [N.] said: 'The Father exists exalted above all the perfect.' He [N.] hath revealed the Invisible and the perfect Triple-power."

In the Life of Plotinus, by Porphyry (c. xiv.), among the list of "Gnostics" against whose views on Matter the great coryphaeus of Later Platonism wrote one of the books of his Enneads (II. ix.), there is mention of Nikotheos in close connection with Zoroaster and others (S. 603 ff.). If we now turn to Schmidt's Plotins Stellung zum Gnosticismus und kirchlichen Christentum (Leipzig, 1900), in which he has examined at length the matter of the treatise of Plotinus and the passage of Porphyry, we find him returning to the consideration of Nikotheos (pp. 58 ff.). Schmidt (p. 61) takes the "hidden Nikotheos" for a "heavenly being," indeed as identical with the Alone-begotten, and as, therefore, the revealer of Himself. This Alone-begotten is the "Light-Darkness" of p. 13a of the "Untitled Apocalypse" of C. B. In other words, Nikotheos seems to be a synonym of the Triumphant Christos. See R. Liechtenhan, Die Offenbarung in Gnosticismus (Gottingen, 1901), p. 31. So far for the inner meaning; but is there possibly an outer one? As there was an apocalypse, for the words of Nikotheos are quoted, there was a seer, a prophet, a Christos, who had seen and handed on. It is somewhat remarkable that one of the by-names given to Jesus (Jeschu) by Rabbinical theological controversy was Balaam (Bileam), meaning "Destroyer of the people." Is there, then, any connection between Niko-theos on the one hand and Niko-laos (the Greek equivalent of Balaam) on the other? There are, at any rate, many other parallels in the Talmud Jeschu-Stories of names of dishonour on the Rabbinical side equating with names of exalted honour on the Gnostic and Christian side. If so--dare we ask the question?--have we in the logos of Nikotheos a fragment from an "Apocalypse of Jesus"?

Nay, may not Balaam-Niko-laos,--to take a lesson from the mystic word-play of the time,--"allegorically" have symbolized on the one hand the "victory of the many" (laos), and on the other the "Victor of the many," for "people" in Philo signifies the "many" as opposed to the "one'' "race" (genos) which sums up all His "limbs" in the Christ?

^279:1 fus,--according to the accenting of R., but fus would mean "Light."

^279:2 This is evidently a quotation.

^279:3 Reading diapneomenos with the Codd., and not diapneomenui with R. This means "exhaling his light." In the Egypto-Gnostic tradition underlying the Pistis Sophia, it is the function of the Rulers of the Fate to "squeeze out" the light from the souls and to devour it, or absorb it into themselves.

^279:4 The Rulers of the Fate.

^279:5 Sc. Fate's.

^279:6 Sc. the Seven Rulers or Energies of the Fate-sphere,--anenergeton.

^280:1 This is evidently a quotation from a Greek translation of one of the Books of the Chaldaeans ( section section 9, 10) in the Serapeum. It seems to me to be a "source" on which both the Hebrew and non-Hebrew Hellenists commentated in Alexandria. Thus both the commentator in S. and J. in the Naassene Document and the Poemandrists of the period would use it in common.

^280:2 Theog., 614.

^280:3 Cf.  section section 3 and 19.

^280:4 That is, Fore-thought and After-thought.

^280:5 Sc. Man.

^280:6 I am almost persuaded that  section 14 is also a quotation or summary and not the simple exegesis of Zosimus; the original being from the pen of some non-Hebrew Hellenistic allegorizer.

^280:7 That is, Poemandres, the Shepherd of men.

^280:8 Cf.  section 7 above; evidently a quotation from the "Inner Door." Compare also the logos quoted by S. ( section 8) in the Naassene Document from some Hellenistic scripture: "I become what I will, and am what I am." Do Hermes and S. then both depend on the same scripture, in the form of an apocalypse; that is, does Hermes in his "expository sermon" depend on the direct teaching of the Mind to himself, which would be instruction in the first person?

^281:1 tyflegorountos. The lexicons do not contain the word. It is probably a play on kategorountos. Cf. note on "blind from birth" of C. in the Conclusion of Hippolytus in "Myth of Man" (vol. i. p. 189).

^281:2 That is, presumably, though in one aspect only, the soul that sees in the Light as opposed to the blind body. This passage reflects the same thought-atmosphere as that which surrounds the saying underlying Matt. v. 25 (= Lk. xii. 57-59): "Agree with thine adversary quickly whiles thou art in the way with him, lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. Amen, I say unto thee, thou shalt not come forth thence till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing." The third Evangelist, instead of the vague "agree," preserves the technical terms apellaxthai, used of the discharge of a debt (cf. the technical katallagen exein of our text), and praktur, an officer charged with the collection of taxes and debts. This Saying was interpreted by the Gnostics as having reference to the reincarnation of the soul into another body in order to discharge its karmic debts.

^281:3 o antimimos daimun. The term "counterfeit spirit" (antimimon pneuma) occurs frequently in the Pistis Sophia.

^282:1 The Counterfeit Daimon.

^282:2 Or execution.

^282:3 The two last paragraphs are apparently also quoted or summarized from a Hellenistic commentary on a Book of the Hebrews, translated into Greek, and found in the libraries of the Ptolemies. It is remarkable that the contents of this book are precisely similar not only to the contents of the Books from which J. quotes in the Naassene Document, but also to the ideas about the Chaldaeans which the commentator of S. sets forth.

^282:4 If we can rely on this statement of Zosimus, this proves that there was a developed Anthropos-doctrine also in the Trismegistic Books, as apart from the Chaldaean Books,--that is, that the Poemandrists did not take it from the Chaldaean Books, but had it from their own immediate line of tradition, namely, the Egyptian.

^282:5 Cf. 13 above.

^282:6 Lit. changing his mind.

^282:7 A lacuna occurs in the text. We could almost persuade ourselves that Zosimus had the text of S. and even the source of J. before him. For "Blessed Land," cf.  section 7 above.

^283:1 Berth., p. 244; for a revised text see R. 214, n. 1.

^283:2 The twelve tormenting or avenging daimones of C. H., xiii. (xiv.).

^283:3 The famous Egyptian Theurgist and Magician who is fabled to have contended with Moses; while others say he was the instructor of Moses.

^284:1 The soul having now found itself wings and become the winged globe.

^284:2 epi ton Poimenandra (sic).

^284:3 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 4.

^284:4 Cf. C. H., i. 26, 29.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 285]

II.

 

JAMBLICHUS

ABAMMON THE TEACHER

THE evidence of Jamblichus [*1] is of prime importance seeing that it was he who put the Later Platonic School, previously led by the purely philosophical Ammonius, Plotinus and Porphyry, into conscious touch with those centres of Gnosis into which he had been initiated, and instructed it especially in the Wisdom of Egypt in his remarkable treatise generally known by the title On the Mysteries. The authorship of this treatise is usually disputed; but as Proclus, who was in the direct tradition, attributes it to Jamblichus, the probabilities are in favour of its authenticity.

Jamblichus writes with the authority of an accredited exponent of the Egyptian Wisdom as taught in these mysteries, and under the name of "Abammon, the Teacher," proceeds to resolve the doubts and difficulties of the School with regard to the principles of the

[p. 286]

sacred science as formulated by Porphyry. Jamblichus begins his task with these significant words [*1]:

HERMES THE INSPIRER

"Hermes, the God who is our guide in [sacred] sermons, was rightly held of old as common to all priests. And seeing that it is he who has in charge the real science about the Gods, he is the same in all [our sacred sermons]. [*2] And so it was to him that our ancestors attributed all the discoveries of their wisdom, attaching the name of Hermes to all the writings which had to do with such subjects. [*3] And if we also enjoy that share of this God which has fallen to our lot, according to our ability [to receive him], thou dost well in submitting certain questions on theology to us priests, as thy friends, for their solution. And as I may fairly suppose that the letter sent to my disciple Anebo was written to myself, I will send thee the true answers to the questions thou hast asked. For it would not be proper that Pythagoras and Plato, and Democritus and Eudoxus, and many others of the ancient Greeks, [*4] should have obtained fitting instruction

[p. 287]

from the recorders of the sacred science of their times, and that thou, our contemporary, who art of a like mind with these ancients, should lack guidance from the now living bearers of the title 'Common Teachers.'" [*1]

From the above important passage we learn that among the Egyptians the books which dealt technically with the science of sacred things, and especially with the science of the Gods, that is to say, with the nature of the hierarchy from man upwards to the Supreme Ruler of our system, were regarded as "inspired." The Ray of the Spiritual Sun which illumined the sacred science was distinguished as a Person, and this Person, because of a partial similarity of attributes, the Greeks had long identified with their God Hermes. He was "common" to the priests of the sacred science, that is to say, it was this special Ray of the Spiritual Sun which illumined their studies. Not, however, that all were equally illumined, for there were many grades in the mysteries, many steps up the holy ascent to union

[p. 288]

with Deity. Now the Rays of the Spiritual Sun are really One Light, "polarised" variously by the "spheres" of which we have heard so much in the Trismegistic treatises. These Rays come forth from the Logos, and each illuminates a certain division of the whole hierarchy of beings from the Logos to man, and characterises further the lower kingdoms, animals and plants, and minerals. Hence, for instance, among animals, we get the ibis, the ape and the dog as being especially sacred to Thoth or Hermes.

THOSE OF THE HERMAIC NATURE

Among men generally, also, there are certain whose characteristics are of a "Hermaic" [*1] nature; the more evolved of these are adapted to certain lines of study and research, while again among those few of these who are beginning to be really conscious of the science of sacred things, that is to say, among the initiated students or priests, the direct influence of this Ray or Person begins to be consciously felt, by each, as Jamblichus says, according to his ability, for there are still many grades.

Now the peculiar unanimity that prevailed in these strictly hierarchical schools of initiation, and the grand doctrine of identification that ran throughout the whole economy--whereby the pupil became identified with the master when he received his next grade of initiation, and whereby his master was to him the living symbol of all that was above that master, that is to say, was Hermes for him, in that he was the messenger to him of the Word, and was the channel whereby the divine inspiration came to him--rendered the ascription to

[p. 289]

[paragraph continues] Hermes of all the sacred scriptures, such as the sermons of initiation, a very natural proceeding. It was not the case of a modern novel-writer taking out a copyright for his own precious productions, but simply of the recorder, scribe or copyist of the sacred science handing on the tradition. As long as this was confined to the disciplined schools of the sacred science it was without danger, but when irresponsible people began to copy a method, to whose discipline they refused to submit, for purposes of edification, and so appended the names of great teachers to their own lucubrations, they paved the way for that chaos of confusion in which we are at present stumbling.

THE BOOKS OF HERMES

Towards the end of his treatise Jamblichus, in treating of the question of the innumerable hierarchies of being and their sub-hierarchies, says that these are so multiplex that they had to be treated by the ancient priests from various aspects, and even among those who were "wise in great things" in his own time the teaching was not one and the same.

"The main states of being were completely set forth by Hermes (in the twenty thousand books, as Seleucus [*1] writes, or in the thirty-six thousand five hundred and twenty-five as Manetho relates), while the sub-states are interpreted in many other writings by the ancients, some of them sub-dividing [*2] some of the sub-states and others others." [*3]

At first sight it would seem that we are not to suppose

[p. 290]

that it took 20,000 volumes to set forth the main outlines of the cosmic system. Jamblichus would seem to mean that in the library or libraries of the books treating of the sacred science, the general scheme of the cosmos was set forth, and that the details were filled in very variously by many writers, each according to the small portion of the whole he had studied or speculated on. As to the number of books again we should not be dismayed, when we reflect that a book did not mean a large roll or volume but a division or chapter of such a roll. Thus we read of a single man composing no less than 6000 "books"!

But on further reflection this view does not seem satisfactory. The ghost of the very precise number 36,525, which Jamblichus substitutes from Manetho for the vague total 20,000 of Seleucus, refuses to be laid by such a weak-kneed process.

We see at once that 365*25 days is a very close approximation to the length of the solar year. We know further that 36,525 years was the sum of 25 Sothiac cycles (1461 * 25 = 36,525), [*1] that most sacred time-period of the Egyptian secret astronomy, which was assigned to the revolution of the zodiac or the Great Year. Now supposing after all that Jamblichus does mean that Hermes actually did write the scheme of the cosmos in 36,525 "books" or "chapters"; and supposing further that these "chapters" were not written on papyrus, but in the heavens; and supposing still further that these "chapters" were simply so many great aspects of the real sun, just as the 365*25 days were but aspects of the physical sun--in such case the above favourite passage, which every previous writer has referred to actual books superscribed with the

[p. 291]

name of Hermes, and has dragged into every treatise on the Hermetic writings, will in future have to be removed from the list, and one of the functions of the real Hermes, the Initiator and Recorder, will become apparent to those who are "wise in greater things."

THE MONAD FROM THE ONE

In the next chapter, after first speaking of the God over all, Jamblichus refers to the Logos, the God of our system, whom he calls "God of gods, the Monad from the One, prior to being and the source of being." And then continues:

"For from Him cometh the essence of being and being; wherefore is He called Father of being. For He is prior to being, the source of spiritual existences; wherefore also is He called Source of spiritual things. These latter are the most ancient sources of all things, and Hermes places them before the aethereal and empyrean and celestial gods, bequeathing to us a hundred books on the history of the empyrean, and a like number on that of the aethereal, but a thousand of them concerning the celestial." [*1]

I am inclined to think that there is a mistake in the numbers of these books, and that we should have 10 assigned to the first class, 100 to the second, and 1000 to the third. In any case we see that all are multiples of the perfect number 10; and that thus my theory is still supported by the further information that Jamblichus gives us.

THE TRADITION OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE

We next come to a passage which deals directly with our Trismegistic literature. Jamblichus tells Porphyry that with the explanations he has already 

[p. 292]

given him, he will be able to find his way in the Hermetic writings which have come into his hands.

"For the books in circulation bearing the name of Hermes contain Hermaic doctrines, although they often use the language of the philosophers, seeing that they were translated from the Egyptian by men well skilled in philosophy." [*1]

The information given by Jamblichus is precise; they were translations, but instead of a literal rendering, the translators used the usual phraseology of the Greek philosophical writers.

Jamblichus then goes on to say that physical astronomy and physical research generally were but a very small part of the Hermaic science, by no means the most important.

For "the Egyptians deny that physics are everything; on the contrary they distinguish both the life of the soul and the life of the mind from nature, [*2] not only in the case of the cosmos but also in man. They first posit Mind and Reason (Logos) as having a being peculiar to themselves, and then they tell us that the world of becoming [or generation] is created. As Forefather of all beings in generation they place the Creator, and are acquainted with the Life-giving Power which is prior to the celestial spaces and permeates them. Above the universe they place Pure Mind; this for the universe as a whole is one and undivided, but it is variously manifested in the several spheres. [*3] And they do not speculate about these things with the unassisted reason, but they announce that by the divine art of their priestly science [*4] they reach higher and more

[p. 293]

universal states [of consciousness] above the [Seven Spheres of] Destiny, ascending to God the Creator, [*1] and that too without using any material means, or any other [material] assistance than the observation of a suitable opportunity.

"It was Hermes who first taught this Path. [*2] And Bitys, the prophet, translated [his teachings concerning it] for King Ammon, [*3] discovering them in the inner temple [*4] in an inscription in the sacred characters at Sais in Egypt. [From these writings it was that Bitys] handed on the tradition of the Name of God, as 'That which pervadeth the whole universe.'" [*5]

"As to the Good Itself [the Egyptians] regard It in Its relation to the Divine as the God that transcends all thought, and in Its relation to man as the at-onement with Him--a doctrine which Bitys translated from the Hermaic Books." [*6]

From these two passages we learn that the ancient doctrine of Hermes concerning the Path, which is the keynote of our Trismegistic tracts, was to be found either in inscriptions in the sacred script in the secret chambers of the temples, into which no uninitiated person was ever permitted to enter, or in "books," also in the sacred script; that these had never been translated until the reign of King Ammon. [*7] But what are we to understand by translated? Into Greek? Not necessarily, but more probably interpreted from the

[p. 294]

hieroglyphic symbols into the Egyptian vernacular and written in the demotic character. The term used (diermeneuein) clearly bears this sense; whereas if translation from Egyptian into Greek had been intended, we should presumably have had the same word (metagrafein) employed which Jamblichus uses when speaking of the Hermetic books that had been read by Porphyry. Reitzenstein (p. 108), however, has apparently no doubt that the writings of Bitys were in Greek, and that these writings lay before Jamblichus and were the only source of his information. But I cannot be certain that this is the meaning of the Greek.

We have rather, according to my view, probably two strata of "translation"--from hieroglyphic into demotic, from demotic into Greek. As to Bitys, we know nothing more definite than Jamblichus tells us. Perhaps he was the first to translate from the sacred hieroglyphs into the vulgar tongue and script; and by that we mean the first to break the ancient rule and write down in the vulgar characters those holy sermons and treatises which previously had never before been inscribed in any but the most sacred characters. We are not, however, to suppose that Bitys was the only one to do this.

Now in our Trismegistic literature we have a deposit addressed to a King Ammon. Is it then possible that this King, whoever he was, was the initiator of a change of policy in the immemorial practice of the priests? It may be so, but at present we have not sufficient data to decide the point.

BITYS

A further scrap of information concerning Bitys, however, may be gleaned from Zosimus ( section 8), when, speaking of the Logos, the Son of God, pouring His Light

[p. 295]

into the soul and starting it on its Return Above, to the Blessed Region where it was before it had become corporeal (as described in the Trismegistic tractate, entitled "Concerning the Inner Door")--he writes:

"And there shall it see the Picture (pinax) that both Bitos hath described, and thrice-greatest Plato, and ten-thousand-times-great Hermes,--for Thoythos translated it into the first sacred tongue,--Thoth the First Man." [*1]

The identity of Bitys and Bitos is thus unquestionable. [*2] Reitzenstein, however, asserts that neither of these name-forms is Egyptian, and therefore approves of the identification of our Bitys with "Pitys the Thessalian" of the Papyri, [*3] as Dieterich has suggested. The headings of the fragments of the writings of Pitys in the Papyri run: "The Way [or Method] of Pitys"; "Pitys to King Ostanes Greeting"; "The Way of Pitys the King"; "Of Pitys the Thessalian."

From this Reitzenstein (n. 2) concludes that already in the second and third centuries (? A.D.) Pitys is included among the prophetical theologi and Magians. What the precise date of these Papyri may be it is not easy to determine, but, whether or not they belong to the second and third centuries, it is evident that Pitys was regarded as ancient and a contemporary of the Magian Sage Ostanes.

King, [*4] referring to a passage of the Elder Pliny (Nat. Hist., xxx. 4), which remarks on the similarity of the

[p. 296]

[paragraph continues] Magian Gnosis with the Druidical Gnosis of Gaul and Britain, says: "Pliny by his 'Magica' understands the rites instituted by Zoroaster, and first promulgated by Osthanes to the outer world, this Osthanes having been 'military chaplain' to Xerxes during his expedition to Greece."

This date, if we can rely upon it, would take us back to the Persian Conquest of Egypt, but what has a Thessalian Pitys to do with that?

Curiously enough also Pliny in his xxviiith Book makes use of the writings of a certain Bithus of Dyrrachium, a city on the coast of Illyricum in the Ionic Gulf, known in Grecian history as Epidamnus.

All of this is puzzling enough; but whatever conclusions may be drawn from the evidence, the clearest indication is that Bitys was ancient, and therefore that whatever translating or rather "interpreting" there may have been, it was probably from hieroglyphic into demotic, and the latter was subsequently further "interpreted" into Greek.

OSTANES-ASCLEPIUS

But is Ostanes the Magian Sage of tradition, or may we adopt the brilliant conclusion of Maspero, and equate Ostanes with Asclepius, and so place him in the same circle with Bitys, or rather see in Bitys an "Asclepius"?

At any rate the following interesting paragraph of Granger [*1] deserves our closest attention in this connection, when he writes:

"Maspero, following Goodwin, has shown that Ostanes is the name of a deity who belongs to the cycle of

[p. 297]

[paragraph continues] Thoth. [*1] His name, Ysdnw, was derived by the Egyptians themselves from a verb meaning 'to distinguish' and he was a patron of intellectual perception. As time went on, he gained in importance. Under the Ptolemies he was often represented upon the Temple walls (l.c.). In Pliny he appears as an early writer upon medicine. [*2] Some of the prescriptions quoted as from him are quite in the Egyptian style. [*3] Philo Byblius, on whom, to be sure, not much reliance can be placed, [*4] mentions a book of Ostanes--the Octateuch. [*5] It is tempting to identify this with some such collection as the six medical books which occupy the last place in Clement's list. [*6] Now Pliny, as appears from his list of authorities, does not quote Ostanes directly. If we note that Democritus is mentioned by Pliny in the same context, and that Ostanes is the legendary teacher of Democritus upon his journey to Egypt, we shall consider it at least probable that Pliny depends upon Democritus for his mention of Ostanes. The Philosopher, whose visit to Egypt may be regarded as a historical fact, would in that case be dealing with a medical collection which passes under the name of Ostanes. Asclepius, who appears in the Poemander, will be the Greek equivalent of Ostanes. Thus the collocation of Hermes and Asclepius is analogous to the kinship of the Egyptian deities, Thoth and Ysdnw."

FROM THE HERMAIC WRITINGS

That these Bitys-books contained the same doctrines as our Trismegistic writings is evident from the whole

[p. 298]

treatise of Jamblichus. Jamblichus throughout bases himself upon the doctrines of Hermes, [*1] and clearly suggests that he does not owe his information to translations only, as was the case with Porphyry, but to records in Egyptian; but whether to the demotic treatises of the Bitys-school or to the heiroglyphic records themselves he does not say. That these doctrines were identical with the teachings in our Trismegistic literature requires no proof to any one who has read our treatises and the exposition of Jamblichus; for the benefit, however, of those who have not read Jamblichus, [*2] we append a passage to show the striking similarity of ideas. Treating of the question of freewill and necessity raised by Porphyry, and replying to the objection that the Egyptians taught an astrological fatalism, Jamblichus writes:

"We must explain to you how the question stands by some further conceptions drawn from the Hermaic writings. Man has two souls, as these writings say. The one is from the First Mind, and partakes also of the Power of the Creator, [*3] while the other, the soul under constraint, comes from the revolution of the celestial [Spheres] [*4]; into the latter the former, the soul that is the Seer of God, insinuates itself at a later period. This then being so, the soul that descends into us from the worlds [*5] keeps time with the circuits of these worlds, while the soul from the Mind, existing in us in a spiritual fashion, is free from the whirl of

[p. 299]

[paragraph continues] Generation; by this the bonds of Destiny are burst asunder; by this the Path up to the spiritual Gods is brought to birth; by such a life as this is that Great Art Divine, which leads us up to That beyond the Spheres of Genesis, [*1] brought to its consummation." [*2]

THE COSMIC SPHERES

With regard to the nature of these Spheres, Jamblichus shows very clearly that they are not the physical planets, as may be seen from the following passages of his De Mysteriis:

"With regard to partial existences, then, I mean in the case of the soul in partial manifestation, [*3] we must admit something of the kind we have above. For just such a life as the [human] soul emanated before it entered into a human body, and just such a type as it made ready for itself, just such a body, to use as an instrument, does it have attached to it, and just such a corresponding nature accompanies [this body] and receives the more perfect life the soul pours into it. But with regard to superior existences and those that surround the Source of All as perfect existences, the inferior are set within the superior, bodies in bodiless existences, things made in their makers; and the former are kept in position by the latter enclosing them in a sphere.

"The revolutions of the heavenly Bodies, [*4] therefore, being from the first set in the celestial revolutions of the aethereal Soul, [*5] for ever continue in this relationship; while the Souls of the [invisible] Worlds, [*6] extending to their [common] Mind, are completely

[p. 300]

surrounded by it, and from the beginning have their birth in it. And Mind in like manner, both partially and as a whole, is also contained in superior states of existence." [*1]

And again in another passage Jamblichus writes:

"We say that [the Spiritual Sun and Moon, and the rest] are so far from being contained within their Bodies, that on the contrary, it is they who contain these Bodies of theirs within the Spheres of their own vitality and energy. And so far are they from tending towards their Bodies, that the tendency of these very Bodies is towards their Divine Cause. Moreover, their Bodies do not impede the perfection of their Spiritual and Incorporeal Nature or disturb it by being situated in it." [*2]

To this we may add what Proclus writes in his Commentary on the Timaeus of Plato:

"Each of the [Seven] Planetary Spheres is a complete World containing a number of divine offspring, which are invisible to us, and over all of these Spheres the Star [*3] we see is the Ruler. Now Fixed Stars differ from those [*4] in the Planetary Spheres in that the former have but one Monad, namely, their system as a whole [*5]; while the latter, namely the invisible globes in each of the Planetary Spheres, which globes have an orbit of their own determined by the revolution of their respective Spheres, have a double Monad--namely, their system as a whole, [*6] and that dominant characteristic which has been evolved by selection in the several spheres of the system. For since globes are secondary to Fixed Stars they require a double order of government, 

[p. 301]

first subordination to their system as a whole, and then subordination to their respective spheres. [*1] And that in each of these spheres there is a host [*2] on the same level [*3] with each, you may infer from the extremes. [*4] For if the Fixed Sphere [*5] has a host on the same level as itself, and Earth has a host of earthy animals, [*6] just as the former a host of heavenly animals, [*7] it is necessary that every whole [*8] should have a number of animals on the same level with itself; indeed it is because of the latter fact that they are called wholes. The intermediate levels, however, are outside the range of our senses, the extremes only being visible, the one through the transcendent brilliance of its nature, the other through its kinship with ourselves." [*9]

It is evident that we are here dealing with what are known to Theosophical students as the "planetary chains" of our system, and that therefore these Spheres are not the physical planets; the visible planets are

[p. 302]

but a very small portion of the globes of these chains, of some of which there are no globes at all visible. The ascription therefore of the "influence" of these Spheres to the sun, moon, and five of the visible planets is at best a makeshift, a "correspondence," or a "symbolism."

Footnotes

^285:1 The exact date of Jamblichus is very conjectural. In my sketches of the "Lives of the Later Platonists" I have suggested about A.D. 255-330. See The Theosophical Review (Aug. 1896), xviii. 462, 463.

^286:1 I translate from the text of Parthey (Berlin, 1857).

^286:2 The term logos is, of course, used technically, as a sacred or inspired sermon or course of instruction.

^286:3 panta ta oikeia syggrammata.

^286:4 Parthey here adds the following interesting note: "The Egyptian teachers of Pythagoras were Oenuphis of On (Plut., De Is. et Os., 10) and Sonchis (Clem. Al., Strom., i. 15, 69); Plato was the pupil of Sechnuphis of On (Clem. l.c.) and of Chonuphis (Plut., De Gen. Socr., 578); Democritus was taught by Pammenes of Memphis (Georg. Sync., i. 471 Dind.); Eudoxus by Chonuphis of Memphis (Plut. and Clem. ll. cc.)." To this Parthey appends a list of some of the many other famous Greeks who owed their knowledge to Egyptian teachers, viz., Alcaeus, Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, Appuleius, Archimedes, Bias, Chrysippus of Cnidus, Cleobulus, Daedalus, Decaeneus, Diodorus Siculus, Ellopion, Euripides, Hecataeus of Abdera, Hecataeus of Miletus, Hellanicus, Herodotus, Homerus, Lycurgus, Melampus, Musaeus, Oenopides of Chios, Orpheus, Pausanias, Pherecydes, Polybius, Simmias, Solon, Sphaerus, Strabo, Telecles, Thales, Theodorus, Xenophanes of Colophon, Zamolxis. I have quoted this note on purpose to show the overpowering weight of evidence which some modern theorists have to face, in order to maintain their thesis that the philosophy of Greece was solely a native product. The universal testimony of the Greeks themselves is that all their greatest philosophers, geometricians, mathematicians, historians, geographers, and especially their theosophists, were pupils of the Egyptian Wisdom; the modern theory of the unaided evolution of philosophy on the soil of Greece, which is so universally accepted, is, to my mind, entirely erroneous. The "form" or "manner" of "philosophizing" was of course solely due to Greek genius, but the "matter" of it was of hoary antiquity. Cf. Plutarch, De Is. et Os., x.

^287:1 That is to say, presumably, teachers of all without distinction of race. Op. cit., i. 1.

^288:1 It is from this region of ideas that the terms "mercurial temperament," and so forth, have reached modern times over the bridge of astrological tradition.

^289:1 Porphyry (De Abs., ii. c. 55) mentions a Seleucus whom he calls a "theologist"; Suidas says that Seleucus of Alexandria wrote a treatise On the Gods, in 100 books or chapters.

^289:2 Reading dialabontes instead of diaballontes.

^289:3 Ibid., viii. 1.

^290:1 See Georgius Syncellus, Chron., i. 97, ed. Dindorf. Also Eusebius, Chron., vi.

^291:1 Op. cit., viii. 2.

^292:1 Ibid., viii. 4.

^292:2 That is, the life of the body.

^292:3 Lit. distributed to all the spheres as different.

^292:4 dia teis ieratikeis theoyrgias,--lit. by the theurgy known to the priests.

^293:1 The Mind in its creative aspect.

^293:2 Sc. This Way up to God.

^293:3 See Commentary on C. H. (xvi.).

^293:4 Or secret shrine.

^293:5 Op. cit., viii. 5.

^293:6 Ibid., x. 7.

^293:7 Identified by some writers with one of the last kings of the Saitic dynasty (the xxvith), who reigned somewhere about 570 B.C. See Thomas Taylor, Iamblichus on the Mysteries, p. 306 n. (2nd ed., London, 1895). But as there is no objective evidence by which this identification can be controlled, we simply record it.

^295:1 See notes appended to the extract from Zosimus.

^295:2 As has already been supposed by Hoffmann and Riess in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyklopadie, i. 1347. R. 108.

^295:3 Dieterich, Jahr. f. Phil, Suppl., xvi. 753; Wessely, Denkschr. d. K. K. Akad. (1888), pp. 92, 95, 98.

^295:4 King (C. W.), The Gnostics and their Remains, 2nd ed. (London, 1887), p. 421, who, however, does not document his statement.

^296:1 Granger (F.), "The Poemander of Hermes Trismegistus," in The Journal of Theological Studies, vol. v., no. 19, ap. 1904 (London), p. 398.

^297:1 Proc. Soc. Bibl. Arch., xx. 142.

^297:2 Nat. Hist., xxviii. 6.

^297:3 P. S. B. A., ibid., 256, 261.

^297:4 He, however, was very well placed to have accurate knowledge on such a point.--[G. R. S. M.]

^297:5 Eus., Praep. Ev., I. x. 52.

^297:6 Strom., VI. iv. 37.

^298:1 Especially in Book VIII., which is entirely devoted to an exposition of Hermaic doctrine, and ought perhaps to be here translated in full. I have, however, preferred to select the passages definitely characterized by Jamblichus as Hermaic.

^298:2 Who must be read in the original and not in the inelegant and puzzling version of Taylor, the only English translation.

^298:3 The Second Mind according to "The Shepherd."

^298:4 The Seven Spheres of the Harmony.

^298:5 The Seven Spheres.

^299:1 pros to agenneton.

^299:2 Op. cit., viii. 6.

^299:3 That is, as an individual soul and not as the world-soul.

^299:4 Physical planets.

^299:5 Of all of our visible system?

^299:6 That is to say, the seven spheres.

^300:1 Op. cit., i. 8.

^300:2 Ibid., i. 17.

^300:3 That is, visible planet.

^300:4 That is, perhaps, the invisible globes.

^300:5 Lit. their wholeness.

^300:6 In our case the whole solar system.

^301:1 Or, as one would say in modern Theosophical terms, to their planetary chains.

^301:2 Hierarchy.

^301:3 sustoixon.

^301:4 That is to say, we may infer from the fixed stars (or suns) and from the globes which we can see (i.e. the visible planets), the manner of those we cannot see.

^301:5 The sphere of fixed stars or suns.

^301:6 That is to say, all the visible globes (vulgo planets) of our system as a whole. An "animal" means a "living thing"; so that here "earthy animals" mean the living vehicles of the heavenly beings which we so erroneously call "heavenly bodies."

^301:7 That is to say, suns or solar systems.

^301:8 Here whole means plane.

^301:9 That is to say, the brilliant light of the suns in space, and the reflected light of the physical globes of the planetary spheres of our system. See Proclus, Commentarius in Platonis Timaeum, Bk. iv., p. 279 D, E, p. 676, ed. Schneider (Vratislaviae, 1847). The passage is very difficult to translate because of its technical nature. Taylor, in his translation (London, 1820, ii. 281, 282), misses nearly every point.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 303]

III.

 

JULIAN THE EMPEROR [*1]

Text: ap. Cyril, Contra Julianum, v. 176; Migne, col. 770 A. See also Neumann (C. I.), Juliani Imperatoris Librorum contra Christianos quae supersunt (Leipzig, 1880), p. 193. [*2]

THE DISCIPLES OF WISDOM

That God, however, has not cared for the Hebrews only, [but rather] that in His love for all nations He hath bestowed on them [sc. the Hebrews] nothing worth very serious attention, whereas He has given us far greater and superior gifts, consider from what will follow. The Egyptians, counting up of their own race the names of not a few sages, can also say they have had many who have followed in the steps [*3] of Hermes. I mean of the Third Hermes who used to come down [*4] [to them] in Egypt. The Chaldaeans [also can tell of] the [disciples] of Oannes and of Belus;

[p. 304]

and the Greeks of tens of thousands [who have the Wisdom] from Cheiron. [*1] For it is from him that they derived their initiation into the mysteries of nature, and their knowledge of divine things; so that indeed [in comparison] the Hebrews seem only to give themselves airs about their own [attainments].

 

Here we learn from Julian that the Third Hermes, the Hermes presumably of our Sermons, was known, by those initiated into the Gnosis, to be no physical historical Teacher, but a Teaching Power or Person, who taught from within spiritually.

Footnotes

^303:1 Julian the Emperor reigned 360-363 A.D. It was during the last year of his reign that he wrote Contra Christianos.

^303:2 Also Taylor (Thomas), The Arguments of the Emperor Julian against the Christians (London, 1809), p. 36.

^303:3 Lit. "from the succession" (diadoxeis).

^303:4 epifoite'santos,--"to come habitually to"; epifoitesis is used of the "coming upon one," or inspiration of a God.

^304:1 Partially quoted by Reitzenstein (p. 175, n. 1).

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 305]

IV.

 

FULGENTIUS THE MYTHOGRAPHER [*1]

AN intermediate of the parent copy of our Corpus in every probability lay before Fulgentius. Thus we find him (p. 26, 18 H [*2]) referring to the first sermon, though barbarously enough, in the phrase: "Hermes in Opinandre libro," and quoting from the introductory words; he also quotes (p. 88, 3) some words from C. H., xii. (xiii.), stupidly referring them to Plato, adding in Greek:

FRAGMENT XXVIII.

The human mind is god; if it be good, God [then] doth shower His benefits [upon us].

And twice (p. 85, 21, and p. 74, 11) Fulgentius refers in all probability to the lost ending of "The Definitions of Asclepius," in the latter passage telling us, "as Hermes Trismegistus says," that there were three kinds of music,--namely "adomenon, psallomenon, aulumenon,"--that is, singing, harping, and piping.

Footnotes

^305:1 The date of this Afro-Latin writer cannot be later than the sixth century.

^305:2 Helm (R.), Fabii Planciadis Fulgentii V. C. Opera (Leipzig, 1898).

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 306]

[p. 307]

IV

Conclusion

[p. 308]

[p. 309]

AN ATTEMPT AT CLASSIFYING THE EXTANT LITERATURE

BEFORE we proceed to append our concluding remarks, it will be as well to set down some attempt at classifying our extant sermons and fragments. Unfortunately, however, this cannot be done in any scientific manner, owing to the fact that the literature, even were it fully before us, would be found to be too chaotic. Indeed, even with our fragmentary information concerning it, we are acquainted with no less than four unrelated Corpora--those that lay before Lactantius, Cyril, and Stobaeus, and our own imperfect Corpus of Byzantine tradition. There must also have been other Corpora or collections, as, for instance, the books that Jamblichus used, not to mention the ancient body of MSS. which lay before Petosiris and Nechepso.

OF HERMES

First and foremost, standing in a class by itself, must be placed:

C. H. i.--"The Poemandres."

This is the fundamental Gospel of the School, the Self-instruction of the Hermes-or Master-grade.

With it, as based upon it in general type, though not in form, must be taken:

C. H. xi. (xii.).--"Mind unto Hermes."

[p. 310]

This is of later date, but still it must have been comparatively early, for it introduces the Aeon-doctrine, which must be early, and is the esoteric instruction on the doctrines laid down in C. H. iv. (v.)--"The Cup"--which was perhaps regarded as the most important sermon after "The Poemandres."

Of the lost early literature we can get no clear indication; it may, however, be mentioned that the "Sayings of Agathodaimon" referred to in the Tat Sermon, C. H. xii. (xiii.), probably belonged to the most archaic deposit of the Trismegistic literature, and may be compared with the "Sayings of Ammon" mentioned by Justin Martyr. These belonged, presumably, originally solely to the Hermes-grade.

With the same type as the conclusion of the "Poemandres" in its present form, that is to say with a later development, we must classify:

C. H. iii. (iv.).--"The Sacred Sermon"; and
C. H. vii. (viii).--"Whither stumble ye."

Here also, for lack of a more satisfactory heading, we must place:

Ex. xxii.--"An Apophthegm of Hermes."
Ex. xxiv.--"A Hymn of the Gods." 
Frag. xxvi.--From "The Inner Door."
Frag. xxvii--"For Our Mind saith."

The last being probably from one of the oldest deposits of the literature.

The next most convenient heading for classification is that under which we can place the greatest number of pieces, namely:

TO TAT

We know that the Tat-instruction was divided into

[p. 311]

[paragraph continues] (a) "The General Sermons," of which C. H. x. (xi.)--"The Key"--is said to be the epitome or rather summation; and (b) "The Expository Sermons," of which C. H. xiii. (xiv.)--"The Secret Sermon on the Mountain"--was the consummation.

It is, of course, not certain whether the Tat Sermons were divided simply into these two classes, for though we are certain in a number of instances that we are dealing with an extract from an Expository Sermon, we are often in doubt when the heading is only "From the Sermon," or "Sermons to Tat," how to classify it. We do not know how many General Sermons there may have been, or whether they were divided into Books as were the Expository Sermons and the "To Asclepius," at anyrate in the Corpus of Cyril. For convenience of classification, however, we may consider, though perfectly arbitrarily, that all the sermons and fragments which cannot fall under the heading of "Expository" may be treated as "General."

The General Sermons

C. H. (ii.).--"The General Sermon." [*1]
C. H. viii (ix.).--"That No One of Existing Things do Perish."
Ex. x.--"Concerning the Rule of Providence." [*2]
Ex. xi.--"Of Justice." [*3]
Ex. xx.--"The Power of Choice."
Fragg. vi and vii.
C. H. x. (xi.).--"The Key."

[p. 312]

This last is stated to be the epitome or summation of "The General Sermons." It is addressed to both Asclepius and Tat, and is to be taken in connection with "The Perfect Sermon."

The Expository Sermons

Of these there were in the Corpus of Cyril three Books--to the First of which are assigned:

Fragg. xx. (?), xxii., xxiii., xxiv.
Ex. ii. and Fragg. iii., xi., xii., xv. [*1]

To be assigned to "The Expository Sermons" in general without any clearer indications:

Exx. iii. (?).--"Of Truth." [*2]
Ex. iv. [*3]
Exx. v., vi., vii., viii., ix. [*4]
Ex. i.--"Of Piety and True Philosophy." [*5]

From the Corpus Hermeticum we may conjecturally assign the following to this class:

C. H. iv. (v.).--"The Cup." [*6]
C. H. v. (vi.).--"Though Manifest."
C. H. vii. (viii.).--"About the Common Mind." [*7]

[p. 313]

Finally, the whole course of these "Expository Sermons" is consummated by what we may call "The Initiation of Tat":

C. H. xiii. (xiv.).--"The Secret Sermon on the Mountain."

We next pass on to what Cyril calls the "To Asclepius," of which, as of "The Expository Sermons, there were in his Corpus at least Three Books.

TO ASCLEPIUS

In our Corpus Hermeticum the following are assigned to Asclepius:

C. H. ii. (iii.). "An Introduction to the Gnosis of the Nature of All Things."
C. H. vi. (vii.).--"In God Alone is Good."
C. H. ix. (x.).--"About Sense." [*1]
C. H. xiv. (xv.).--"A Letter to Asclepius." [*2]

From the "To Asclepius" in Cyril's collection we have:

Frag. xxv. (?). 

And definitely from the Third "To Asclepius":

[p. 314]

Fragg. xvi.-xviii.

In this Third Book it is probable that "The Perfect Sermon" was included in Cyril's Corpus. This sermon, which is the longest we possess, was evidently originally addressed to Asclepius alone, for its alternative title is par excellence "The Asclepius," and my conjecture that the introduction of the "holy three"--Asclepius, Tat and Ammon--is due to a later editor, is amply borne out by all the evidence. We may thus well conclude our list with:

"The Perfect Sermon."

For the fragments of the lost Greek original of this important tractate, see Lactantius:

Fragg. v., viii., ix., x.

This Sermon is to be taken in close connection with "The Key" which sums up "The General Sermons" to Tat.

TO AMMON

Stobaeus ascribes eight of his extracts to a Book or Books of his collection entitled "To Ammon." These excerpts, however, would seem to be more appropriately classified under "Sermons to Tat." As, however, Johannes distinctly so describes them, we will append them here.

Exx. xii, xiii.
Exx. xiv.-xix.--"Of Soul," i.-vi.

Exx. xvi.-xix. follow one another in the text of the Excerpts by Stobaeus; as Ex. xviii., however, refers to "The General Sermons," it therefore would make us suppose that either we are here dealing with "The Expository Sermons" to Tat, or that the Ammon-grade had already had communicated to them "The General Sermons."

The above are the four types of Trismegistic Sermons

[p. 315]

proper, and we next turn to the writings of the Disciples of Hermes.

OF ASCLEPIUS

It is remarkable that Asclepius, the most learned of the Three, writes his treatises and letters, not to philosophers or priests, or students, nor yet to his younger brother Tat--but invariably to the King or to Kings. He invariably writes to "Ammon"; and the once existing literature of this class was a very rich one, if we can believe the writer or redactor of C. H. (xvi.). The fragments that remain, however, are by no means numerous, and include:

C. H. (xvi.).--"The Definitions of Asclepius." [*1]
Frag. iv.--Probably from the lost ending of above.
C. H. (xvii.).--"Of Asclepius to the King." [*2]
Ex. xxi. (?)--which may, perhaps, be more correctly headed "Of Asclepius to the King" instead of with Stobaeus "Of Isis to Horus."

To neither Tat nor Ammon are tractates assigned; for when Tat is perfected he becomes in his turn Hermes, and so writes as Hermes, while Ammon is the man of action and affairs who does not teach. May we further from these phenomena conclude that "Asclepius" was the man who was skilled in theory and intellectual grasp, but was not capable of direct illumination as was Tat?

The next class of literature falls under the heading:

OF ISIS

Whether or not the forms of this literature which we possess are contemporaneous with or later than

[p. 316]

the Tat and Asclepius Sermons, we cannot say; but in any case they are based on ancient types--the "Books of Isis to Horus." To this type we assign:

Ex. xxi.--"Of Isis to Horus."

Though, as we have suggested above, this is an error of Johannes, and should be rather "Of Asclepius to the King."

Ex. xxiii.--"From Aphrodite."

Where Aphrodite probably equates with Isis.

Exx. xxv., xxvi.--"The Virgin of the World."
Ex. xxvii.--"From the Sermon of Isis to Horus."

The remaining class of literature is connected with the name of Osiris as the Disciple of Agathodaimon, the Thrice-greatest, and may be headed as:

FROM THE AGATHODAIMON LITERATURE

Our fragments are all taken from Cyril's Corpus, and are referred to by him under the heading "To Asclepius." We have, however, not included them under this heading in our tentative classification, because they are plainly not addressed to Asclepius, but belong to a quite different form of literature, most probably throwing back to an ancient type of the same nature as the "Books of Isis." To this class are to be assigned:

Fragg. xiii., xiv., xix., xxi.

This form may be perhaps more appropriately taken with the "Sayings of Agathodaimon" and the "Sayings of Ammon" as Agathodaimon; both of which pertain to the oldest types of the Trismegistic literature.

Finally, we add the appendix to our Corpus written by a Poemandrist rhetor and apologist:

C. H. (xviii.).--"The Encomium of Kings."

[p. 317]

[paragraph continues] This may be taken with the quotation from the editor of Cyril's Corpus of XV. Books.

And so we come to the end of our tentative classification; with the full conviction, however, that as no one at the time when the literature was extant in a number of Corpora and collections of all sorts attempted to classify it, so now that we have only the flotsam and jetsam of this once abundantly rich cargo before us, no inventory can be made that is of the slightest scientific value, and we can at best offer the reader a few sorted heaps of disjecta membra of varying dates.

OF JUDGMENTS OF VALUE

We now approach the conclusion of our task, but with the feeling that the whole matter should be put aside for years before any attempt be made to set down any judgments of value. We are as yet too much involved in a maze of details to be able to extricate ourselves into the clear space in which we can walk at ease round the labyrinth and view it from a general and detached point of view.

Nevertheless, we will endeavour to set down some general impressions of our experiences in the labyrinth--of the many windings we have had to traverse, and the many places with no way out into which we have been led by following the paths of history and criticism; out of which there has been time and again no egress, even when holding fast to the thread of light woven out of the illuminating rays of the doctrines of the tradition.

It is indeed a difficult task to stand with the feet of the mind set firm on the surface of objectivity, and with the head and heart of it in the heights and depths of the subjective and unmanifest. And yet this almost superhuman task is the Great Work set before every scholar of the Gnosis--the man who would think truly

[p. 318]

and judge justly, viewing the matter from all standpoints, and appraising it from without and within, from above and below, endeavouring to unite centre and circumference in a blended intuitional sense that transcends our divided senses and intellect.

The Trismegistic literature is scripture, and to its understanding we must bring all and every faculty that the best minds of to-day are bringing to bear upon the special scripture which each one may believe to be the most precious legacy from the Past to the Present.

Now the application of what is called "criticism" to scripture is the wielding of a two-edged sword; this sword is not only two-edged, but it is fiery. If it is rightly used, it will disperse the hosts of error and hew a path into the Paradise of Truth; but if it is wrongly used, it will react on the daring soul that attempts to grasp it, and he will find in it the flaming brand in the hands of the Angel-Warden that keeps him from the Gate of Heaven.

Criticism, which is regarded with such fear and trembling by some, and is sneered at and despised by others, is the sword that the Christ has brought on earth in these latter days. There is now war in the members of the faithful, war within them, such war as they cannot escape, if God has given them a mind with which to reason. Every man of intelligence who loves his own special scripture, is keenly aware of the war within his members--head against heart and heart against head, form against substance and substance against form. This is keenly felt by those who love their own special Bible; but how few can enter into the feelings of another who loves with equal fervour some other Bible? Who can be really fair to any other man's religion? And by this we do not mean an absolutely lifeless indifference, in which the head

[p. 319]

alone is concerned--for there are not a few men of this type who deal with the comparative science of religion--but a lively sympathy that knows that the other man's religion is the highest thing on earth for him, and the light-giving revelation of God's Wisdom.

THE SONS OF GOD

In treating of the "Religion of the Mind," of the Gnosis of Thrice-greatest Hermes, I have endeavoured to enter into it as I conceive the Disciples of that Way entered into it, with love and reverence. I would do the same with any other of the Great Religions of Humanity (and have done so in some cases), if I desired fervently, all prejudices and predilections apart, I will not say, to understand it--for what mortal mind can grasp the Divine Revelation in any of its Great Forms?--but to share, however imperfectly, in its illumination. Now, this attitude of mind and love of God and man is strongly deprecated by those who fear to stand accused of lack of loyalty to their own particular form of that Great Form of Faith which God has given for their guidance. The one object of their enquiries into other Great Forms of Faith is to "prove" that their own small form of the Great Form to which they give allegiance, is the end of all ends, and the highest of all heights, and that the other countless forms are of the Enemy of their God. My God, or rather God, for He is the Father of all, has no enemies; He has many sons, all brethren, and loves them equally even though they refuse to believe Him. There is but one Religion, its Great Forms are many, the forms of these Forms are innumerable, as many as are the individual minds and hearts of men, and the many hearts and minds of individual man.

[p. 320]

And here I would set forth my present all-insufficient notion of the Great Form of Religion known as Christianity, for there will doubtless be some who read these volumes who will accuse me of I know not what attitude other than that of their own to that Faith.

My faith in the Master of Christendom is unbounded; I dare not limit it or qualify it--for that Master is for me the Mind of all master-hood, Poemandres Himself. For how can any small mind of man dare to limit the Illimitable, the Mystery of all mysteries, that enfolded Jesus the Christ, and Gautama the Buddha, and Zoroaster the Mage, and Lao-tze the Sage, and Orpheus the Bard, and Pythagoras the Philosopher, and Hermes the Gnostic, and all and every Master and Master of masters? Do I detract from the transcendency of Jesus the Christ, when I mention His Brethren, all Sons of God? I do not, for the Sons of God are not separate and apart, set over one against the other; they are all one Sonship of the Father, and these apparent differences must be left to those who think themselves wise enough to judge between them--instructed enough to know the within of the matter as well as the without, which in no case has come down to us in any but the most fragmentary and erroneous tradition. I do not know; I dare not judge those who are Judges of the quick and dead. And so I leave this audacity to those who would forget the logos of their Saviour: "Judge not."

If, nevertheless, I am still judged as a "calumniator" by some, it is but natural injustice and quite understandable. There is, however, no real Injustice in the universe, and he who would be Justified and rise again with Osiris, must balance mortal seeming justice and injustice to reach the true equilibrium, and so be free of mortal opinion, and stand in the Hall of Truth. It is to the bar of this Judgment Hall that all men in

[p. 321]

the last resort appeal, whether they be born Christian or Mahommedan, Brahman or Jew, Buddhist or Taoist, Zoroastrian or Pagan--or whether they be born to a manner of faith that is none of these, or to an ideal of faith that includes them all.

Christianity is the Faith of the Western World--the Faith most suited to it in nature and in form. He who gave that Faith, gave in fullest abundance through many sources; and the greatest sign of His authority, of His authentia, was the throwing open of some part of the age-long secret mystery-teaching to the many without distinction of age, sex, class, caste, colour, or nation, or of instruction. The inner doors of the Temple were thrown wide open to the Amme-ha-aretz; but the innermost door still remained closed, for it is a door that is not man-made--it opens into the within of things, and not into some inner court of formal instruction. That door still remained naturally closed to the unworthy and unknowing; but no Scribe or Pharisee of the established order of things could any longer keep the key thereof in his selfish hands. The key was given to all, but given still mystically, for it is hidden in the inner nature of each son of man, and if he seek not in himself, searching into the depths of his own nature, he will never find it. That key is the opener of the Gate of the Gnosis, the complement and syzygy and spouse of Faith; the virile husband of the woman-side of the Christ-Religion.

In the early days that Gnosis was given in greatest fullness; Faith there was, Faith in mighty abundance, but there was also Gnosis; and it was because of this Gnosis of not a few that the Faith of the many was so intense. But over these mysterious days, and the inner in-working of the Mystery, a veil has been drawn to hide the holy operations from profane eyes 

[p. 322]

[paragraph continues] So that to-day, these many centuries after, the foolish of the Faith deny there was ever a Gnosis; just as their still more foolish predecessors persecuted the Gnostics of Christ and howled them down as Antichrists and First-born Sons of Satan. The natural veil was thus drawn over the too bright light of the Sacred Marriage when Heaven had kissed the Earth once more. 

So great, then, is my faith in the authentia of the Master, so great my assurance of the wisdom of His Gnosis. If this be thought "calumny" of His transcendency, then we are judged "calumniators" with Hermes, a Knower of the Mystery, and so complimented immeasurably beyond our deserts.

CONCERNING DATES

And now let us turn to the Religion of the Mind, which is also the Religion of the Heart--for is not Thoth Lord of the heart of man?

In the first place we have endeavoured faithfully to investigate every statement or suggestion that can be thought to be indicative of date, and we have not succeeded in any single instance in fixing a precise date for any sermon or fragment. What, however, we have been able to do, is to clear the ground of many false opinions, and to show the insecurity, if not the absurdity, of any attempt at precision. Every hypothesis of precision of date, when that hypothesis has favoured a late date for any sermon, has broken down. Whenever there has been a clearer indication, as, for instance, in the case of the Shepherd of Hermas, and the Poemandres of Hermes, it has thrown the time-period backwards and not forwards.

What has been proved, and amply proved, however, is that our literature goes back in an unbroken tradition of type and form and content to the earliest Ptolemaic

[p. 323]

times. The earliest forms of this literature are lost, but clear records of its nature remain. Of the extant literature there are specimens of varying date, though how they should be ordered is by no means clear; what, however, is clear is that some of our documents are at least contemporaneous with the earliest writings of Christianity.

In the "Prolegomena" we have established an unbroken line of tradition in which Gnosis and Mystery-teaching have been handed down through pre-Christian, Pagan and Jewish, and through Christian hands. We have further shown that the Gnosis of our Trismegistic documents is a simpler form than that of the great doctors of the Christianised Gnosis, Basilides and Valentinus, who flourished in the first quarter of the second century. The earlier of our sermons, therefore, represent one of the main streams, perhaps the main stream, of the Unchristianised Gnosis. We have further shown that, together with many other schools, both our Poemandrists and the writers of the New Testament documents use a common theological or theosophical nomenclature, and have a common body of ideas.

What is clear from all this is that there is no plagiarism, no deliberate copying, no logoklopia of other men's secrets, though there was the freest drawing on a common fund. The condition of affairs and the nature of the problems involved are such, that any theory of plagiarism at once becomes a two-edged sword; he who says that Trismegisticism copied from Christianity, can at once have his argument reversed into the form that Christianity copied from Trismegisticism.

As to date, then, we are dealing with a period when there was as yet no divorcement between Gnosis and Faith even in Christianity itself, and therefore the

[p. 324]

canons of judgment erected in later times by ecclesiastical self-limitation cannot be made to apply.

THE BLEND OF TRADITIONS

The view of General Christianity, gradually narrowed down by the Church Fathers into dogmatic Nicene Christianity, looked to one tradition only as the schoolmaster of the Faith--the tradition of Israel as the God-favoured Folk. Nevertheless it was the fair Greek tongue and the Greek method of thought that were used in evolving this special dispensation into a world-cult for the many.

The Trismegistic tradition laboured under no such limitation; its sympathies were more catholic. It is true that its main source was in Egypt, but it embraced with whole-hearted affection the wisdom of Hellas and the genius of Greece which were developed under Divine Providence to teach the Western Nations the glory and beauty of the mind. At the same time its sympathies were not divorced from the tradition of the Hebrews, though it refused to set them apart from the rest of humanity, and looked rather to the great river of wisdom in the Books of the Chaldaeans, Persians, Medes, and Parthians, than to the single stream shut off in the Books of Israel. The spirit of our Trismegistic writings is the same as that which inspired the Pagan and Jewish and Christian Gnostic scribes of the Naassene Document, all of whom believed that there was but one Mystery which all the mystery-institutions of the world attempted to adumbrate.

If, then, we were to say for the sake of convenience that our Trismegistic writings enshrine the Wisdom of Egypt in Greek tradition, we should not divorce that Wisdom from the Wisdom of the Chaldaeans and the rest. The Wisdom was one, the forms were many; and both

[p. 325]

[paragraph continues] Egypt and Chaldaea looked back to an Archaic Gnosis that was the common mother of their most ancient forms of Mystery-teaching.

And if we say that this Wisdom. has come down to us in Greek tradition, we should ever remember that this Graecising or philosophising has to do with the form and not with the substance. For whence did Thales and Pythagoras and Plato draw the inspiration for their philosophy or love of wisdom; was it not from Egypt? At anyrate so say the Greeks themselves without a single dissentient voice. And can we think that the Greeks, who were always so proud of their own achievements and boasted their own genius so loudly, would have given the palm of wisdom to Egypt had they not been compelled by overwhelming evidence to do so? But this does not mean that we are to deprive Hellas of her just laurels. Hellas was the mother of philosophy in the sense of systematic thinking and the development of the analytic reason. This is her great virtue and honour; independent research, and the piercing analysis of the intellect and the beauty of clear thinking in excellent expression, were her gifts to the Western world. It was she beyond the other nations that created for herself a subtler vehicle of thought for the manifestation of the powers of mental analysis. That, however, is not necessarily in itself wisdom, but the perfecting of an instrument whereby wisdom, if it be attained by other means, may be the more clearly expressed for those in whom the analytic faculties are being developed.

Wisdom transcends this mode of mind; for ratiocination is not ecstasis, the practical intelligence is not the contemplative mind. Nor is mind, using it as contrasted with the other faculties and energies and

[p. 326]

powers in man, the only or even the highest thing in man. This Secret of the Sphinx Egypt had possessed for millennia; so that her priests could say to Solon: "You Greeks are all children"--for the intellect in Greece was young, though destined to grow into a giant; whereas the hoary Gnosis of the heart of man was prior to the aeons, and will continue when the aeons shall cease.

That Gnosis of Man still awaits decipherment in Egypt; it is hidden in her glyphs and symbols and holy signs. But that Gnosis will never yield its secret to those who persist in interpreting these symbols of the Language of the Gods into their lower forms, forms intended for children and not for men. And indeed our Trismegistic sermons, if they should teach us nothing else, can at least assure us of this, for their writers were still ear to mouth with the Living Voice of that once Great Church of Wisdom. Our Poemandrists knew what the mystery-tradition inculcated; they knew, for they had been within the holy shrines.

At anyrate for my part I prefer to believe their view of the matter, than to listen to the contemptuous patronage of modern conceit bred of complete ignorance of the manifold natures and powers and energies in man.

OF INITIATION

Indeed the whole of this theosophy of Egypt, as indeed of the theosophy of all climes and times, was intended to lead a man up the stairway of perfectioning, to the portals of the first true natural initiation, whereby he becomes superman, or, as Hermes would say, at last and in truth "man" and not a "procession of Fate." Beyond that stage are many others too sublime for us in any way to understand; and it is just because

[p. 327]

of their sublimity that we do not understand and so we "interpret" things of the height into the lowest notions and opinions of the most limited things of sense. For beyond the superman stage comes the Christ, and then--but who shall speak of that which transcends even perfected master-hood?

And by initiation, in this sense, we do not mean probationary forms of drama and of instruction, "of things said and done," but a natural thing and process, all that which the Christ of Christendom has laboured to inculcate with so much wisdom even in the blurred record that has come down to us. To this initiation a man may come without a physical guide or the help of any tradition of formal ceremony. Nevertheless, he would indeed be foolish who should say that the greater mystery-institutions which have been established by wise teachers and the Providence of God, have been or are of no effect.

On the contrary, the disciple of wisdom will study every record of such institutions accessible to him, and ponder on their marvellous multiplicity, and marvel at the infinite modes devised to play the pedagogue, that so man may be brought unto his God. Nevertheless, if he has not the love and wit to study such things, he should not despair, for is he not already in the Outer Court of the Temple, if he would but lift up his eyes to see the mysteries of the universe that surround him on every side?

We all are babes in the Womb of the Great Mother; how long we continue as babes, as embryos, remains for each of us to decide. For in this Birth the Mother alone cannot bear all the pains of labour; we too must help and strive and struggle and dare to breathe within her holy Womb, so as to accustom our dead lungs to expand, before the Great Birth can be accomplished, and we can at length walk forth into the Inner

[p. 328]

[paragraph continues] World erect upon our feet and draw in at every pore and in every atom its pure air without fear. But this Inner World is no thin shadow of the outer world, as it may appear to us in the dark night of our present ignorance; it is the Inner Cosmos, not the inner earth. Rapts and visions may let us see some mysteries of the inner earth, but not the mysteries of Earth, much less the Divine Mysteries of Cosmos.

Nor is there any need to label these things with precise terms, for now even the most experienced in such vision can know but in part; whereas then we shall know the Fullness, face to face, without a parable. But knowing this, who shall tell the Mystery, who can tell the Mystery--for is not the whole of Nature telling us this Mystery now at every moment with infinite voices from infinite mouths, and yet we hear nothing? For is not the whole creation designed with this one purpose to tell every son of man that he is of Light and Life and only happens to be out of them, as Hermes says?

A LAST WORD

But it is very possible that some who have done me the honour of reading to the end, will say: "This man is a dreamer, an ecstatic; we have no use for such in the hard world of rigid facts that confront us in our everyday life!"

But indeed I have little time for dreams and ecstasies in the sense in which my supposed critics would use the words, as any one may see who can realise the labour that has been expended on these volumes, nine-tenths of which are filled with translations and commentaries, criticisms and notes, in which dreams and ecstasies have no part, but only strenuous co-labour of mind and soul and body. And that is just the carrying out of what I hold to be the true doctrine of practical

[p. 329]

mysticism, or if objection be taken by the reader to that much ill-used word, of the Great Work of life. It is true that it is almost impossible to talk of these high or deep things except in language that in every expression and in every word is liable to misconstruction. For even when we call them high things, they are not high in space or place, but rather in the sense that they are of greater intensity than the shows and appearances of opinion that form the surfaces or superficialities of our world of normal conditioning.

Spirit in itself is not superior to mind, or mind to soul, or soul to body; each and all must work together according to their proper dignity, nature, and energy, in perfect equilibrium in the perfect man. They are not descending degrees of some one thing, but are mutually in some mysterious way all aspects of one another.

For should we regard them as quantitatively distinguished solely, then we should be looking at them from the point of view of divided body alone; or should we regard them as qualitatively distinguished, then we should be looking at them from the point of view of separated soul alone; or should we regard them as logically distinguished, then we should be regarding them from the standpoint of the formal reason solely; while if we should look at them as wholes monadically and synthetically, we should be regarding them from an abstract and not a vital view-point.

Nevertheless they are all each of other, the same in difference and different in the same. Their source and middle and their end is Man, and Man alone can reach unto the Gnosis of God.

And therefore we may conclude with the daring counsel given unto Hermes by the Mind--a doctrine fit for Men.

[p. 330]

"If, then, thou dost not make thyself like unto God, thou canst not know Him. For like is knowable to like alone.

"Make thou thyself to grow to the same stature as the Greatness which transcends all measure; leap forth from every Body; transcend all Time; become Eternity; and then shalt thou know God.

"Conceiving nothing is impossible unto thyself, think thyself deathless and able to know all--all arts, all sciences, the way of every life.

"Become more lofty than all height, and lower than all depth. Collect into thyself all senses of all creatures--of fire and water, dry and moist. Think that thou art at the same time in every place--in earth, in sea, in sky; not yet begotten, in the womb, young, old, and dead, in after-death conditions.

"And if thou knowest all these things at once--times, places, doings, qualities, and quantities; thou canst know God."

This is the Straight Way, the Good's Own Path, the Ancient Road.

"If thou but sett'st thy foot thereon, 'twill meet thee everywhere, 'twill anywhere be seen, both where and when thou dost expect it not--waking, sleeping, sailing, journeying, by night, by day, speaking, and saying naught. For there is naught that is not image of the Good."

And so for the present writing we bid farewell to Thrice-greatest Hermes and the teachings of his Mind, the Shepherd of all men--with heart-felt thanks that by the Mercy of God the echo of his voice has come to us across the ages and bidden us once more remember.

Footnotes

^311:1 The text has bodily fallen out of our Corpus with one of the quires.

^311:2 This seems to be a complete sermon, and to be presupposed in C. H. xii. (xiii.); as also Ex. xi.

^311:3 Exx. x.-xiii. probably go here as being part of the "Sermons on Fate to Tat"; but they are assigned otherwise by Stobaeus.

^312:1 These all seem to go together from the same Sermon or Book, which in the case of Frag. xv. is definitely assigned by Cyril to the "First of the Expository Sermons." The beginning of the Sermon is given in Lact. xxiv., and a reference in Lact. xiii.

^312:2 Seems to be a complete tractate.

^312:3 By comparison with Ex. vii.

^312:4 Ex. ix. is characterised as "the most authoritative and chiefest of them all," and therefore came, presumably, at the end of one of the Books of these Sermons.

^312:5 A complete tractate, containing heads or summaries of previous sermons, and probably one towards the end of this collection.

^312:6 The esoteric counterpart of which is C. H. xi. (xii.).

^312:7 These three sermons are too advanced to be classed among "The General Sermons," and in the case of the last, Tat is a questioner and not a hearer as he indubitably was in the introductory instruction.

^313:1 This is said to follow on "The Perfect Sermon," which was not included in our Corpus among the selections of the Poemandrist apologist who redacted it.

^313:2 This is said by the editor to be an expansion of an instruction already given to Tat, in Asclepius' absence, and the doctrine is very similar to that contained in C. H. xi. (xii.)--"Mind unto Hermes." It also stood in Cyril's (viii.) "To Asclepius."

^315:1 The end is lost.

^315:2 A fragment only from the end of the sermon is preserved.

     
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 331]

Index

Aah-Tehuti, i. 66. 

Aahlu, Territory of Illumination, i. 70. 

Aall, i. 33. 

Aan, i. 55. 

Ab, i. 89. 

Abammon, the Teacher, iii. 285. 

Abbot Olympius, Story of, i. 384. 

Abercius, ii. 55. 

Abortion, i. 335, ii. 366. 

Abraham, i. 253. 

Abraxas, i. 82, 402. 

Abraxoid, i. 82. 

Abydos, i. 292. 

Abyss, i. 408, ii. 27, 80, 81, 269. 

Accuser, blind, iii. 281. 

Achaab, the Husbandman, ii. 265. 

Achaea, i. 350. 

Acharantus, the Husbandman, ii. 265. 

Achemides, i. 400. 

Active Principle, the, i. 225. 

Acts of John, i. 236, ii. 55, 238, iii. 157; mystery ritual in, i. 182, 183, ii. 243, iii. 156. 

Acts of Philip, i. 147. 

Adam, i. 115, 149, iii. 277, 281; body of, i. 281; celestial, i. 146. 

Adam (J.), i. 336. 

Adam Kadmon, i. 146. 

Adamant, i. 392. 

Adamas, i. 146, 159, 161. 

Adams (see Marsham). 

Adomenon, iii. 305. 

Adonis, i. 151, 156, 294. 

Adoration of images, ii. 286. 

Adrasteia, i. 430, iii. 116. 

Advent, ii. 171. 

Adversary, Agree with thine, iii. 281. 

Aeacus, i. 303. 

Aelian, i. 103. 

Aeon, i. 66, 92, ii. 128, 175, 232, 370, iii. 117, 161; become, ii. 190; birth of the, iii. 160; circle of infinitude, i. 399; communities of the, in Phoenicia, i. 403; demiurgic, i. 410; eternity or, iii. 91; feast of the, i. 403; in Theurgic literature, i. 410; Logos, i. 406; Mithriac, i. 399; in Plato, i. 404; song of praise to the, i. 408; is not time, i. 405; boundary of all universes, i. 392; wealth-giving, i. 402. 

Aeon or Aeons, i. 182, ii. 240. 

Aeon-doctrine, the, i. 387, ii. 190. 

Aeonian Essence Above, i. 152. 

Aeonic Consciousness, ii. 244; Immensities of Egypt, i. 407. 

Aeonology, ii. 32, 192, 248; Hellenistic origin of, i. 401, 405. 

Aeons, ii. 373; father of the, i. 411; hymn of the, ii. 43; Great Silence, Mother of, ii. 241; of Pleroma, i. 408, ii. 245; "rootage" of, ii. 317; type of the, ii. 282. 

Aerolites, iii. 53. 

Aesculapius, cult of, i. 468. 

Aether, i. 84, 101, iii. 50, 98, 101, 125; the height of the, i. 233; quintessence or, ii. 92; Mighty Whirlpool, i. 451. 

Aethiopia (see Ethiopia), i. 188, 281. 

Aethiopian queen, i. 316. 

Again-becoming, ii. 76, 83. 

Agamemnon, i. 446. 

Agathodaimon, i. 85, 98, 105, 109, 479, ii. 213, iii. 156, 157, 163; 

[p. 332]

[paragraph continues] Osiris disciple of, i. 478, iii. 261; literature, iii. 257, 316; sayings of, iii. 310, 316; type, iii. 261. 

Age, Golden, iii. 135; of seven years, iii. 37. 

Agree with thine adversary, iii. 281. 

Agrippa (Cornelius), i. 13. 

Ahriman, i. 325, 326, 400. 

Ahura Mazda (see Ormuzd), i, 326. 

Aion, Reitzenstein's monograph on, i. 387. 

Aipolos, i. 175, 177. 

Air, ii. 342, iii. 66, 129, 210. 

Air very air, iii. 17. 

Air-spaces, iii. 205. 

Akasha-Ganga, i. 110. 

Akhmim, i. 282. 

Akron, i. 364. 

Ajax, i. 446. 

Alalkomeneus, i. 148, 286. 

Alaric, ii. 401. 

Albinus, iii. 227. 

Alchemist, the true, ii. 139. 

Alethophilus, i. 13. 

Alexander, brother of Philo, i. 204; Cornelius (Polyhistor), i. 164. 

Alexandria, i. 99, 301; Jewish colony of, i. 204; Library of, i. 197. 

Alexandrian religio-philosophy, i. 200. 

Alexandrine Gnostics and fourth gospel, i. 38. 

Alexarchus, i. 314. 

Alkyoneus, i. 149. 

All, ii. 310; in all, ii. 221; calumniators of the, ii. 228; genesis of the, i. 406; and Good, ii. 175; master of the, i. 409; and one, ii. 118; is one, ii. 213, 268, 308, 309; one and, i. 136, ii. 230, 344; threefold divided, i. 165; perfected, ii. 255. 

All-Father Mind, ii. 8. 

All-form, ii. 185, 194. 

All-god, Hymn to, ii. 108. 

All-goodness, ii. 344. 

All-perfection, iii. 255. 

All-receiving, i. 333. 

All-seed Potency, ii. 30. 

All-seeing Light, ii. 253. 

All-sense, ii. 364, 396. 

All-soul, ii. 145. 

Allegory, i, 200. 

Almond-tree, i. 182. 

Alone Good Father, ii. 283. 

Alone-begotten, i. 403, iii. 278. 

Alter-egos, ii. 43. 

Amasis, i. 465. 

Ambrosia, i. 161. 

Amelineau, i. 50. 

Amen, i. 74, 274, 337. 

Amen-Ra, Hymn to, i. 131. 

Amenhotep, i. 467. 

Amenhotep-Asclepius, i, 473. 

Amentet, i. 304. 

Amenthe, i. 304. 

Amenti, i. 379; Place of Union with Unseen Father, i. 70. 

American Encyclopaedia, i. 24. 

Amme-ha-Aretz, iii. 321. 

Ammianus Marcellinus, i. 113. 

Ammon, i. 100, 101, 149, 273, 471, ii. 308; King, iii. 293; Kronos that is, ii. 279; sayings of, iii. 307, 313; words of, iii. 152, 215, 216; temples of, ii. 279; (Zeus), i. 318. 

Ammon-Kneph, iii. 158. 

Ammonius, iii. 285. 

Amoun, i. 274, iii. 61; meaning of, i. 273. 

Amphithemis, i. 149. 

Amphitrite, i. 359. 

Amsu, i. 327. 

Amulet, i. 346, 349. 

Amygdalos, i. 182. 

Amyxai, i. 183. 

Anacreon, cup of, i. 167, 193, 455. 

Anaktoreion, i. 180, ii. 171. 

Anaximander, iii. 178, 179. 

Anebo, iii. 286. 

Augel, recording, i. 64; sovereign, i. 371. 

Angel-chief, i. 234. 

Angels, the, i. 240; of Darkness, i. 424; eldest of all, i. 198; evil, ii. 355, iii. 239; of Light, i. 424; paternal, i. 159; tongue of, ii. 32; "words," i. 243. 

Anger, ii. 224. 

Animal, hylic, ii. 63; soul, ii. 246; spirits, i. 363. 

Animal-soul of cosmos, i. 353. 

Animals, burials of, i. 295; celestial, ii. 282; circle of, iii. 46, 51; earthy, iii. 301; sacred, ii. 52, 383, iii. 102, 288; worship of, i. 353. 

Ankh-tie, i. 61. 

[p. 333]

Ankhnes-Ra-Neferab, i. 73. 

Announcement, Great, ii. 170, 317. 

Annu, i. 74. 

Annuals (winds), i. 316. 

Anpu, i. 342. 

Anthropos, Myth of, i. 143; Prototype of humanity, i. 139. 

Anthropos-doctrine, i. 193, iii. 273, 282; Zosimus on, i. 196. 

Anticleides, i. 314. 

Antigonus the Elder, i. 298. 

Antilegomena, i. 370. 

Antoninus Pius, i. 464. 

Ants, iii. 35, 36. 

Anubis, i. 88, 100, 283, 284, 315, 322, 342. 

Ape, i. 87, 95, 446, 449. 

Ape-form, i. 95. 

Ape-Thoth, i. 462. 

Apelles, i. 298. 

Aphrodite, i. 61, 151, 181, 280, 305, 327, 350, 352, 359, ii. 345, iii. 89, 316. 

Aphrodite-Helen, iii. 182. 

Apion, i. 307, 387, ii. 5. 

Apis, i. 267, 268, 277, 292, 303, 304, 307, 309, 311, 322, 337, 355; = Epaphos, i. 314; animated image of Osiris, i. 321. 

Apocalypse of Jesus, iii. 279; of Thespesius, iii. 192; Untitled, ii. 107, 282. 

Apocalypsis, Vision and, ii. 20 ff. 

Apocrypha, i. 365. 

Apocryphal, ii. 234, 236. 

Apogeneses of souls, ii. 260. 

Apokatastasis, ii. 128. 

Apollo, i. 279, 298, 334, 342, 352, 359; golden curls of, i. 352; monad, i. 275. 

Apollonius of Tyana, i. 374, ii. 197, 252. 

Apology of a Poemandrist, ii. 298. 

Apophis, i. 313. 

Apophthegm of Hermes, iii. 88. 

Apostles, Memoirs of, i. 195. 

Apotheosis, ii. 163; of Hermes, iii. 222. 

Appendages, iii. 145, 181. 

Appetite, iii. 75; and heart, iii. 78. 

Apple, of the eye, iii. 165; of the World-Eye, iii. 167. 

Appuleius, ii. 307. 

Apu, i. 282. 

Arabs, i. 272. 

Aratus, i. 314. 

Arbiter (Thoth), i. 58. 

Arcadia, i. 376; Mount of, ii. 238. 

Archangelic Book of Moses, i. 197. 

Archemachus, i. 301. 

Archetypal, Form, ii. 6, 8, 9, 29; Model, i. 236, 241; Pattern, i. 235; Seal, i. 235. 

Archetype, ii. 66; of every other light, i. 241; of Soul, ii. 71; Time's, i. 229, ii. 193.

Archi-charila, i. 310. 

Architect, iii. 122, 125, 235. 

Archontics, i. 424. 

Arcturus, i. 288. 

Ares, i. 305, 327. 

Argives, i. 299, 311. 

Argo, i. 296. 

Argus, iii. 232. 

Aridaeus, Vision of, i. 438, 452. 

Ariouth, i. 88. 

Aristagoras, i. 267. 

Aristarchus, i. 100. 

Ariston, i. 314. 

Aristotle, i. 62, 327, 340, 362; on perfumes, i. 364. 

Ark, tables of the laws in the, i. 238. 

Arms of the Sun, i. 331. 

Arnebeschenis, iii. 198, 209. 

Aroueris, i. 279, 280. 

Arrival of Isis from Phoenicia, i. 330. 

Arsaphes, i. 314. 

Art-prose, ii. 300. 

Artaud, i. 27. 

Artemidorus, i. 158. 

Artemis, i. 352; dyad, i. 275. 

Artificer of Time, ii. 192; of this new World, iii. 118. 

Artist, ii. 290; Supreme, iii. 266. 

Arts, iii. 40, 198; and sciences, iii. 199, 325. 

Asar (Osiris), i. 276; and Ast, i. 367. 

Asar-Hapi, i. 302. 

Ascension of Isaiah, ii. 232. 

Ascent of the Soul, ii. 41 ff.; Straight, i. 428. 

Asclepieion, i. 460. 

Asclepius, i. 127, 469, ii. 391, iii. 184, 198; the Healer, i. 467; the pupil of Taautos, ii. 279. 

Asclepius-Imuth, i. 461. iii. 96, 198. 

Asclepiuses, many, iii. 221. 

[p. 334]

Asenas, iii. 277. 

Ashes, i. 355. 

Ashvaghosha, ii. 44. 

Ashvattha, ii. 317. 

Aso, i. 281. 

Asp, i. 356, 357. 

Aspalathus, i. 365. 

Asphodel, iii. 134. 

Ass, i. 290, 307, 329, 422; bound, i. 305, 330. 

Ass-like, i. 305. 

Assyrians, initiations of the, i. 151; mysteries of the, i. 155, 426. 

Astarte, i. 285. 

Astral body, the true, ii. 172; crater, i. 453. 

Astronomers, iii. 112. 

Asuras, iii. 180. 

At-one-ment, ii. 50, 190, 371. 

Atalanta, i. 446. 

Atem-cult, i. 88. 

Atf-crown, i. 71, 77. 

Athanasius, ii. 72. 

Atheism, i. 278. 

Atheists, i. 296. 

Athena, i. 62, 273, 286, 308, 343, 352, 359; hebdomad, i. 275; house of, iii. 183. 

Athenaeum, The, i. 68. 

Athenagoras, i. 59, 61, iii. 220. 

Athenais, i. 285, 286. 

Athenians, Colonies of the, i. 314. 

Athens, i. 350. 

Athlete, i. 446; Therapeut, i. 206. 

Athur (Athyr), i. 282, 316, 337, 350. 

Atlantic Island, i. 106; names, i. 285. 

Atlanticum, i. 108. 

Atlantis, Plato's, i. 176; Story of, i. 285. 

Atom, ii. 269. 

Atomicity, i. 395. 

Atoms, permanent, i. 289. 

Atonement, Great Day of, i. 306. 

Atropos, i. 442. 

Attis, i. 152; the, i. 179; will I sing, i. 186. 

Atum, i. 130, 132, 134, 135. 

Atum-Ptah-Thoth, i. 136. 

Augoeides, i. 361. 

Augurs, ii. 273, iii. 112. 

Augustine, i. 110, ii. 352; quotations from the old Latin version of, iii. 249. 

Aurelian Sun-God, ii. 281. 

Authentia, iii. 318, 319. 

Authentic Name, the, ii. 252. 

Autozoon, i. 154, 400. 

Avarice, ii. 224. 

Avatara, iii. 143. 

Avengers, iii. 50. 

Avenging Daimon, i. 91, ii. 15, 40. 

Awake thou that sleepest, i. 160. 

Azazel, Ritual of, i. 306. 

Azoth, 1, 281. 

Ba, i. 89. 

Baba, i. 329. 

Babe, ii. 216. 

Babel und Bibel, iii. 179. 

Babes, ii. 295; new-born, ii. 296. 

Babylonian cultus, i. 379; Talmud, i. 115. 

Bacchic caves, i. 453; mysteries, i. 212; initiates, i. 191; orgies, i. 311. 

Bacchus, ii. 56; starry cup of, i. 414; infant, i. 303. 

Bad, i. 341. 

Balaam (Bileam), iii. 279; Jeschu, ii. 80; the Lame Man, i. 335; = Nicolaos, ii. 80, iii. 279. 

Balaamites, i. 165, ii. 80. 

Balance, i. 55, 64, 72, ii. 95, 118. 

Balancer, i. 58, 64; Judge of the two Combatant Gods, i. 56. 

Baptism, in the Cup, ii. 191; of light, ii. 255; spiritual, ii. 92. 

Baptist, John the, i. 470. 

Baptize, ii. 87. 

Bardic lore, i. 392. 

Barga, Da (P. Angelo), i. 10. 

Baris, i. 289. 

Barley-water, i. 347. 

Basilides, i. 436, ii. 32, 98, 107, 160, 400, iii. 135, 140, 145; Exegetica of, ii. 215; Hermes and, ii. 215. 

Bastardy, i. 334; charge of, ii. 51. 

Bath-kol, i. 101, 279, 285. 

Bats (simile), i. 161. 

Battle, inner, iii. 6. 

Baudissin (Count), i. 123. 

Baumgarten-Crusius, i. 13, 24. 

Bear, i. 176, 295, 422, ii. 101, iii. 51, 130, 131; Little, iii. 51. 

Bears, ii. 62. 

Beast, i. 398. 

Beasts, Great, i. 424, 425. 

Beautiful, the, ii. 113, 114, 118; Vision of the, iii. 15, 53. 

[p. 335]

Beauty, ii. 8, 28, iii. 54; of the Gnosis, ii. 123; of the Good, ii. 144, 145, 163; of the Truth, ii. 121. 

Bebi, i. 329. 

Bebon, i. 329, 343. 

Becanus Goropius, i. 20. 

Become Aeon, ii. 190; all things, ii. 194. 

Becoming, i. 333. 

Beetle, i. 356. 

Beginning, i. 234; of philosophy, i. 274. 

Begrudgeth, ii. 108. 

Behemoth, i. 423, 424; monster of the south land, i. 427. 

Behnesa logoi (see Oxyrhynchus), ii. 17, 239. 

Belly-lust, ii. 112. 

Beloved, the, ii. 35. 

Belus, iii. 303. 

Benci, i. 9. 

Benefactor, i. 320; of men, ii. 213. 

Beqesu, i. 60. 

Bergk, i. 149. 

Bernays, ii. 392. 

Bestiaries, iii. 112. 

Bestower of the Spirit, ii. 231. 

Better, i. 333; the, ii. 89. 

Better One, i. 328, 340, ii. 291, 294, 297. 

Beyond-same, ii. 62. 

Bhakti-Marga, ii. 119. 

Bible of Hellas, the, i. 193; of logia, ii. 236; of the Veii, ii. 235. 

Bileam (Nico-laus), i. 165. 

Biographic Generale, i. 27. 

Birds, iii. 103. 

Birth, iii. 22; from Above, ii. 239; of the Aeon, iii. 160; blind from, i. 189, iii. 281; Chamber of, i. 75; of a Christ, the, ii. 243; conception and, iii. 68; demiurge of, ii. 244; engine of, ii. 39; essential, ii. 228, 250; in God, ii. 226; of Horus, i. 75, 76, 95, ii. 242, iii. 122, 157, 160, 162; of Man, ii. 241; mysteries of a divine, i. 75; new, ii. 239, 240, 250; of Osiris, iii. 122; parent of my bringing-in to, ii. 232; second, i. 79; in understanding, ii. 226; virgin, ii. 240; way of this, ii. 244. 

Birthday of the Eye of Horus, i. 331; of the Sun's Staff, i. 331. 

Birthdays of the Gods, i. 279; of Horus, i. 332. 

Bithus of Dyrrachium, iii. 296. 

Bitos (see Bitys), i. 197, iii. 276, 295; Pinax of, iii. 277. 

Bitter Chaos, i. 92, 192; matter, i. 92; path, ii. 362; awesome and, i. 397; water, i. 92. 

Bitterness, i. 92, 153: cup of, ii. 139; of God, i. 92; of Jacob Bohme, i. 92, 397. 

Bitys (see Bitos), i. 197, iii. 294; the prophet, ii, 280, iii. 293. 

Bitys-books, iii. 297. 

Bitys-school, iii. 298. 

Black dog-ape, i. 88; rite, iii. 107, 141, 149, 155. 

Black-robed, i. 332. 

Blackden, iii. 186. 

Blasphemers, ii. 140, 244. 

Blessed Land, iii. 282; Man Above, i. 159, 164; Nature, i. 155; Nature Above, i. 152; Ones, ii. 206; Region, iii. 276, 295; Space, ii. 98.

Blind, Accuser, i. 189; from birth, i. 189, iii. 281. 

Bliss, ii. 226. 

Boat, i. 52, 89; Solar, i. 270. 

Bocchoris, i. 272. 

Bockh, i. 107. 

Bodhisattvas, ii. 45. 

Bodies, how composed, ii. 133; everlasting, iii. 30; glory of celestial, ii. 165; migration into, ii. 329. 

Bodiless, ii. 88, 128; the, ii. 65, iii. 14. 

Body, iii. 63; of Adam, i. 281; aery, iii. 145; of bliss, ii. 45; divine, ii. 93; elements of, iii. 200; encompasses all things, iii. 46; fiery, ii. 151, 154, 171; of God, ii. 85; of the Great Man, i. 425; house of, ii. 321; of Jesus, i. 286; the last, ii. 187, 195; of the Law, ii. 44; mixture of, iii. 199; noetic, ii. 242; soul and, ii. 124, 130; spirituous, iii. 145, 210; subtle, iii. 145, 209; that can never die, ii. 221; times of, iii. 9; of transformation, ii. 44; type of, iii. 49; universal, ii. 125. 

[p. 336]

Bodying, iii. 31, 36, 38. 

Bohme, Jacob, i. 92. 

Boissonade, ii. 38. 

Bone of Horus, i. 189, 343; of the sea-hawk, i. 189, 343; of Typho, i. 189, 343. 

Bonnet, ii. 108. 

Book of Breathings, i. 65. 

Book of the Dead, i. 52, 54, 55, 69, 83, 290; flood in the, i. 109; mysteries and the, iii. 186. 

Book of Elxai, i. 369. 

Book of Enoch, i. 126, 424. 

Book of God, i. 467. 

Book of the Great Logos according to the Mystery, i. 166, ii. 96. 

"Book of the Living," i. 367. 

Book concerning the Logos, ii. 265. 

Book of the Master, i. 68, 77, 78. 

Book of Ostanes, iii. 277. 

Book, The Sacred, i. 75. 

Books, canonical, ii. 235; of the Chaldaeans, i. 392, ii. 81 ff., iii. 280, 321; preserved from flood, i. 113; on the Gnosis, iii. 231; Hermaic, iii. 293; of Hermes, i. 100, 115, 196, 342, 380, iii. 282, 289; of Hermes described by Clem. of A., iii. 222; hieratic, iii. 225; of Isis, iii. 316; of Isis and Horus, i. 481, iii. 208; of Isis to Horus, iii. 316; Lord of, i. 53; of Manetho, i. 104; of Moses, i. 456, ii. 158; of the Saviour, i. 418; of Taautos, ii. 279; of Thoth, i. 122, 124; Victim-Sealing, iii. 223, 224. 

Bootes, i. 288. 

Boreas, iii. 132. 

Boundary, ii. 9; Great, ii. 35; Horos or, ii. 366; of the Spheres, ii. 195. 

Boundless Light, i. 93; Point, the, i. 184. 

Boutos, i. 288. 

Brain, the, i. 162, 169. 

Branch, The, i. 227. 

Brass, sounding, i. 303. 

Bread, distribution of, iii. 224; which the Lord hath given you to eat, i. 246; super-substantial, i. 86. 

Breadth-depth-length-height-ray, i. 94. 

Breasted, i. 130, 138. 

Breath, iii. 199; gift of, iii. Ill; of God, i. 232, ii. 76. 

Brethren, ii. 50; the two Horus, i. 66; of the Lord, i. 147. 

Brick-bat, i. 115. 

Brimo, i. 180. 

Brimos, i. 180, 314. 

Bringer-of-good, i. 158. 

Brockhaus, i. 35. 

Broiled fish, i. 270. 

Brother, of the Lord, James, i. 143; of Man, ii. 35. 

Brucker, i. 21. 

Brugsch, i. 49, 55, 57. 

Bubble, i. 390. 

Buddha, Gantama the, iii. 320; Three Bodies of, ii. 44. ff. 

Buddhism, Great Vehicle of, ii. 44. 

Buddhist seer, i. 379. 

Budge, i. 52, 89, 103, 367. 

Builder, mind as, ii. 153. 

Builder-Souls, iii. 140. 

Builders, iii. 139, 140. 

Bull-born, i. 311. 

Burials of Animals, i. 293, 295; of Osiris, i. 295. 

Burn living men, i. 355. 

Burns his food publicly, i. 270. 

Busiris, i. 293, 305. 

Buto, i. 315, 347. 

Buys Plato, i. 351. 

Byblos, i. 284-286. 

Cabiri (Kabiri), i. 127. 

Caduceus, i. 61, iii. 232. 

Caintes, i. 142. 

Call thou me not Good, ii. 72. 

Called, i. 147. 

Calumniators, ii. 233, 250, iii. 317. 

Cambyses, i. 277, 322. 

Cana of Galilee, i. 167. 

Cancer, i. 415. 

Candalle (Flussas), i. 10. 

Canopus (Canobus), i. 296, 301. 

Capitoline Zeus, i. 352. 

Carapace, cosmic, ii. 321; of darkness, ii. 121; of selfhood, ii. 42. 

Caravanserai, ii. 283. 

Cardamum, i. 365. 

Carpenter, Estlin, i. 468. 

Carriers of holy symbols, i. 264. 

Casaubon, i. 21. 

Cask, drop from a, i. 190. 

Cat, i. 344. 

Catalogue of kings, i. 277. 

Catharms, iii. 210. 

[p. 337]

Cave, ii. 126, 128. 

Cedrenus, iii. 269. 

Celsus, i. 147, 423; True Word of, ii. 50. 

Celts, i. 350. 

Ceremonies, Overseer of the, iii. 223. 

Chalcidius, i. 19, 435, ii. 159. 

Chaldaeans, i. 196, 327, ii. 53; Books of the, i. 392, 465, ii. 81 ff., iii. 280, 324; mystery-tradition, i. 138. 

Chamber of Birth, i. 75; of Flames, i. 75; of Gold, i. 75. 

Chambers, i. 34, iii. 218, 266; opinion of, i. 34 f. 

Champollion, i. 27. 

Chaos, i. 150, 338, 388, 389, ii. 27, 102; the bitter, i. 192; liquid, i. 191. 

Character, ii. 244, iii. 179. 

Charila, i. 310, 311. 

Chariot, celestial, i. 154, iii. 173; of the Powers, i. 238. 

Charioteer, i. 429, 430, ii. 270. 

Charity, ii. 346. 

Charops, i. 303. 

Cheiron, iii. 304. 

Chemia, i. 263, 309, iii. 158. 

Chemmis, i. 282. 

Cherubim, i. 238. 

Cheyne, i. 468. 

Child of the Egg, i. 139; of God, ii. 255. 

Child-making, ii. 68. 

Children, likeness of, iii. 89; recognition of, iii. 20. 

Chnouphis (Chnuphis), i. 92, 477, ii. 265. 

Chnubis, i. 477. 

Chnum, i. 477, 480, iii. 155, 159. 

Choeroboscus, iii. 112. 

Choir (choirs) of daimons, ii. 89, 145, 272, 273, iii. 102; of Gods, ii. 206. 

Chonouphis, i. 274. 

Chrism, the Ineffable, i. 154, 190. 

Christ, i. 301; a, ii. 174; the, i. 160, iii. 324; the birth of a, ii. 241, 243; disciples of, i. 290; garment of, ii. 249; of God, ii. 3; "scourge" of, ii. 173; triumphant, ii. 117. 

Christ-baptism, ii. 93. 

Christ-mystery, i. 198. 

Christ-stage of manhood, i. 367, 368. 

Christ-state, ii. 93, 243. 

Christos, descent of the, i. 90. 

Chronicum (Eusebius), i. 20. 

Chrysippus, i. 298. 

Church, ii. 117; virgin, i. 377. 

Churning the Ocean, iii. 180. 

Chwolsohn, ii. 57. 

Cicala, song of, ii. 292. 

Cicero, ii. 235. 

Circle of the All, iii. 47; of animals, iii. 46, 51; Life-producing, iii. 51; of Necessity, i. 428; of Sun, iii. 52; of types-of-life, ii. 194, 227. 

Circles, seven, ii. 76, iii. 47. 

Circuit (Eudoxus), i. 269. 

Circumambient, i. 300. 

Circumterrene, ii. 276. 

Cities of Refuge, i. 237. 

Citizens, true, i. 221. 

City, ii. 109; of the Eight, i. 57; of God, i. 235, 245, 246, ii. 256; the grandest, i. 235; the Intelligible, i 235; the Little, i. 293. 

Civil Wars, i. 352. 

Claudius, i. 119. 

Cleanthes, i. 347. 

Clement, Second Epistle of, i. 153. 

Clement of Alexandria, i. 153, ii. 215, 235, 300; on the mysteries, iii. 150; on the tradition of the Gnosis, i. 148. 

Clementine Homilies, i. 388, ii. 72. 

Cleombrotus, iii. 170, 175. 

Cloak, hateful, ii. 121. 

Closed lips, ye of the, i. 210. 

Closet, i. 209. 

Clotho, i. 442. 

Cnossus, iii. 179. 

Cock, iii. 162; crowing of, iii. 161, 162. 

Cocks, i. 325. 

Codex Brucianus, i. 50, 93, ii. 282; Untitled Apocalypse of, ii. 303. 

Coffin, i. 287. 

Colberg, i. 22. 

Colonies of the Athenians, i. 314. 

Colony, ii. 354. 

Colour, one, i. 391; ray-like, i. 224. 

Columns, i. 104; of Hermes, i. 112. 

Combatant Gods, Judge of, i. 53. 

Combatants, Two, i. 66. 22 

[p. 338]

Come unto us, ii. 43. 

Comets, iii. 52. 

Common hearth, iii. 171; reason, i. 346; teachers, iii. 287. 

Companions of Horus, i. 270, 290; of Odysseus, i. 270. 

Completion-Beginning, i. 74. 

Comprehensible, Incomprehensibles, i. 184. 

Conception, ii. 390; and birth, iii. 68; Typhon, i. 304. 

Concupiscence, ii. 224. 

Conductor of Souls, i. 159. 

Cone-bearing, i. 266. 

Configuration of the Element, iii. 276. 

Congress, ii. 240. 

Consciousness, Aeonic, ii. 244; Nirvanic, i. 51, ii. 45, 46. 

Constancy, ii. 390. 

Constantine, ii. 55. 

Consummation, Supreme, ii. 161. 

Contemplation, iii. 94. 

Contemplative or Theoretic Life, i. 208. 

Contemplator, ii. 93. 

Continence, ii. 225. 

Continuum, ii. 397. 

Conybeare, i. 219, ii. 71; critical text of the D. V. C. , i. 200. 

Coptic Gnostic Codex Brucianus, ii. 282; works, the, ii. 51. 

Coptos, i. 335. 

Coriander seed, i. 246, 247. 

Corporality, ii. 212, 218. 

Corpse, sensation's, ii. 121. 

Corpus (Hermeticum), original MS. of, i. 6; quires lost from, ii. 69. 

Corruption's chain, ii. 121. 

Cory, i. 104, 106, 123. 

Cosmogony, Chart of Orphic, ii. 162; of Taaut, i. 126. 

Cosmoi, Seven, i. 407. 

Cosmos, ii. 325, 337, 377, iii. 39; Animal-Soul of, i. 353; beautiful, ii. 147; most wise Breath, ii. 118; of Cosmos, i. 91; course of, ii. 133; divine mysteries of, iii. 325; egg or womb of, i. 451; imitator of eternity, ii. 368; second God, ii. 125; good, ii. 358; great body of, ii. 128; higher, ii. 378; Horus, i. 338; intellect of, ii. 373; intelligible, i. 146, ii. 167, 194, 275; principles of, ii. 207; matter or, ii. 336; gaze through Me upon the, ii. 179; meaning of, ii. 85; order, ii. 134; paradigm of, ii. 196; passions of, ii. 185; re-birth of, ii. 357; sense-and-thought of, ii. 133, 139; sensible or hylic, ii. 167; sensible image of, i. 334; a sphere, ii. 148; this, i. 224. 

Cotta, iii. 231. 

Counterfeit, iii. 282; of Spirit, iii 68. 

Covent Garden theory, i. 258. 

Cow, i. 316, 332. 

Cow-horns, i. 291. 

Cowherd, i. 272. 

Cradle, Hall of the Child in his, i. 74, 75. 

Crater, ii. 92; astral, i. 453; in Orpheus, Macrobius, and Proclus, i. 151; in Plato, i. 450; sidereal of Father Liber, i. 451; vulcanic, i. 452. 

Crates, Visions of, i. 380. 

Creation, new, ii. 243; of the world, iii. 117. 

Creation-myths, i. 51. 

Creator, God the, iii. 293; Word of the, iii. 256. 

Creator-Word, iii. 254. 

Creatures of Light, i. 51. 

Cretan civilisation, i. 149. 

Crete, i. 359. 

Critias, i. 106. 

Criticism, iii. 315. 

Crocodile, i. 77, 267, 288, 329, 330, ii. 382; sixty eggs, i. 356, 358; tongue-less, i. 357. 

Crocodilopolis, ii. 382. 

Cronus (see Kronos), i. 390, ii. 144, 162, iii. 234; Ammon, i. 127; Mithriac, i. 400; mystery deity, i. 400. 

Cross, i. 286, ii. 367; seal of a, iii. 161. 

Crosswise, iii. 24, 47. 

Crown of lives, i. 71. 

Crux ansata, i. 61. 

Cry (of Nature), ii. 34. 

Cudworth, i. 32. 

Cult of Aesculapius, i. 468; of Jesus, ii. 138. 

Cultores et Cultrices pietatis, i. 208. 

Cumont, i. 324, 399, 400, 401. 

[p. 339]

Cup, ii. 86, iii. 273; of Anacreon, i. 167, 193, 455; baptism in the, ii. 191; of bitterness, ii. 139; of Dionysus, i. 452; of the divine draught, i. 245; His, iii. 284; which I drink, i. 168; of immortality, iii. 205; of initiation, ii. 94; in which the King drinketh, i. 167; of Living Water bubbling-forth, i. 399; of prudence, i. 454; of Tantalus, ii. 198. 

Cupido, ii. 309. 

Cure of intellect, ii. 347. 

Cutting of wood, i. 293. 

Cybele, priests of, i. 169. 

Cyclic Gods, ii. 77, 89. 

Cyclopaedia of Biblical Literature, i. 27. 

Cyllene, i. 158, 168. 

Cylinder, i. 176, 439, iii. 101, 175, 177, 178. 

Cymbal, tinkling, i. 303. 

Cynocephalus, i. 55, 56, 120. 

Cyperus, i. 364. 

Cypress, i. 364. 

Cyril's Corpus of XV. Books, iii. 251. 

Cytherea, iii. 92. 

Daimon, i. 324, 443; avenging, i. 91, ii. 15, 40; Chnum the Good, i. 477; counterfeit, iii. 281; essence of, is activity, ii. 273; evil, i. 355; Good, i. 84, 97, 402, ii. 156, 199, 203, 204, 206, iii. 150, 155, 255; Good Holy, i. 94; mind a, ii. 154, 171; self-born, iii. 120. 

Daimon-Chief, iii. 237. 

Daimones, ii. 313, 375, iii. 49; choirs of, ii. 89, 272, 273, 277, iii. 102; Concerning the, ii. 282; hierarchy of, ii. 314; Homer on, i. 299; incursions of, ii. 277; in service, ii. 274; Theory of the, i. 298. 

Daimonial Energy, ii. 137. 

Daimonials, ii. 130. 

Daimonic Soul, ii. 229. 

Damascius, i. 91, 152, 156, ii. 19, 25, 260. 

Damatrios, i. 350. 

Dark mist, i. 125; mystery, iii. 149; space, ii. 26; wisdom, i. 87, 91. 

Darkness, i. 91, 325, 451, ii. 4, 13, 79, 80, 81; carapace of, ii. 121; comprehended it not, i. 125; genesis of fire and, i. 197; serpent of, ii. 31; thrice-unknown, ii. 25; torment of, ii. 226, 245. 

Dawn, Land of Eternal, i. 80; New, iii. 96. 

Day of Light, i. 326. 

De Faye, i. 196. 

De Horrack, i. 49. 

De Mysteriis, iii. 252. 

De Sphaera Barbarica, i. 407. 

Dead, Book of the, i. 52, 54, 69, 83, 290; judge of the, i. 64; prayers for the, i. 78; things, if ye have eaten, i. 175; raise, i. 373; resurrection of, ii. 165; rising from, i. 173, iii. 163; shall leap forth from graves, the, i. 172; sheeted, i. 161; the, i. 172. 

Death, i. 417, ii. 39, 126, 209; living, ii. 121; of the serpent, ii. 300; there is no, ii. 124; twelve fates of, ii. 249; Way of, ii. 18. 

Death-genius, i. 88. 

Deathless Water, ii. 18. 

Deathlessness, ii. 128; Way of, ii. 39. 

Decans, i. 100, iii. 45; Egyptian names of, iii. 54; Six-and-thirty, iii. 45, 46. 

Deep, Infinite, i. 390. 

Deer, form of a, i. 191. 

Deinon, i. 307. 

Delphi, i. 256, 310; Oracle at, i. 349. 

Demagogue (in Plato), i. 431. 

Demeter, i. 305, 318, 345, 350, iii. 232; limbs of, i. 347; wanderings of, i. 298. 

Demi-Gods, i. 106. 

Demiurge, i. 130, 457, ii. 33, iii. 22, 30; of birth, ii. 244; of God, iii. 240; the Sun, ii. 269. 

Demiurgic Aeon., i. 410; Mind, i. 137, ii. 35; Thought, iii. 56. 

Democritus, i. 323, iii. 297. 

Denderah, i. 73, 74, 75. 

Deo nubere, i. 216. 

Depth, i. 409. 

Der-el-Bahari, i. 120. 

Descent of the Christos, the, i. 90; from the Head Above, i. 169; of Kore, i. 350; of Man, ii. 34. 

[p. 340]

Desert, i. 163. 

Desirable, ii. 161; One, ii. 254. 

Destiny, iii. 69; bonds of, iii. 299. 

Destruction, Way that leadeth to, i. 182. 

Detailed, ii. 237; Discourses, ii. 264. 

Determination, ii. 357, 358. 

Dens Lunus, i. 166. 

Devas, iii. 180. 

Deveria, i. 28. 

Devil taking form of fisherman, iii. 164. 

Devotee of God, ii. 139. 

Devotees, race of, ii. 241. 

Devotion, iii. 238; God-gnosis, ii. 131, 136; and Gnosis, ii. 114; Way of, ii. 119. 

Devourer, i. 289. 

Devourers of the Unrighteous, i. 425. 

Dharmakaya, ii. 44, 45. 

Diabolus, iii. 238. 

Diaconic, i. 300. 

Diadochi, i. 102. 

Dialogues with Tat, ii. 237. 

Diaspora, i. 255. 

Diaulos, i. 149. 

Didymus, ii. 72. 

Dieterich, i. 82, 84, 90, 92, 94, 197. 

Diktys, i. 271, 286. 

Dinarchus, ii. 236. 

Diochite, i. 292. 

Diocletian, ii. 300. 

Dionysiac rites, i. 256. 

Dionysian night-rites, i. 311. 

Dionysius (the sculptor), i. 352. 

Dionysius Aegeensis, i. 62. 

Dionysus, i. 281, 298, 301, 302, 305, 310, 313, 345, 347, 416, 453; bull-formed, i. 311; cup of, i. 452; gladsome, i. 312; ivy of, i. 314; mysteries of, i. 311; Osiris and, i. 310; relics of, i. 312; and Semele, i. 161; Spirit is, i. 318. 

Disciples of Thrice-Greatest Hermes, i. 481. 

Disciples of the Christ, i. 290; of God, i. 254; of the Logos, i. 243; Triad of, i. 476; the Twelve, i. 169; of Wisdom, iii. 303. 

Discipline of the Priests, iii. 224; of Souls, ii. 347. 

Discourse on Sense, ii. 131, 132. 

Discourses, Detailed, ii. 264. 

Disobedient Ones, iii. 143. 

Dispensation of all things, ii. 158; of the Universe, ii. 173. 

Divider of all, the, i. 236. 

Divining, art of, i. 262. 

Divinity, Feminine, ii. 32; Great-ness of. ii. 309; Reason of, ii. 311, 318. 

Dodecagon, i. 305. 

Dodecaschoenus, iii. 155. 

Dog, i. 87, 90, 277, 284, 288, 295, 296, 322, 325, 342, 352, 353, 358, 422. 

Dog-days, i. 355. 

Dog-headed, i. 355; ape, i. 55. 

Dog-town, i. 354. 

Dolphin, iii. 113, 180. 

Door, About the Inner, iii. 275; Inner, iii. 274, 280. 

Doser, i. 465, iii. 155. 

Double, image or, i. 189. 

Dove, i. 352. 

Dowsing in the Mind, ii. 255. 

Dragon, i. 94, 352, 422, iii. 112, 180; lower, i. 426. 

Dragon-slayer, i. 94. 

Drainer of Water, ii. 39. 

Draughts, i. 278. 

Dream, ii. 222; of Scipio, i. 413. 

Dream-sight, ii. 130. 

Dreams and ecstasies, iii. 203; the people of, i. 162. 

Drexler, i. 115, 166. 

Druidical Gnosis, iii. 296. 

Drummond, i. 200. 

Dry, iii. 66; space, ii. 75, 76. 

Du Preau, i. 10. 

Dual Soul, ii. 169. 

Dualism, ii. 31, 115 ff. 

Dualistic, ii. 140. 

Dualists, Theory of the, i. 323. 

Diimichen, i. 49. 

Duncker and Schneidewin, i. 143. 

Duration, ii. 211. 

Dwarf, iii. 165. 

Dwelling of the Golden One, i. 75. 

Dyad, i. 275, 414. 

Eagle, i. 56, 284, 330, 422, 446, 449, iii. 133, 180. 

Earth, ii. 209, iii. 66, 130, 261; the black, i. 156; blood-red, iii. 277; fiery, iii. 277; fleshly, iii. 277; depths of, i. 413; Let there 

[p. 341]

be, iii. 262; primal, i. 310; red, i. 150; Sons of God on, i. 233; very earth, iii. 17; virgin, iii. 277. 

Earth-and-Water, ii. 5, 8, 37. 

Earth-born, ii. 49; folk, ii. 122. 

Ebers Papyrus, i. 50. 

Ebionites, i. 369. 

Ebony, i. 87. 

Eclipses, i. 321. 

Ecliptic, iii. 177. 

Economy, ii. 28, iii. 61. 

Ecstasis, i. 251, ii. 157, 161, 303. 

Eden, i. 159; brain, i. 187; river of, i. 187. 

Edersheim, i. 200. 

Efflorescence, iii. 100. 

Efflux, God's, iii. 121, 122. 

Egg, i. 125, 126, 131, 326, 389, 462, ii 282; Child of, i. 139; first, i. 391; God from, i. 392; skull-like, i. 391; sphere or, i. 427; throbbing, i. 182. 

Egregores, iii. 137; Watchers, i. 126. 

Egypt, is body, i. 164; image of heaven, ii. 351; holy land, i. 70; sacred language of, ii. 280; once sea, i. 317; geographical symbols of, iii. 186; theosophy of, iii. 323; wisdom of, ii. 98. 

Egyptian alphabet, i. 337; names of Decans, iii. 54; emanation doctrine, iii. 95; teachers of Greeks, iii. 286; mysteries, grades of, i. 50; philosophy, i. 28; rhetor, ii. 299; syncretism 1000 B.C., i. 135; translation from, iii. 294. 

Egyptians, Gospel according to the, i. 38, 142, 150, 153, 242, ii. 54, 164. 

Egyptians, Greek disciples of, i. 274. 

Eight, i. 71; at the, ii. 228; ogdoad or, i. 275; spheres, ii. 275; wardens, i. 85, 121. 

Eight-and-twenty, i. 320. 

Eighteen, i. 319. 

Eighth, ii. 16; sphere, ii. 42 ff. 

El-Khargeh Oasis, iii. 216. 

El Shaddai, i. 159. 

Elder Horus, i. 279, 280, 334, 343, 367. 

Eldest of all Angels, i. 198. 

Elect, i. 147, ii. 317. 

Eleians, i. 311. 

Element, Configuration of the, iii. 276; the One, ii. 195, 244. 

Elements of body, iii. 200; complaint of, iii. 118; four, ii. 311; friendship and enmity with, iii. 133. 

Elephantine, i. 320, 477. 

Eleusinian logos, i. 175; mysteries, i. 59, 160. 

Eleusis, i. 178, 179, 180, ii. 171. 

Elis, i. 359. 

Elohim, Sons of, i. 159. 

Elxai, i. 71; Book of, i. 369. 

Elysian state, i. 152. 

Emanation, holy, iii. 121. 

Emanations, i. 84. 

Embalmment, Ritual of, i. 460. 

Embarking, i. 321. 

Embryology, ii. 102. 

Embryonic stages of Incarnation (Pistis Sophia), iii. 68. 

Empedocles, i. 159, 300, 435, ii. 362, iii. 237. 

Emptiness, ii. 174. 

Enclistra, iii. 93. 

Encydopadie, (Pauly), i. 26, 33. 

Encyclopaedia Britannica, i. 34. 

Encyclopaedism, i. 107, 108. 

End, i. 315. 

Endymion, i. 151. 

Energies, ii. 211, 212, iii. 37. 

Energy, ii. 259; and feeling, iii. 34, 40; of God, ii. 160, 178, 180, 203. 

Enformation according to Gnosis, ii. 246. 

Engine of birth, ii. 39; cosmic, ii. 34; of Justice, ii. 41; of the universe, iii. 50. 

Enoch, Book of, i. 126, 424. 

Entrance, i. 321; of the Golden Heavens, i. 75; on Light, i. 79. 

Envy, ii. 224. 

Epachthe, i. 350. 

Epaphos, i. 314. 

Epeius, i. 446. 

Epicurus, i. 323. 

Epimetheus, iii. 274, 280, 282. 

Epiphanius, ii. 79. 

Epiphany, Feast of, iii. 160. 

Epiphi, i. 331. 

Epopt, ii. 93, iii. 188. 

Epopteia, i. 263, ii. 21, iii. 159. 

Epoptic, i. 362; mystery, i. 362. 

Equator, iii. 177. 

[p. 342]

Equilateral triangle, i. 305, 359. 

Equilibrium, i. 56. 

Er, Vision of, i. 413, 426, 428, 437, ii. 15, 40, 187. 

Erataoth, i. 422. 

Erdmann, i. 32. 

Erebus, i. 125. 

Eros, i. 125, ii. 309, 345. 

Error, ii. 224. 

Esaldaios, i. 159, 166. 

Eschenbach, i. 62. 

Essence, ii. 269, iii. 84; first, iii. 55; of God, ii. 113, 199; intelligible, ii. 276, iii. 57; moist, i. 187, 388, 390, 454, ii. 4, 75; one, i. 391; primal, iii. 56; of seed, i. 156. 

Essence-chief, ii. 341. 

Essenes, i. 30, 208, 369, 373, ii. 395. 

Essential, iii. 236; birth, the, ii. 250; man, ii. 116, 251, 321. 

Eternity, ii. 325, 366; Aeon, i. 229, iii. 91; become, ii. 188; cosmos imitator of, 368; of eternity, i. 91; moving image of, i. 405; illumined by Logos, i. 399; maker of, i. 66; prince of, i. 132. 

Etesian Winds, i. 316. 

Ether, i. 125. 

Etheric double, iii. 206; link, iii. 206. 

Ethiopia (see Aethiopia), i. 98. 

Ethiopian, i. 88; enchanters, i. 119. 

Ethiopian History, i. 106. 

Eucharist, ii. 94. 

Eudoxus, i. 269, 274, 293, 305, 332, 343, 345. 

Euhemerus (see Evemerus), ii. 162. 

Eunomus the Locrian, ii. 300. 

Eunuch, business of, i. 186. 

Euphrates, i. 188; waters of the, i. 426. 

Euripides, i. 323, 352, 357. 

Eusebius, i. 20, 123, 370. 

Eustathius, i. 172. 

Eve, iii. 280. 

Eve, Gospel of, i. 142, ii. 24, 25, 238. 

Evemerus (see Euhemerus), i. 257, 296, 297; theory of, i. 295. 

Everard, i. 12. 

Evil angels, ii. 355, iii. 239; create, i. 91; Daimon, i. 355; pleroma of, ii. 113. 

Evoi, i. 186. 

Excerpts from Theodotus, ii. 251. 

Executioner, mind the, ii. 201. 

Exegetica of Basilides, ii. 215. 

Exhalation, iii. 206. 

Existing Non-existences, i. 184. 

Experience and memory, iii. 195. 

Expository Sermons, ii. 250, 264, iii. 54; to Tat, iii. 216, 256, 257, 259, 262, 263, 264, 266. 

Eye, altogether all, i. 214; apple of, iii. 165; heart's, ii. 121; of Horus, i. 336; House of, i. 288; incorporeal, iii. 253; of intellect, ii. 308; of mind, ii. 253; pupil of, i. 84, 394; Pupil of the World's, iii. 159; of the soul, iii. 129; spiritual, i. 214. 

Ezekiel, Hebrew poet, i. 164. 

Ezekiel, i. 154, 227, 379; Mercabah, or Chariot of, i. 238; Wheels of, iii. 173. 

Fabricius, i. 5, ii. 263. 

Face, i. 433; of God, i. 218. 

Fairbanks, i. 159. 

Famine Years, Inscription of the Seven, i. 466. 

Famines, plagues and, iii. 49. 

Farrar, ii. 55. 

Fast to the world, ii. 239. 

Fate (see Heimarmene), ii. 7, 201, 202, 273, iii. 61, 85, 265; hebdomad of, ii. 251; and necessity, ii. 385; procession of, ii. 49, iii. 273, 282, 326; providence and, iii. 36, 55, 60; Sermons on, ii. 217. 

Fate-Sphere, ii. 41, 282, 283. 

Fates, i. 439. 

Father of the aeons, i. 411; Alone Good, ii. 283; who is in the Hidden, i. 209; House of the, i. 224; own, iii. 242. 

Father-God, ii. 6. 

Fatherhood, i. 150; of God, i. 73. 

Fatherless, iii. 242. 

Fawn-skin, i. 191, 311. 

Fecund, iii. 254, 269. 

Feeling, energy and, iii. 34. 

Fellow-rulers of height, ii. 302. 

Fence of fire, i. 427; of iniquity, i. 427; of the teeth, i. 162. 

Ferment, i. 125, 396. 

Fever, iii. 115. 

[p. 343]

Few, the, i. 207, ii. 346, iii. 11. 

Ficinio, Marsiglio, i. 8, 9, 19. 

Fiery body, ii. 154, 171; ruler, i. 166; whirlwinds, i. 409. 

Fifth part, a, ii. 318. 

Fifty-six-angled, i. 305. 

Fig-leaf, i. 312. 

Figs, i. 349. 

Finger on lips, i. 349. 

Fire, ii. 310; fence of, i. 427; very fire, iii. 17; flower of, iii. 138; knowing, iii. 98; and mind, God of, i. 130; ordeal of, i. 79; robe of, ii. 1 52; and snow, i. 95; sons of, iii. 136; sphere of, i. 428; voice of, ii. 5, 26; and water, iii. 66. 

Fire-tenders, iii. 199. 

Fire-tree, ii. 317. 

Fire-workers, iii. 199. 

Firmament, iii. 262, 263, 264; water above, i. 188. 

Firmaments, iii. 194; or layers, iii. 211. 

Firmicus Maternus, i. 477. 

First, egg, i. 391; essence, iii. 55; God, i. 339, iii. 85; Hermes, ii. 83; man, i. 115, 139, ii. 27; cube (Poseidon), i. 275; woman, i. 139, ii. 27. 

First-born God, ii. 203; His, i. 227; of water, i. 398. 

Fish, broiled, i. 270; cosmic, ii. 56; great, i. 425; taboos, i. 269. 

Fish-eater (Oannes), i. 149. 

Fisher-soul, i. 271. 

Fishers, i. 59, 61; of men, i. 59, 372. 

Fishes, i. 373. 

Five, i. 336; branched, i. 266, 285; Fifths, the, i. 203; Mercurii, i. 109. 

Five-branched, nor from, i. 265. 

Flame, i. 457; rite of the, i. 93. 

Flame-coloured robe, i. 331. 

Flames, Chamber of, i. 75; Region of, i. 51. 

Flask of clay, i. 190. 

Flautists, ii. 289. 

Fleas, iii. 51. 

Flesh, refraining from, i. 267; tongue of, ii. 31. 

Fleshless meal, ii. 390. 

Flies, iii. 51, 133, 190. 

Flock, sacred, i. 226, 238. 

Flood, i. 106, ii. 83, iii. 154, 276; in Book of the Dead, i. 109; books preserved from the, i. 113; in Egypt, i. 317; He who inhabiteth the, i. 169, 170; of Nile, ii. 83; those of the, i. 154. 

Flower of Fire, iii. 138. 

Food, twofold form of, ii. 317; forms of, ii. 317; of Gods, i. 86. 

Forebears, ii. 329, 381, 382, iii. 5. 

Forefather, iii. 21, 98, 292. 

Foreknowledge, iii. 12, 58, 96. 

Foresight, iii. 262. 

Forethought, ii. 12, 39, iii. 22, 280. 

Forgiveness of sins, i. 251. 

Form, ii. 9; archetypal, ii. 6, 8, 9, 29; distinctive, ii. 244; of divine similitude, ii. 319; one, ii. 35; root of, ii. 193; servant's, i. 398, 

Formless state, ii. 31, 45. 

Formlessness, iii. 27. 

Fornication, iii. 166. 

Fornicator, ii. 202. 

Fortune, ii. 341. 

Fount of Light, i. 74. 

Four, i. 337, ii. 65; elements, ii. 311; quarters, i. 93; sets of, ii. 328; winds, i. 60, 61, 84. 

Fourteen pieces, i. 288, 320. 

Fourth Gospel from Alexandrine Gnostics, i. 38; quotations from, i. 194. 

Fourth state, i. 152. 

Foxes have holes, iii. 35. 

Fragrance, force of, i. 394. 

Frazer, i. 158. 

From Thee to Thee, ii. 231, 254. 

Fruit, Perfect, i. 182. 

Fruitful, i. 177. 

Fulgentius, iii. 305. 

Fullness, iii. 325; of Godhead, ii. 117. 

Furies, i. 327. 

Gabriel, i. 422, iii. 211. 

Galaxy, i. 416. 

Galen, i. 100. 

Galilee, Mount of, ii. 238. 

Ganges, Heavenly, i. 110. 

Garamas, i. 149. 

Gardener of Life, ii. 140. 

Gardthausen, i. 113. 

Garment, celestial, i. 399; of the Christ, ii. 249; of shame, i. 153, 242, ii, 42. 

[p. 344]

Garments, twelve sacramental stoles or, iii. 182. 

Garrucci, ii. 56. 

Gate, guardian of the, i. 428; of heaven, i. 181, ii. 240; which Jacob saw, i. 171; mystery at third, i. 190; True, i. 190. 

Gate-keeper, i. 311. 

Gates of Celestial Nile, i. 71; of Gnosis, ii. 123; of Oblivion and Wailing, i. 303; of the Sun, i. 162. 

Gautama the Buddha, iii. 317. 

Gaze into the Light, i. 93; through Me upon the Cosmos, ii. 179. 

Genera, ii. 313 ff.; restorer of all, ii. 310; and species, ii. 378. 

General, i. 296; instruction, ii. 236; Sermons, the, ii. 141, 145, 158, 219, 236, 264, iii. 45, 77, 308. 

Generated Ingenerables, i. 184. 

Generation, i. 333. 

Generative Law, the, i. 191. 

Geneses of Souls, ii. 260. 

Genesis, ii. 148, 177, iii. 26; of the all, i. 406; of fire and darkness, i. 197; ground of, i. 337; matter's becoming or, ii. 177; moist essence of, i. 170; and seed of all the gods, iii. 273; soul is cause of all in, i. 151; vase of, iii. 26; wheel of, i. 426, ii. 274, 283. 

Geography, mystic, iii. 130; of sacred lands, iii. 184. 

Gephyraeans, i. 350. 

Geryones, i. 147, 166. 

Gibbon, i. 23. 

Gift, God's greatest, ii. 95. 

Gigantic Passions, i. 298. 

Globe, winged, i. 390. 

Glories, i. 80, 96. 

Glory, ii. 75, 261; of celestial bodies, ii. 165; house of, i. 79; king of, i. 171; robe of, i. 361, ii. 43. 

Glossalaly, i. 303. 

Glosses, i. 342. 

Glow-worms, i. 391. 

Gnosis, i. 192, ii. 14, 17, 20, 90, 97, 131, 146, 246, iii. 76; of the all, ii. 296; archaic, iii. 322; beauty of, ii. 123; books on, iii. 231; Christianised, iii. 320; devotion joined with, ii. 114; of things divine, iii. 233; of divinity, ii. 330; Druidical, iii. 296; enformation according to, ii. 246; gate of, iii. 318; gates of, ii. 120, 123; goal of, ii. 139; of God, i. 147, ii. 150, 225, iii. 243, 326; of the Good, ii. 113, 144, 163; of Thrice-greatest Hermes, iii. 316; Introduction to the, ii. 68; of joy, ii. 225; Judaeo-Egyptian, i. 31; to Klea concerning the, i. 261; light of, ii. 155; love of, iii. 260; Magian, iii. 296; of Man, i. 147, 178, iii. 323; masters of, ii. 162; mathesis or, ii. 264; of Mind, ii. 88, 96; apotheosis of Mind, ii. 167; Ophite systems of, i. 98; path of, ii. 98, 195; beginning of the Path, ii. 248; prayer for, ii. 49; pupil of, ii. 135; Sabaean, ii. 140; end of science, ii. 147; seers of, ii. 94; Sethian, i. 393; Simonian, ii. 107; of teachings, ii. 257; they who are in, ii. 131, 137, 138; of truth, i. 207; of Trismegistic documents, iii. 323; Unchristianised, iii. 323; virtue of soul, ii. 167; way of, ii. 98. 

Gnostic, i. 377; elements in Hermas, i. 376; Few, the, i. 382; Horos, i. 250, ii. 348; Jottings, things seen in the mysteries, iii. 150, 156. 

Gnosticism, Hermeticism another name for, ii. 192. 

Goal of Gnosis, ii. 139; of piety, iii. 5. 

Goat-herd, i. 175. 

God, ii. 358; is all, ii. 212; iii. 258; all-pure, ii. 295; apostles of, i. 239; artificer of time, i. 229; beyond all names, ii. 99; birth in, ii. 226; body of, ii. 85; Book of, i. 467; born in, ii. 244; born from rock, i. 95; breath of, i. 232, ii. 76; with bull's foot, i. 311; as cause, ii. 66; celestial Messiah of, i. 226; child of, ii. 255; city of, i. 235, 245, 246, ii. 256; contemplator of works of, iii. 245; cosmos, second, ii. 125; creator, iii. 293; cup-bearer of, i. 245; demiurge of, iii. 240; devotee of, ii. 131, 139; disciples of, i. 254; efflux of, iii. 122, 162; from egg, i. 392; energy 

[p. 345]

of, ii. 160, 178, 180, 203; essence of, ii. 113, 199; essentiality of, ii. 199; eye of, i. 247, ii. 312; face of, i. 218; father, ii. 67; fatherhood of, i. 73; of fire and mind, i. 130; first, i. 339, iii. 85; first-born, ii. 203; gift of, ii. 87, 95; gnosis of, i. 147, ii. 150, 225, iii. 243, 329; and Gods, ii. 67; Good, ii. 240; is good, ii. 66; Good is, ii. 110, 112; the Good of, ii. 189; greatness of, ii. 244; herald of, ii. 95; house of, i. 171, 181, ii. 240; ignorance of, ii. 120; image of, i. 232, 236, ii. 91, 92, 100, iii. 236, 244; two images of, ii. 326; ineffability of, iii. 14, 216; inner, ii. 294; knower of true, ii. 97, 196; Laughter, Son of, i. 220; law of, iii. 195; light of, i. 232; likeness with, ii. 132; love of, ii. 323; lyre of, ii. 292; Man of, i. 411; Mind is, iii. 305; imperishable Mind, iii. 113; musician, ii. 288; mysteries of, i. 213; mystery of, Son of, i. 226; name of, i. 198, 234, ii. 344, iii. 293; one, i. 53; one and sole, iii. 266; organ of will of, ii. 133; Osiris, a dark, iii. 156; oracle of, i. 250; place of, i. 233, ii. 71; primal, i. 135; race of, i. 253; race, friend of, i. 233; ray of, ii. 275; rays of, ii. 155; river of, i. 244; from rock, i. 392, 399; sacrifice to, iii. 243; second, i. 230, ii. 127, 170, 320, 365; seeds of, ii. 131, 137; seer of, iii. 298; sense-and-thought of, ii. 135; sensible, ii. 311; servant, i. 251; servants of, i. 212, 220; shadow of, i. 236; shepherd, i. 226; son of, i. 138, 157, 198, 226, ii. 28, 116, 118, 133, 140, 221, 222, 241, iii. 239, 275, 280, 282; song of, ii. 332; sons of, i. 198, 229, iii. 217, 316; sons of, in Hellenistic theology, iii. 218; sons of the one, i. 234; sower, ii. 220; sphere of, ii. 230; spirit of, ii. 81; is spirit, ii. 71; two temples of, i. 228; beyond understanding, iii. 229; unwearied spirit, ii. 290; way of birth in, ii. 223, 244; way up to, ii. 280; way to worship, ii. 212, iii. 243; who lookest behind thee, i. 59; will of, ii. 160, 220, 395, iii. 195; wisdom of, ii. 176. 

God-circle, i. 132, 133, 135. 

God-gnosis, ii. 88, 93, 138, iii. 238; devotion is, ii. 131, 136. 

God-the-Mind, male and female, ii. 7. 

God-words, i. 134. 

Goddess-of-child-bed-town, i. 355. 

Godhead, fullness of, ii. 117. 

Godlessness, ii. 200. 

Gods, ii. 145; birthdays of, i. 279; choir of, ii. 206; creation of, iii. 105; cyclic, ii. 77, 89; duty of, ii. 272; Egyptians don't mourn if they believe in, i. 351; food of, i. 86; genesis and seed of all, iii. 273; great, i. 127, 347; hymn of, iii. 91; inerrant, ii. 145; intelligible, iii. 25; language of, ii. 279, iii. 323; immortal men, ii. 213; mother of, i. 152, 176; mountain of, i. 244; On the, iii. 289; path up to, ii. 169, 299; proscription of worship of, i. 399; scribe of, i. 53; scribe of the nine, i. 50; six-and-thirty, iii. 49; star-flocks of, i. 373; supercosmic, ii. 373; way-of-birth of, ii. 242; ye are, i. 163. 

Going-forth, the, ii. 246. 

Going-home, ii. 98. 

Gold, Chamber of, i. 75; heavenly flame of Burning, i. 75. 

Golden age, iii. 135; calf, i. 316; hawk, i. 76; heaven of Isis, i. 75; Horus, i. 76; One, Dwelling of, i. 75. 

Good, ii. 88, 211; All and, ii. 175; Beauty of, ii. 144, 145, 163; Daimon, i. 84, 92, 94, 97, 402, ii. 156, 199, 203, 204, 206, 213 f, iii. 151, 155, 255; Daimon, Son of, i. 104; efflux of, i. 361; gnosis of, ii. 113, 144, 163; God, ii. 240; is God, ii. 110, 112; of God, ii. 189; good-will of, iii. 241; husbandman, ii. 213, 265; imperfect, i. 320; Itself, iii. 293; law, iii. 8; Logos, i. 333; mind, ii. 127, 155, 156; news, i. 141; path of the, ii. 190; own path of, ii. 189, 196, iii. 330; perfect, i. 205; physician, i. 461, ii. 213; 

[p. 346]

pleroma of, ii. 117; shepherd, i. 37, 373, ii. 52 ff., 213; spirit, iii. 261; threshold of, ii. 97; vision of, ii. 119, 143. 

Good-Doer, i. 320. 

Goodness, i. 215. 

Gordian, ii. 198. 

Goropius Becamis, i. 20. 

Gospel, iii. 135; According to the Egyptians, i. 38, 142, 150, 153, 242, ii. 54, 164; of Eve, i. 85, 142, ii. 24, 25, 238; fragment of a lost, i. 153; According to the Hebrews, ii. 238; of Osiris, i. 367; of Perfection, i. 1 42; of Philip, i. 142; proem to the fourth, ii. 371; quotations from the fourth, i. 194; According to Thomas, i. 142, 155, iii. 37. 

Gourd-tree, ii. 56. 

Grace, ii. 20. 

Grand Master, ii. 23. 

Granger, i. 36 ff., 260, ii. 50; theory of, ii. 51. 

Grasshopper, story of Pythic, ii. 300. 

Grasshoppers, ii. 292. 

Grave, three days in the, i. 71. 

Graves, dead shall leap forth from, i. 172. 

Great Announcement, i. 184, ii. 70, 170, 317. 

Great, art divine, ii. 169, iii. 299; beast, i. 425; beasts, i. 424; body of Cosmos, ii. 128; bound-ary, ii. 29, 35; creator, Light, i. 71, 79; fish, i. 425; Gods, i. 127, 347; Green, i. 84, 92, 94, 131, 132, 176, 424, iii. 154; heart, i. 131; ignorance, iii. 140; initiator, ii. 21; Jordan, i. 163; King's viceroy, i. 226; likeness, ii. 164; and little man, ii. 23; lives, ii. 128; Man, i. 60, ii. 40, 56; Man from Above, i. 150; Man, Body of, i. 425; Mind, ii. 213; Mother, mysteries of the, i. 186; Mysteries, the, i. 185, 217, 362, ii. 240; Name, i. 93; Ocean, i. 171, ii. 92; Power, i. 184; Ptah, the, i. 130, 135; Pyramid, i. 69; saying, ii. 234; sea, iii. 163; serpent, ii. 27, 35; snake, ii. 26; Vehicle of Buddhism, ii. 44; work, iii. 317, 329; year, iii. 290. 

Greater deaths, greater lots, i. 180. 

Greatness, ii. 187, 222, 244, 344; a, i. 185; of divinity, ii. 309; of God, ii. 244. 

Greatnesses, i. 165, ii. 28. 

Greek, disciples of Egyptians, i. 274, 286; names in foreign languages, i. 342; philosophizing, ii. 267, 281; wisdom, i. 193. 

Greeks, Protrepticus, or Exhortation to the, ii. 300. 

Green, Great, i. 92, 94, 132, 176, 424, iii. 154; tree, i. 266. 

Grenfell and Hunt, i. 93. 

Grief, ii. 224, iii. 42. 

Griffith, i. 53, 88, 118 ff. 

Grihastha Ashrama, ii. 73. 

Ground of Genesis, i. 337. 

Grudging, ii. 86, 108. 

Guardian of the Gate, i. 428. 

Guards of the whole, iii. 48. 

Guile, ii. 224. 

Gymnosophists, i. 208. 

Habit, ii. 41. 

Habitat of excarnate souls, iii. 210. 

Hades, i. 302, 305, 325, 327, 342, 350, 362, 453, ii. 337, 338; vision of, i. 223; visit to, i. 380; way of salvation from, i. 152. 

Hadrian, i. 195. 

Haf, i. 462. 

Haggadist, ii. 239. 

Haimos, i. 169. 

Hall of the Altar, i. 74; of the Child in his Cradle, i. 74, 75; of the Golden Rays, i. 75. 

Halm, i. 56. 

Hands, iii. 101, 117. 

Haoma or soma-plant, i. 325. 

Harbour of good things, i. 293; of salvation, ii. 123. 

Hardadaf, i. 467. 

Harles, i. 5; Fabricius, i. 23. 

Harlot, i. 174, iii. 166. 

Harmonic canon, iii. 176. 

Harmony, i. 323, ii. 9, 10, 15, 16, 39, 41, 89, iii. 63, 64, 66, 67, 74, 80, 86; heavenly, ii. 253; true, ii. 251; of wisdom, i. 237. 

Harnack, i. 469, ii. 55. 

Harnebeschenis (see Arnebeschenis), i. 76, iii. 209. 

Harper, story of, ii. 291. 

[p. 347]

Harpocrates, i. 291, 346, 349, ii. 265. 

Harpocratians, i. 147. 

Harris Papyrus, i. 131. 

Harrison (Jane E.), i. 310. 

Hatch, i. 179. 

Hate fish, i. 308. 

Hateful cloak, ii. 121. 

Hathor, i. 74, 316. 

Hating, ii. 115; of body, ii. 95. 

Hawk, i. 56, 329, 330, 353, 355, iii. 133, 181; golden, i. 76. 

Head, i. 429; Above, descent from, i. 169. 

Head-born, i. 359. 

Healer, Asclepius the, i. 467. 

Health, iii. 203; of soul, ii. 257. 

Hearer, i. 185, 292, ii. 255. 

Heart, iii. 75; appetite and, iii. 78; eyes of, ii. 121; great, i. 131; of Ra, i. 53; of silence, i. 73; and tongue, i. 136. 

Hearth, common, iii. 171; of universe, iii. 172. 

Heather-bush, i. 284. 

Heather-tree, i. 284. 

Heaven, beauty of, iii. 94; and earth contrasted, iii. 9, 10; Egypt image of, ii. 351; gate of, i. 181, ii. 240, iii. 157; Isis, queen of, iii. 160; law of, iii. 62; ocean, i. 411, iii. 154; pole-lords of, i. 176; power to travel through, ii. 197; seven fortunes of, i. 176; song of, ii. 384; sphere-like, i. 390; Thee I adjure, iii. 269; third, i. 166, 173; tongues of, ii. 32; voices from, i. 323; war in, iii. 118. Heaven-born, ii. 162. 

Heaven-walkers, i. 101. 

Heavenly bodies, iii. 301; chariot, iii. 173; flame of burning gold, i. 75; Ganges, i. 110; harmony, ii. 253; horn, i. 167, 193, 453; Jerusalem, i. 74; Man, ii. 102, iii. 277; Nile, iii. 158; Word proceeding forth, iii. 254. 

Heavens, Entrance of the Golden, i. 75; kingdom of, i. 185; kingship of, i. 167, ii. 43; overseers of, i. 126: sound of, i. 161. 

Hebdomad, Athena, i. 275; celestial, i. 422; of Fate, ii. 251; Ophite, i. 421. 

Hebrew influence, ii. 38, 81. 

Hebrews, Gospel according to the, ii. 238. 

Hecataeus, i. 268, 274, 472. 

Hecate, i. 322, 352. 

Hedgehogs, i. 325. 

Heh, i. 407. 

Height of Cosmos to Depths of Earth, i. 413. 

Heimarmene (Fate), ii. 275, 341, 384, iii. 273. 

Hekekyan Bey, i. 111. 

Helen, i. 147. 

Heliopolis, i. 103. 

Heliopolitan theology, i. 135. 

Helios, i. 278. 

Hellanicus, i. 310. 

Hellas, Bible of, i. 193; wisdom of, 186. 

Hellenistic, myth of Anthropos, i. 143; theology, i. 200, 202, 218, 255. 

Hemisphere, upper, ii. 271. 

Hemlock juice, i. 179. 

Hep-Tep, i. 74. 

Hephaestus, i. 61, 130, 307, 347, iii. 148; men of, iii. 183; Ptah who is, iii. 96. 

Hera, i. 305, 307. 

Heracleian stone, i. 189. 

Heracleides, i. 301. 

Heracleitus, i. 302, 323, 327, 361; sayings of, ii. 213. 

Heracles, i. 303, 318, 319. 

Heracleon, i. 39. 

Herald, ii. 86; of God, ii. 95. 

Herb-knowers, iii. 111. 

Herba medica, i. 293. 

Hercules, myth of, i. 147; noose of, i. 61. 

Hermgeus, i. 314, 320. 

Hermaica, iii. 252. 

Hermaic, books, iii. 293; doctrines, iii. 292; writings, ii. 169, iii. 297. 

Hermanubis, i. 342. 

Hermaphrodites, ii. 37. 

Hermas, Apocalyptic, i. 378; Gnostic elements in, i. 376; higher criticism of, i. 370: name of, i. 374; Old Latin version of, i. 378; Pastoral, i. 370; Shepherd of, i 369, ii. 238, 248, iii. 319; shepherd of, ii. 229, 232. 

Hermeneutic, i. 300. 

Hermes, i. 278, 295, 319, 334, ii. 88, iii. 234; (I.), ii. 83, iii. 147, 

[p. 348]

[paragraph continues] 152; (II.), i. 104, iii. 152; (III.), iii. 303; Alchemical literature, i. 5; all-knowing, iii. 95; apoph-thegm of, iii. 88; Arab tradition, i. 5; and Asclepius, apotheosis of, iii. 222; and Asclepius, sons of God, iii. 217; and Basilides, ii. 215; beloved son of Zeus, i. 122; books of, 115, 196, 342, 380, iii. 282, 289; books of described by Clem, of A., iii. 222; city of, i. 87; columns or pillars of, i. 112; first natural philosopher, iii. 237; gnosis of, iii. 316; the Gnostic, iii. 320; grade of, ii. 250; great-and-great, i. 117; inspirer, iii. 286; inventions of, i. 5; Kriophoros, ii. 52; Logius, ii. 54; Logos, i. 158; master of all physics, iii. 226; mind of, iii. 260; monuments of, i. 113; prior to Moses, i. 19; Paut of, i. 263; prayer of, i. 402; prayers, i. 82; a race or being, iii. 135; religion of, i. 82; rod of, i. 61, 160, 161; scriptures of, iii. 227; spell of, iii. 97; suppliant of, ii. 236; teacher of reincarnation, iii. 227; ten-thousand-times-great, iii. 276; Thoth the first, i. 104; writer of scripture, iii. 227; Word who brings tidings from God, iii. 217. 

Hermes-city, i. 329. 

Hermeses and Asclepiuses, many, iii. 221. 

Hermetic tradition, origins of the, iii. 233. 

Hermippus de Astrologia Dialogus, iii. 270. 

Hermodotus, i. 298. 

Hermopolis, i. 56, ii. 382. 

Heru-Behutet, i. 57. 

Heru-em-Anpu, i. 342. 

Heru-p-Khart, i. 346. 

Heru-ur, i. 279. 

Hesiod, i. 265, 300, 338, 389. 

Hestia, i. 305. 

Hesychius, i. 100, 269. 

Het-Abtit, House of the Net, i. 58. 

Hexads, ii. 117. 

Hexaemeron, iii. 117. 

Hezekiah, ii. 232. 

Hibbert Journal, ii. 71. 

Hidden mystery in silence, the, i. 167; Places, House of the, i. 68. 

Hierarchies, ii. 276, 314, 340, 342. 

Hieratic, iii. 276; books, iii. 225. 

Hieroglyphics, i. 134, 276, 277, 312, 330. 

Hierophants, i. 210, 211; of mysteries, i. 212. 

Hierosolymus, i. 307. 

Higher Criticism of Poemandres, i. 128; of Shepherd of Hermas, i. 370. 

Hilaria, i. 152. 

Hildebrand, ii. 307, 392. 

Hilgenfeld, i. 370. 

Hilgers, i. 25; theory of, i. 369. 

Hippocrates, i. 155. 

Hippolytus, i. 94; Conclusion of, i. 186; and the divulging of the Mysteries, i. 140; Philosophumena of, i. 140. 

Hippopotamus, i. 329, 330, 427. 

Hoeffer, i. 27. 

Hoffmann (G.), i. 33; (S. F. W.), i. 9. 

Holiness, Song of, ii. 50. 

Holy, Holy, Holy, ii. 19. 

Homer, i. 309, 318, 327, 330, 388; on daimones, i. 299; nodding, the good, i. 196. 

Homilies, Clementine, i. 388, ii. 72. 

Honey, i. 349, 364. 

Honey-brew, i. 347. 

Honey-clover, i. 284, 315. 

Hor, Son of the Negress, i. 88; Son of Pa-neshe, i. 119. 

Horapollo, i. 48, 55, 56, 408. 

Horizon, i. 74, 332; of Light, i. 75. 

Horizoned, i. 335. 

Horn, the, i. 190; of Men, i. 166; of one-horned bull, i. 187. 

Horoeus, i. 427. 

Horos or Boundary, ii. 366; Great Boundary, ii. 29; Gnostic, i. 250, ii. 348; Mighty Power, ii. 33. 

Horoscopes, ii. 193, 341. 

Horse, i. 290. 

Horses, i. 430; yoke of, i. 430. 

Horus, i. 53, 63, 77, 88, 92, 94, 132, 133, 136, 334, ii. 51; bastardy suit against, i. 291; birth of, i. 75, 76, 95, iii. 122, 157, 160, 162, 242; birthday of Eye of, i. 331; Birthdays of, i. 332; bone of, i. 189, 343; how born, i. 315; Books of Isis and, iii. 208; Books of Isis to, iii. 313; 

[p. 349]

brethren, i. 66; companions of, i. 270, 290; is cosmos surrounding earth, i. 321; cosmos that is, i. 338; cutting up into pieces of, i. 291; elder, i. 279, 280, 334, 343, 346, 367; eye of, i. 336; gold-miner, iii. 209; golden, i. 76; Isis to, iii. 87; questions of Osiris to, i. 290; and Set, i. 56, 57; white, i. 296; worshippers of, i. 147; the younger, i. 291. 

Hour, i. 72, 266. 

House, ii. 117; of body, ii. 321; of the eye, i. 288; of virginity, i. 218; of Father, i. 224; of glory, i. 79; of God, i. 171, 181, ii. 240; of Hidden Places, i. 68; of Net, i. 58; of Osiris, i. 79; robber in thy, ii. 121. 

Hu-siris, i. 310. 

Humanists, i. 17, 18; MSS., i. 8. 

Husbandman, ii. 263; Achaab, ii. 265; good, ii. 213, 265. 

Hyades, i. 161. 

Hye Kye, i. 160. 

Hyes (Hues), i. 161, 310. 

Hyle, i. 151, 389. 

Hylic animal, ii. 63; cosmic, ii. 319; Mind, i. 452; Nous, i. 416. 

Hymn of the Aeons, ii. 43; to All-God, ii. 108; to Amen-Ra, i. 131; to Attis, ii. 56; of the Four, ii. 389; of the Gods, iii. 91; to Jupiter Ammon, i. 149; Naassene, ii. 109; Orphic, iii. 269; of Osiris and Isis, iii. 124, 146; of Praise, ii. 49; of Praise "Holy art Thou," ii. 19; for morning and for evening prayer, ii. 252; of Rebirth, ii. 229; to the Sun, ii. 253; of Valentinus, ii. 284. Hymnody, secret, ii. 230 f. 

Hymns, Orphic, ii. 235. 

Hyparxis, ii. 269. 

Hysterema, ii. 239. 

I am thou, i. 85, 87, 89, ii. 24. 

I-em-Hetep, i. 457. 

Ialdabaoth, i. 139, 159, 422. 

Iao, i. 411. 

Iao Zeesar, i. 191. 

Iamblichus (see Jamblichus). 

Iatromathematici, i. 471. 

Ibis, i. 48, 54 ff., 87, 353, 355; symbolism of, i. 358. 

Ibis-headed moon-god, i. 47. 

Icheneumon, i. 356, 436. 

Idea, i. 336, ii. 185. 

Ieou, First Book of, i. 172. 

Iexai, ii. 242. 

Ignorance, ii. 146, 246; of God, ii. 120; great, iii. 140; mystery of, ii. 25; sea of, ii. 123; way out of, ii. 237; web of, ii. 121; wine of, ii. 120. 

Illumination, i. 241, ii. 255; degrees of, iii. 208. 

Image, ii. 35, 368; divine, i. 235; or double, i. 89; of God, i. 232, ii. 91, 92, 100, iii. 236, 244; His, i. 233; after His, ii. 125; image of, i. 23 5; of the One, ii. 118. 

Images, adoration of, ii. 286; sacred, ii. 381. 

Imhotep, i. 459. 

Immisch, i. 169. 

Immortality, ii. 210; cup of, iii. 205; draught of, iii. 163; philtre of, iii. 163. 

Impression of a seal, i. 215, 395. 

Impulses, ii. 204. 

Imuth-brotherhood, iii. 148. 

Imuth-Asclepius, i. 466. 

Inaction, ii. 178. 

Inbreathing, iii. 194; of universe, ii. 254. 

Incantations, i. 88. 

Incarnation, iii. 145; embryonic stages of (Pistis Sophia), iii. 68. 

Incarnations of Thoth, i. 463. 

Incense, i. 363. 

Increase and multiply, i. 37, ii. 12, 38, 82. 

India, i. 208, 303, ii. 197; British Raj in, i. 354. 

Indian, ii. 353; wisdom, ii. 198. 

Indians, ii. 401. 

Induced Days, i. 279, 280. 

Inexpressible man, i. 170. 

Inferi, ii. 338. 

Initiates, the Bacchic, i. 191; of Isis, i. 263; Orphic, i. 95, 191. 

Initiation, iii. 323; "in the black," i. 91; Cup of, ii. 94; into Divine Mysteries, i. 208; doctrines of, i. 73; final, ii. 43; hall, i. 179; Isis a grade of, iii. 208; mount of, ii. 238: in the sacred rites, iii. 257; of Tat, iii. 313; temples of, i. 74; theurgic rite of, ii. 255. 

[p. 350]

Initiations, iii. 171; of the Assyrians, i. 151; Therapeut, i. 251. 

Initiator, iii. 251; Great, ii. 21; Thoth the, i. 71. 

Ink, iii. 149. 

Inn or caravanserai, ii. 283. 

Inner, doctrine of the mystery-institutions, i. 141; Door, i. 157, 270, iii. 274, 280; Door, About the, iii. 275, 295; man, iii. 277; way, i. 101. 

Iniquity, Fence of, i. 427. 

Insufficiency, ii. 174, 241, 245. 

Intef, Stele of, i. 138. 

Intellect of Cosmos, ii. 373; eye of, ii. 308. 

Intellectual Light, iii. 257, 268. 

Intelligible cosmos, i. 146, ii. 167, 194, 273, 275, 286; essence, ii. 276, iii. 57; model, i. 241. 

Intemperance, ii. 224. 

Interception, i. 319. 

Intercourse of souls, ii. 314. 

Interpreter, i. 158. 

Intf, i. 467. 

Intoxication, i. 414. 

Invention, iii. 98. 

Inventor of philosophy, i. 138. 

Invert himself, ii. 243. 

Invocation, of the powers, ii. 249; theurgic rite of, ii. 245. 

Io, i. 314. 

Ireuaeus, i. 139, ii. 27. 

Iris, i. 292. 

Isaac, i. 217, 220, 221. 

Isaiah, ii. 232; The Ascension of, ii. 232. 

Iseion, i. 263. 

Ishon, iii. 165. 

Isia, i. 341. 

Isis, i. 63, 279, 332, 346, 349, 373, ii. 30; beheading of, i. 291; books of, iii. 316; books of Horus and, i. 481; feminine principle of Nature, i. 333; Golden Heaven of, i. 75; hastening, i. 340; to Horus, iii. 87; house of, iii. 163; true initiate of, i. 256, 263; grade of initiation, iii. 208; Intercession of, iii. 87; from "knowledge," i. 341; Lady, iii. 155; mysteries of, i. 155, iii. 182; and Osiris, texts and translations of Plutarch on, i. 259; Queen of Heaven, iii. 160; robe of, i. 62, 264. 

Isis-Righteousness, i. 85. 

Isis-Sophia, iii. 134. 

Israel, ingathering of, ii. 303; the myths of, i. 202; seeing, i. 198. 

Israelitismus, i. 124. 

Italy, iii. 131. 

Ithakesian Island men, i. 270. 

Ithyphallus, i. 158. 

Jackal, i. 87. 

Jacob, i. 217; dream of, i. 223. 

Jamblichus, i. 112, ii. 169, 280, iii. 285. 

James, Brother of the Lord, i. 143, 147; the Just, i. 148; John, and Peter, i. 475. 

Janus, i. 59. 

Japanese, the, ii. 302. 

Jennings, Hargrave, i. 12. 

Jeremiah, i. 178, 217. 

Jerusalem, i. 246; Above, i. 163, 183, 245, ii. 42, 251, iii. 100; Below, i. 178. 

Jeschu, i. 335, ii. 239. 

Jeschu (Jesus), i. 165. 

Jeschu ha-Notzri, i. 270. 

Jesus, i. 147; body of, i. 286; cult of, ii. 138; the living one, i. 93; logoi of, iii. 246; Sisters of, i. 147. 

Jesus Christ, spiritual oblations through, ii. 254; through, ii. 255. 

Jesus (Joshua), i. 164. 

Jivanmukta, ii. 167. 

Jnana-Marga, ii. 119. 

Johannine document, sources of, i. 195. 

John, Acts of, ii. 55, 238. 

John, the Baptist, i. 470. 

Jonah, ii. 56. 

Jordan, Great, i. 163. 

Joseph, i. 220. 

Josephus, i. 103, 113, 114. 

Jothor, i. 164. 

Joy, i. 220, ii. 346; grief and, iii. 42; lord of, i. 74; religion of, i. 73. 

Judaeo-Egyptian gnosis, i. 31. 

Judaeus and Hierosolymus, i. 307. 

Judge, of two combatant Gods, i. 53; of the dead, i. 64. 

Judges, statues of, i. 276. 

Judgment, i. 79; scene, i. 55. 

Judgments of value, iii. 317. 

[p. 351]

Julian, the Emperor, i. 113, iii. 303. 

Juniper, i. 364, 365. 

Jupiter, i. 416, 418, 419. 

Jupiter Ammon, Hymn to, i. 149. 

Just, the, i. 70, 79, 156. 

Justice, i. 359, iii. 58, 243; engine of, ii. 41. 

Justice (Maat), i. 263. 

Justification, i. 79. 

Justified, i. 71, iii. 320. 

Ka, i. 89, 97, 132, 133, 134, 280, 463, ii. 287. 

Kabalah, i. 281. 

Kabeiros, i. 149. 

Kabiri (Cabiri), Seven, i. 127, ii. 279. 

Kakodaimon, i. 448. 

Kamephis, iii. 107, 149, 159, 167. 

Karma, instrument of, iii. 116. 

Karmic, agents, ii. 282; scales, Teller of the, i. 72; wheel, ii. 83. 

Kastor, i. 306. 

Kathopanishad, ii. 168, 317. 

Kaulakau, i. 165, ii. 80. 

Kenyon, i. 82, 86, 117. 

Khaibit, i. 76, 89. 

Khamuas, Tales of, i. 118, 281, 380. 

Khat, i. 89. 

Khemennu, i. 53, 56, 58, 65; "the eighth city," i. 120. 

Khepera, i. 357. 

Khmun, i. 119, 120. 

Khu, i. 89. 

Kid, thou hast fallen into the milk, i. 191. 

King, Ambassador of the, i. 250; Ammon, i. 77, ii. 280; Correspondence of Asclepius with the, ii. 278; of glory, i. 171; God as shepherd and, i. 226; the highest, ii. 293; The Perfect Sermon to the, ii. 266, 281; Praising of the, ii. 294; the very statues of the, ii. 298; the true, ii. 302. 

King (L. W.). i. 61, 328, 344, 348. 

King-soul, iii. 144. 

Kingdom of the Heavens, the, i. 185; within man, i. 155. 

Kingdoms, downfalls of, iii. 48. 

Kings, iii. Ill, 126; Catalogue of, i. 277; divine, i. 106; encomium of, ii. 299; eulogy of, ii. 298; glorious fame of, ii. 292; guard and escort of souls of, iii. 127; presidents of common weal and peace, ii. 293; successions of, i. 315. 

Kingsford and Maitland, i. 15. 

Kingship of Heavens, i. 167, ii. 43. 

Klea, i. 260, 264, 310; to, i. 276. 

Kneph, i. 295. 

Kneph-Kamephis, iii. 151. 

Knife, i. 277. 

Knowledge, vehicle of, i. 49. 

Kopto, i. 283. 

Koptos, i. 305. 

Kore, i. 59, 151, 318, iii. 161; Descent of, i. 350. 

Koreion, i. 403, iii. 161. 

Korybantes (see Corybantes), i. 149. 

Korybas, i. 169. 

Koshas, ii. 168. 

Kriophoros, ii. 54. 

Kroll, i. 100, 101. 

Kronos (see Cronus), i. 151, 278, 298, 307, 322, 350; that is, Ammon, ii. 279; whether blest child of, i. 185; sacred dirge on, i. 30; tears of, i. 308. 

Kuphi, i. 332, 364, 366. 

Kuretes, i. 149. 

Labyrinth of ills, i. 191. 

Lachares, i. 352. 

Lachesis, i. 442. 

Ladder, of Being, ii. 165; of the Words, i. 239. 

Lady, of heart and tongue, iii. 208; of all wisdom, iii. 208. 

Lagides, i. 99. 

Lake Mareotis, ii. 403. 

Lame, i. 334. 

Lamp-magic, i. 92. 

Land, Black, iii. 158; Blessed, iii. 282; of Eternal Dawn, i. 80; flowing with milk and honey, ii. 251; of the Living, i. 50, 51; of the Lord, ii. 251; Seriadic, i. 110 ff.; 114. 

Lang, Andrew, i. 258. 

Language, of Gods, ii. 279; of the Word, i. 54. 

Larks, i. 356. 

Lauchert, i. 56. 

Laughter, i. 221; seven peals of, iii. 137. 

Law, body of, ii. 44; generative, i. 191; of God, iii. 195; good, iii. 8. 

[p. 352]

Laws, of Lycurgus, ii. 235; sacred, ii. 235. 

Laya, ii. 260. 

Layers, iii. 194. 

Laying-on of hands, ii. 242. 

Lazarel, Loys, i. 10. 

Lazarus, i. 71. 

Lead, i. 282. 

Leading Forth, i. 164. 

Leah, i. 217. 

Leaven hid in three measures of flour, i. 167. 

Leemans, i. 82, 84, 90. 

Lentils, i. 346. 

Leo, i. 415. 

Leontocephale, la divinite, i. 399. 

Lepsius, i. 49, 69. 

Lethe, Plain of, i. 447; River of, i. 416, 452. 

Leto, i. 315. 

Letronne, i. 107, 117. 

Leviathan, i. 267, 423, 424. 

Liberation, ii. 167. 

Library, i. 102; Alexandrian, i. 197; catalogue of Egyptian priestly, iii. 225; of Osymandias, i. 50; of priesthood of Ra, i. 103; at Thebes, i. 465. 

Libya, Mount of, ii. 382. 

Libyan Hill, ii. 360, 402. 

Life, ii. 184; circle of types of, ii. 194; gardener of, ii. 133, 140; and Light, ii. 13, 14, 20, 226, 231, iii. 325; lord of, i. 132; place of, ii. 133; plastic, iii. 210; plenitude of, ii. 208; shame of, i. 242; theoretic, ii. 163; tree of, i. 428; types of, ii. 245; way of, i. 182, ii. 15, 40, 41; well of, i. 79. 

Life-giving one, iii. 46; power, iii. 292. 

Life-producing circle, iii. 51. 

Lift up the gates, i. 170. 

Light, all-seeing, ii. 253; baptism of, ii. 255; boundless, i. 93; creatures of, i. 51; day of, i. 326; entrance on, i. 79; exhaling his, iii. 279; fount of, i. 74; gnosis of, ii. 155; of God, i. 232; the great creator, i. 71, 79; horizon of, i. 75; hymn, i. 94; intellectual, iii. 257, 268; and life (see life); lily of, i. 77; Logos is, i. 231; manifestation to, iii. 160; moist, i. 391; mountain of, ii. 238; chamber of, i. 75; religion of, i. 73; revealer of, i. 375; treasure of, i. 246; veil, ii. 28, 29, 31. 

Light-Darkness, iii. 278. 

Light-giver, i. 179. 

Light-God, i. 473. 

Light-man, iii. 279. 

Light-spark, i. 395, ii. 29. 

Light-word, ii. 5. 

Like, ii. 90; and unlike, iii. 11. 

Likeness (see Image). 

Lily, i. 77. 

Limbs, ii. 387, iii. 277. 

Linen, i. 71, 265; cloth, i. 71. 

Linus, i. 293; song of, i. 293. 

Lion, i. 56, 90, 290, 314, 422, 446, 449, iii. 180. 

Lionardo of Pistoja, i. 8. 

Lionesses, iii. 181. 

Lions, iii. 112; mouths, i. 314. 

Lipsius, ii. 108. 

Liquid Chaos, i. 191. 

Littre, i. 155. 

Living, Book of the, i. 367; death, ii. 121; land of the, i. 50, 51; mother of the, i. 163; one, i. 93; stones, ii. 254, 256; water, i. 188, 190. 

Locust, iii. 133, 356. 

Logia, bible of, ii. 236; logoi or, ii. 234; Oxyrhynchus (see Behnesa), i. 209, ii. 24, 116, 239, 255. 

Logoi, Behnesa, ii. 17, 239; and ideas, iii. 171; of Jesus, iii. 246; or logia, ii. 234. 

Logoklopia, iii. 323. 

Logos, i. 68, 362; Aeon the, i. 239, 406; Book concerning, ii. 265; "cause of activity," ii. 254; disciples of, i. 243; Eternity illumined by, i. 399; Good, i. 333; Hermes, i. 158; Image of God, i. 232; Life and Light, i. 231; race of, ii. 18, 241; sophia-aspect of, i. 49; spermatic essence of, i. 390; spiritual sun, i. 241; Thoth as, i. 63, 90. 

Logos-Demiurge, i. 135. 

Logos-doctrine, i. 51. 

Logos-Mediator, i. 249. 

Longing, ii. 346. 

Lord, of books, i. 53; Brethren of, i. 147; of divine words, i. 53; of joy, i. 74; of all knowledge, i. 

[p. 353]

[paragraph continues] 55; land of the, ii. 251; of life, i. 132; of moist nature, i. 161; of palingenesis, i. 50; of rebirth, i. 50; of time, i. 76; of two lands, i. 134; of unseen world, i. 73; word of, ii. 6. 

Loreto, i. 469. 

Lost sheep, the, i. 191. 

Lotus, i. 347, 458. 

Lourdes, i. 469. 

Love, i. 77, 125, 338, ii. 12, 39, iii. 259; birth of, i. 338; of gnosis, iii. 260; divine, ii. 94, 309, 346, iii. 260; Himself, ii. 297; and necessity, iii. 110, 264; pure, ii. 332; single, ii. 330. 

Loves, the, iii. 95. 

Lowrie, ii. 55. 

Lucian, i. 158. 

Lychnomancy, i. 92. 

Lycopolitans, i. 305. 

Lycurgus, i. 274; laws of, ii. 235. 

Lydus, i. 403, 404, ii. 342, 361, 385. 

Lyre, Pythagoreans used, i. 366; strings, i. 335. 

Lysippus, i. 298. 

Maasse, i. 418. 

Maat, i. 52, 64, 89, 99, 458. 

M'Clintock, i. 27. 

M'Lennan, i. 353. 

Macrobius on "Descent of the Soul," i. 413. 

Macroprosopus, ii. 282. 

Madiam, i. 164. 

Magi, i. 207, 326, ii. 170, iii. 182, 277. 

Magian gnosis, iii. 296. 

Magic, iii. 275; formulae, i. 50; papyri, ii. 252. 

Magica, iii. 296. 

Magna Mater Mysteries, i. 179. 

Magnet, i. 189, ii. 91. 

Maha-vakyam, ii. 234. 

Mahabharata, ii. 235, 242. 

Mahayana, ii. 44. 

Mahayana-shraddhotpada-shastra, ii. 44. 

Maia, iii. 251. 

Maitland, Kingsford and, i. 15. 

Making-manifest, ii. 99. 

Making-new-again, ii. 75, 83, 128. 

Malalas, iii. 269. 

Male-female, i. 146, 152, ii. 10, 12, 38. 

Malice, ii. 224. 

Malkander, i. 285. 

Mambres, iii. 283. 

Mammon, iii. 184. 

Man, ii. 9, 127, 157, 321, 325, 326; Above, i. 149, 197; Adamas, i. 148; an appearance, iii. 21; birth of, ii. 241; brother of, ii. 35; celestial, ii. 37; cosmic, ii. 12, 116, 382; daring of, iii. 114; descent of, ii. 34; dual nature of, iii. 245; named East, i. 227; essential, ii. 116, 251, 319, 321; first, i. 115, 139, ii. 27, iii. 295; gnosis of, i. 147, 178, iii. 323; great, ii. 23, 40, 56; heavenly, ii. 102, iii. 277; inexpressible, i. 170; inner, iii. 277; of light, iii. 281; after likeness, ii. 277; material, ii. 132; of mighty names, i. 146, ii. 109, 254; a mighty wonder, ii. 315; the mind, iii. 280; mind-led, ii. 203; mystery of, i. 141; new, ii. 43; one, ii. 222, 244; original, i. 168; Phos, iii. 279; Plato's definition of, i. 433; principles of, ii. 149; second, i. 139, ii. 27; shall not live by bread alone, i. 248; son of, i. 160, ii. 43, 138; sons of one, i. 197, 234; substantial, ii. 132; size of thumb, iii. 165; Thy, ii. 232; true, i. 228; of truth, figure of, iii. 277; twofold, ii. 319; typal, i. 168. 

Man-after-His-Likeness, i. 198, 234. 

Man-doctrine, i. 138, 193, 197. 

Man-mystery, the, i. 198. 

Man-Shepherd, ii. 3, 5, 6, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 52. 

Manava Dharma Shastra, ii. 73. 

Maneros, i. 287, 288, 293, 294. 

Manes, i. 297. 

Manetho, i. 99 ff., 103, 273, iii. 289, 302, 329, 355; Beloved of Thoth, i. 102 ff.; books of, i. 104; Sethis of, i. 117, 121; translation activity of, ii. 280. 

Mangey, i. 200. 

Manhood, christ-stage of, i. 367, 368. 

Manic, i. 297. 

Manna, i. 246. 

Mansoul, Siege of, iii. 187. 

Mantra-vidya, i. 64, iii. 274. 

Mantrah, i. 64, 365. 

[p. 354]

Maim, i. 112. 

Manvantara, iii. 137. 

Many, ii. 131, 308; Avoid converse with, iii. 11; unknowing, ii. 250. 

Many-named, i. 184. 

Maps of the world, iii. 185, 187. 

Marcella, Porphyry's Letter to, i. 260. 

Marcellus, i. 106. 

Marcion, ii. 72. 

Marcus, Gnostic, iii. 276. 

Marduk, i. 60. 

Mareotis, Lake, ii. 403. 

Mariam, the sought-for, i. 164. 

Mariamne, i. 143, 147, 301. 

Marriage, with right reason, i. 223; sacred, i. 182, 216, 224, ii. 96, 137, 173, 240, 241, iii. 156, 157, 319. 

Mars, i. 416, 418, 419. 

Marsham Adams, i. 68, 81. 

Marsiglio Ficino, i. 8, 9; opinion of, i. 19. 

Martha, i. 71, 147. 

Martial, i. 116. 

Martyrdom of Peter, ii. 108. 

Mary, i. 71; Magdalene, i. 147; Concerning the Offspring of, i. 142; Questions of, i. 142. 

Masdesin, i. 297. 

Mason, Master, i. 466. 

Maspero, i. 130. 

Mass, ii. 269. 

Master, of the All, i. 409; Book of the, i. 68, 77, 78; of feast, i. 245; grand, ii. 23; Mason, i. 466; of masters, iii. 317; of the wheels, iii. 120. 

Master-architect, i. 48. 

Masterhood, ii. 47, iii. 324. 

Mastery, i. 80. 

Mastich, i. 365. 

Materiality, ii. 212, 218. 

Mathematici, i. 292, 336; theory of, i. 318. 

Mathesis, i. 262, ii. 264, 372, iii. 5. 

Matter, i. 225, 276, 334, 336, 338, 339, 389, 390, 415, 451, ii. 125, 176, 210, 211, 241, 269, 332, 333, 335, 343, iii. 26, 66, 226, 278; becoming of, ii. 177; blend of, iii. 103; cosmos, ii. 336; fourfold, i. 389; by itself, ii. 181; is one, ii. 118; pure, ii. 7; root of, ii. 26. 

Maya, ii. 106 ff. 

Mayin, ii. 107. 

Mazdaeans, i. 400. 

Mazdes, i. 297. 

Means, i. 338. 

Measure, six-and-fiftieth even, i. 305. 

Measurer, the great, i. 53; Thoth, the, i. 66. 

Medes, i. 196. 

Median, i. 197. 

Mediator, i. 58, 325. 

Medici, Cosimo, i. 8. 

Medinet Habu, i. 463. 

Megaloi Theoi (see Cabiri), i. 127. 

Meinian, i. 273. 

Meinis, i. 272. 

Melchizedec, i. 127, iii. 211. 

Melilote, i. 284. 

Members, i. 135. 

Memnon, i. 96. 

Memnonium, i. 50. 

Memoirs of the Apostles, i. 195. 

Memory, i. 433, ii. 397; experience and, iii. 195; restored, ii. 221. 

Memphis, i. 105, 292, 293, 347, 460; brazen gates at, i. 303; Ptah-priests of, i. 135. 

Men, benefactor of, ii. 213; first, ii. 37; fishers of, i. 59, 372; of Hephaestus, iii. 183; burn living, i. 355; gods, iii. 136; nourishment of, i. 133; perfect, ii. 87, 97; sacred or typical, iii. 138; seven, ii. 11; Shepherd of, i. 372, 375, ii. 231. 

Men, i. 166; heavenly horn of, i. 167, 455. 

Menander acts Menander, i. 351. 

Menard, views of, i. 27 ff. 

Mendes, i. 320; goat at, i. 356. 

Mene, iii. 91. 

Menelaos, i. 296. 

Mercabah, iii. 173; or Chariot of Ezekiel, i. 238; vision of, i. 154. 

Merciful (Potency), i. 237. 

Mercury, i. 417, 418, 419. 

Mercy-seat, i. 238. 

Merriment, ii. 346. 

Mesopotamia, i. 171. 

Mesore, i. 349. 

Mesotes, ii. 251. 

Messala, i. 403, 407. 

Messiah-ites, i. 190. 

Metamorphoses, i. 150; of soul, ii. 163. 

[p. 355]

Metempsychosis, ii. 164, 166, iii. 26, 110, 142, 228; concerning, i. 429; Plotinus on, i. 434. 

Methyer, i. 337. 

Meyer, ii. 300. 

Michael, i. 422, iii. 211. 

Middle Way, ii. 96. 

Midst, ii. 316. 

Mighty Power, ii. 29, 33. 

Migration into other bodies, ii. 329. 

Milky Way, i. 414. 

Miller, i. 140. 

Million, i. 407. 

Min, i. 337. 

Mind, ii. 6, 86; All-father, ii. 8; born in, ii. 221; as builder, ii. 153; counterpart of, ii. 40; cup of, ii. 242; a daimon, ii. 154, 171; demiurgic, i. 137, ii. 35; door-keeper, ii. 14; dowsing in, ii. 255; eye of, ii. 228, 230, 253; gnosis of, ii. 88, 95; gnosis apotheosis of, ii. 167; good, ii. 127, 155, 156; imperishable, iii. 113; great, ii. 213; hylic, i. 452; joy of, ii. 230; judge, ii. 201; man, iii. 280; of all masterhood, ii. 3, 4, 229; of mind, iii. 257; of my own mind, iii. 104; pilot, ii. 201; pure, ii. 324, iii. 292; religion of, i. 91, ii. 401, iii. 316; of universals, i. 225. Mind-consciousness, ii. 239. 

Mind-led man, ii. 203. 

Minerva Mundi, iii. 93. 

Ministers, iii. 50. 

Minoides Mynas, i. 140. 

Minos, i. 149. 

Mint, i. 293. 

Minutoli, i. 465. 

Mirrors, ii. 285. 

Mist, dark, i. 125. 

Mithras, i. 325, iii. 181. 

Mithriac, Aeon, i. 399; Cronus, i. 400; mysteries, i. 290, iii. 180; mystery-tradition, i. 95. 

Mithriaca, i. 178, 179, 182, ii. 276, iii. 181. 

Mixture, iii. 102. 

Mnaseas, i. 314. 

Mnevis, i. 272, 309. 

Mohler, i. 25. 

Moirogenesis, i. 465. 

Moist, i. 309, iii. 66; essence, i. 170, 187, 388, 390, 454, ii. 4, 75; light, i. 391; nature, i. 151, 310, 312, 313, ii. 4, 5, 13, 26. 

Moistened, i. 161. 

Moistener, i. 161, 279. 

Moisture, i. 313. 

Moly, i. 325. 

Momos, iii. 115, 116, 142, 182; speech of, iii. 113. 

Monad, i. 359, 395, 404, 414, 456, ii. 90; Apollo, i. 275; from the One, iii. 291; pleroma, i. 405; quintessence, i. 403. 

Monastery, i. 209, iii. 93. 

Montanus, ii. 292. 

Montet, i. 387, 

Moon, i. 319, 321, 332, 417, 419, ii. 180, 312. 

Moon-God Thoth, i. 72. 

Morning, Infinite, i. 80. 

Moses, ii. 38; Archangelic Book of, i. 197; Books of, i. 456, ii. 158; companions of, i. 244; Eighth Book of, i. 197, 411; hierophant and prophet, i. 247. 

Mot (see Mut), i. 125, 126. 

Mother, of Gods, i. 152, 176; Holy Spirit, ii. 238; of living, i. 163; own, iii. 242; wisdom, i. 224; womb of great, iii. 324. 

Mother-Aeon, ii. 163. 

Mother-city, best, i. 237. 

Motion, ii. 61. 

Mount, of Arcadia, ii. 238; Athos, i. 140; of Galilee, ii. 238; holy, i. 375; of initiation, ii. 238; of Olives, ii. 54; Passing o'er the, ii. 171; of perfection, ii. 24; Tabor, ii. 238; way up to, ii. 150, 171; wending up, ii. 219, 237; mountain, i. 377; of light, ii, 238; Secret Sermon on, i. 56, ii. 234; top of, ii. 237. Mozley, i. 34; on poles, i. 176. 

Mukti, ii. 167. 

Mulberry-tree, i. 284. 

Mulberry-wood, tables of, iii. 216. 

Muller, i. 104, 117. 

Muller (C.), i. 107, 123. 

Mummification, iii. 123. 

Mummy, i. 71. 

Muratorian Fragment, i. 378. 

Murderer, ii. 202. 

Muses, i. 280, 287, ii. 323; the nine or ennead, i. 85; prophets of the, ii. 292. 

Museum, i. 102. 

[p. 356]

Music, ii. 324, 331. 

Music-maker, ii. 290, 291. 

Musician, God, ii. 288; the, ii. 291. 

Mustard seed, i. 247. 

Mut (see Mot), i. 337. 

Myer, Qabbalah of, i. 281. 

Myriad-eyed, i. 184. 

Myrrh, i. 332, 364, 366. 

Mysteries, iii. 251; Anthropos-theory of, i. 193; of Assyrians, i. 155; Bacchic or Corybantic, i. 212; below, the, iii. 94; and Book of the Dead, iii. 186; of Dionysus, i. 311; Eleusinian, i. 59; the Great, i. 217, 362, ii. 240; of Great Mother, i. 186; hierophants of, i. 212; Hippolytus and divulging of, i. 140; most holy, i. 221; ineffable, i. 210; of Isis, iii. 182; Lesser, i. 180, ii. 159, 214, 240; of light and divine birth, i. 75; Magna Mater, i. 179; Mithriac, i. 290, iii. 1 80; On the, iii. 285; punishment for revealing, i. 213; of purity, i. 154; of regeneration, ii. 240; scribe of, iii. 223; of solemn life, i. 209; of godlike virtues, i. 207. 

Mysterious black, iii. 158. 

Mystery, of birth from virgin womb, ii. 240; of blessed bliss, i. 154; Book of the Great Logos according to, i. 166; dark, iii. 149; of deity, i. 225; deity, Cronus, i. 400; epoptic, i. 178; at third gate, i. 190; of Heavenly Man, i. 226; of ignorance, ii. 25; of man, i. 141; of repentance, ii. 245; ritual in Acts of John, i. 182, 183; of sameness, ii. 241; of Samothracians, i. 168; of virgin-birth, i. 211. 

Mystery-institutions, iii. 327; inner doctrine of, i. 141. 

Mystery-myth, the, i. 278 ff. 

Mystery-play of all time, i. 377. 

Mystes, i. 210, ii. 93, iii. 188. 

Mystic, ii. 240, iii. 184; enclosure, i. 179; eucharist, ii. 94; images, i. 207; spectacle, iii. 107. 

Mystical god-blending, i. 156. 

Mysticism, practical, iii. 325, 326. 

Myths, of Plato, i. 109; treatment of, i. 200; under-meaning of, i. 201. 

Naas, i. 187, 192. 

Naassene Document, i. 92, 390, ii. 54, 91, iii. 280, 282; analysis of, i. 142. 

Naassene Hymn, ii. 109. 

Naasseries, i. 141. 

Naasseni, i. 146. 

Nai, i. 294. 

Nakdimon, Rabbi, ii. 239. 

Naked, i. 211, 213, 373, 374. 

Name, i. 85, ii. 343; authentic, ii. 252; of God, i. 198, 234, ii. 344, iii. 293; ogdoad, ii. 252. 

Name-maker, iii. 276. 

Names, i. 352; of power, ii. 279; energetic speech of, ii. 267. 

Naos, i. 187. 

Nature, iii. 25; Arise! blessed, i 155; by-products of, iii. 52; contemplators of, i. 206; fairest part of, ii. 348, 350; moist, i. 151, 161, 310, 312, 313, ii. 4, 5, 13, 26; original, i. 155; productive, iii. 66; seven-robed, i. 156; vaporous, iii. 209. 

Naughtiness, superfluity of, i. 451. 

Naumann, History of Music of, i. 294. 

Nazorenes, i. 369. 

Nebris, fawn-skin, i. 191. 

Necessity, i. 101, ii. 211, iii. 61, 264; circle of, i. 428; daughters of, i. 442; fate and, ii. 385; foreknowledge and, iii. 12, 58; love and, iii. 110, 264; spindle of, i. 440; throne of, i. 447; utterance of, ii. 362. 

Nechepso, i. 100 ff., 464, 472, 477. 

Necheus, i. 464. 

Nectar, i. 415. 

Nefer-Tem, i. 458. 

Negress, Hor, son of, i. 88. 

Nehe-maut, i. 49. 

Neilos, i. 307. 

Neilotis, i. 115. 

Neith, i. 108, 273. 

Nemanous, i. 285. 

Nemesis, iii. 116. 

Neophytes, i. 214. 

Nephthys, i. 280, 284, 315, 322 337, 340, 344. 

Nesert, i. 457. 

Net, i. 58 ff., 62; house of, i. 58; temple of, i. 62; of Vulcan, i. 62. 

Netting, i. 62. 

[p. 357]

Nicolaitans, i. 165, ii. 79. 

Night, i. 91, iii. 94, 114. 

Night-stool boy, i. 298. 

Nightingale, i. 445, 449. 

Nigidius, i. 407. 

Nikolaos, iii. 279. 

Nikotheos, iii. 278. 

Nile, i. 267, 269, 308, 314, 316, 345, 347, 384, ii. 265, iii. 148, 154; celestial, i. 70, 92, 156, iii. 163; father, i. 109; flood of, iii. 224; heavenly, iii. 158; Osiris, i. 308; Osiris' efflux, i. 312. 

Nine, ii. 16. 

Nineteenth Century, ii. 192. 

Nirmanakaya, ii. 44. 

Nirvana, ii. 98. 

Nirvanic consciousness, i. 51, ii. 45, 46, 98. 

Nitriote nome, i. 384. 

Noah, ii. 56. 

Nochaitae, i. 142. 

Noetic, body, ii. 242; world, iii. 80. 

Non-Being, ii. 161. 

Noose, of Hercules, i. 61. 

Nourishment of gods, i. 133. 

Numbers, i. 404; which pre-exist in Soul, iii. 173. 

Numinis majestas, iii. 260. 

Nuptial number, iii. 174, 336. 

Nurse, i. 276, 285, 336; of all, i. 310, ii. 209. 

Nut, i. 65. 

Oannes, i. 149, 425, iii. 303. 

Oblivion (Lethe), Place of, i. 454. 

Oblong, i. 319. 

Obscuration, ii. 260. 

Obscure Philosopher, ii. 215. 

Ocean, i. 162; churning the, iii. 180; of divine love, ii. 94; of generation, iii. 163; great, ii. 92; heaven, i. 131, iii. 154; stream of, i. 162, 282. 

Oceanus, i. 310, iii. 273. 

Ochus, i. 277, 307. 

Octateuch, iii. 297. 

Odysseus, i. 446; companions of, i. 270. 

Oenuphis, i. 274. 

Ogdoad, i. 57, 120, 130, 132, 246, 263, 275, ii. 42, 228, 251; name, ii. 252. 

Old man of sea, i. 176. 

Old old path, ii. 98. 

Olympian path, the, ii. 171. 

Olympic stole, iii. 182. 

Olympus, i. 61, 299. 

Omar Khayyam, i. 167. 

Omega, iii. 273. 

Omniform, ii. 194, 245, 341. 

Omphis, i. 320. 

One, ii. 100; and all, i. 136, 197, ii. 118, 230, 310, 344; is all, ii. 268, 308, 309; colour, i. 391; element, ii. 195, 244; essence, i. 391; form, ii. 35; image of, ii. 118; man, ii. 222, 244; and only, ii. 258, iii. 22; pleroma, ii. 133; second, ii. 118, 268; sense, ii. 139, 244; sight, ii. 161; source, ii 150. 

One-and-Only One, ii. 100. 

Oneness, ii. 90, 91, 92, iii. 258. 

Onion, i. 271. 

Only Son, ii. 196. 

Onnofris, i. 294. 

Onoel, i. 422. 

Onomacritus, i. 392, ii. 235. 

Ophianae, ii. 27. 

Ophitae, ii. 27. 

Ophite, hebdomad, i. 421; systems of gnosis, i. 98. 

Ophites, i. 142; diagram of, i. 422, 423, 449, iii. 277. 

Opinion, i. 430; and sensation, iii. 84. 

Oracle, at Delphi, i. 349, ii. 42, 228. 

Ordeal of fire, i. 79. 

Order, ii. 385; and its opposite, iii 266. 

Orderer of the world, iii. 208. 

Orelli, i. 24, 123. 

Orgies, i. 149, 155, 211, 350. 

Origen, i. 140, 423, ii. 72, iii. 99; Celsus and, i. 423. 

Original, man, i. 168; nature, i. 155; seed, i. 155. 

Orion, i. 295, 296. 

Ormuzd, i. 325, 400; servant of, i. 297. 

Orpheus, i. 391, 392, 445, iii. 320. 

Orphic, eschatology, i. 439; fragments, i. 265; hymn, iii. 269; hymns, ii. 235; initiates, i. 191; Phanes, ii. 282; or Pythagorean initiate, i. 95; world-egg, i. 387, 388. 

Orphicism, i. 392. 

Osiriaca, the, i. 256, 311. 

Osirian Passion, i. 288. 

[p. 358]

Osiric and Typhonic Passions, i. 298. 

Osirified, i. 65, 71, 120; Thoth and the, i. 65. 

Osiris, i. 63, 74, 80, 193, 279, 367, iii. 198; Apis animated image of, i. 321; birth of, iii. 122; black, i. 296, 309; burials of, i. 293, 320; great campaign of, i. 353; dark God, iii. 156; and Dionysus, i. 310; disciple of Agathodaimon, i. 478, iii. 261; efflux of, i. 328; eye of, iii. 158; fourteen parts of, i. 289; garment of, i. 71; gospel of, i. 367; house of, i. 79; and Isis, blessings of, iii. 122; members of, i. 156; mystery-god, iii. 257; Nile, i. 308; secrets of, iii. 96; seeking for, i. 332; the sun, i. 332; tombs of, i. 289, 292, 293, 312; is water, i. 156. 

Osiris-myth, i. 130. 

Osiris-plant, i. 314. 

Ostanes, iii. 295; Book of, iii. 277, 296. 

Osymandias, library of, i. 50. 

Outbreathing of universe, ii. 254. 

Outline of His Face, ii. 282. 

Overseer of ceremonies, iii. 223. 

Overseers of heavens, i. 126. 

Own-form, ii. 46. 

Own-nature of masterhood, ii. 47. 

Ox, i. 356, 422. 

Oxyrhynchus, i. 269, 354, iii. 246; logia, i. 172, 173, 209, ii. 24, 116, 239, 255; logion, probable completion of, ii. 122. 

Oxyrhynchus-town, i. 354. 

Pa-neshe, i. 119. 

Paean, i. 293. 

Pain, sharp tooth of, iii. 115. 

Paitoni, i. 9. 

Palaestmos, i. 287. 

Palestine, i. 208. 

Palingeneses, i. 311. 

Palingenesis, i. 283, ii. 83; lord of, i. 50. 

Palisade, i. 163. 

Palladius, ii. 50. 

Pallas, iii. 181. 

Pamphilus, i. 100. 

Pamphus of Athens, i. 181. 

Pamyle, i. 279. 

Pamylia, i. 279, 312. 

Pan, i. 186, ii. 56. 

Panacea, i. 241. 

Panathenaea, i. 62. 

Panchaea, i. 297. 

Pandora, iii. 274, 280. 

Panics, i. 283. 

Panopolis, i. 282. 

Pans, i. 282. 

Panthers, i. 436. 

Pantomorph, ii. 194, 245, 341. 

Panu, i. 294. 

Paophi, i. 331. 

Papa, i. 172. 

Paphie, iii. 91. 

Papyrus, i. 284, 289; Ebers, i. 50; Harris, i. 131; Insinger, ii. 244. 

Paradigm, of cosmos, ii. 196; of time, ii. 196. 

Paradigms, iii. 56. 

Paradise, i. 173, 187, iii. 279; a, i. 244; celestial, i. 425; planted with trees, i. 189. 

Parallelogram, iii. 177. 

Paraplex, i. 269. 

Parents we are to abandon, ii. 96. 

Parmenides, i. 181. 

Parthey, i. 14, 26; criticism of text of, ii. 64. 

Parthians, i. 196, 197. 

Passage of Sun, i. 71, 77. 

Passing o'er Mount, ii. 171. 

Passion, i. 283, ii. 204, 262, 288; and sensation, iii. 42. 

Passions, i. 277, 351, ii. 249, 262; Osiric and Typhonic, i. 298; Titanic, i. 311. 

Passive Principle, i. 225. 

Pastophors, iii. 225. 

Pastos, iii. 225. 

Path, i. 70, 74, ii. 89, 91, 114, 118, iii. 293; bitter, ii. 362; of gnosis, ii. 98, 195, 248; up to Gods, ii. 169, iii. 299; Good's own, ii. 189, 190, 196, iii. 327; secrets of holy, i. 192; old old, ii. 90, 98; Olympian, ii. 171; of return, iii. 144; of salvation, ii. 171; of self-knowledge, ii. 40; moving on a soundless, i. 357; steps of, i. 79; to supreme, ii. 197; thither, iii. 6; to truth, iii. 5. 

Patrizzi, i. 11. 

Paul, propaganda of, i. 204. 

Pauly, i. 26. 

Paut, i. 57, 132; of Hermes, i. 263. 

[p. 359]

Pawnbroking bye law, i. 242. 

Payni, i. 305. 

Peace, author of its, iii. 4; virtue of perfect, i. 218. 

Peacock, i. 391. 

Pearls, i. 175. 

Peisistratidae, i. 392. 

Pelasgos, i. 149. 

Pelousios, i. 287. 

Penelope, i. 159. 

Pentateuch, i. 203. 

Perception, iii. 84. 

Perfect, i. 434; blessedness, ii. 242; fruit, i. 182; men, ii. 87, 97; one, ii. 91; Sermon, ii. 136, 266; glory of soul, ii. 165; the, iii. 14, 256; vision, iii. 96. 

Perfection, beginning of, i. 178; Gospel of, i. 142; mount of, ii. 24; perfect, i. 178. 

Perfume-makers, i. 365. 

Permanence, ii. 271. 

Permanent atoms, i. 289. 

Perret, ii. 56. 

Persea, i. 349, iii. 208. 

Persephassa (see Proserpina), i. 301. 

Persephone, i. 151, 181, 347, 350, iii. 161. 

Persia, ii. 206. 

Persians, i. 207. 

Person, i. 136, iii. 287, 288. 

Persona, ii. 25. 

Persons, of Ptah, i. 132. 

Peter, James, John, and, i. 475. 

Petosiris, i. 100 ff., 464, 472, 477. 

Petra, iii. 161. 

Petroma, iii. 232. 

Petron, iii. 172. 

Phaeacians, i. 270. 

Phaedrus, river, i. 287; soul and her mysteries in the, i. 429. 

Phallephoria, i. 279, 313. 

Phallus, i. 289, 312. 

Phamenoth, i. 321. 

Phanes, i. 391, 394. 

Phaophi, i. 305, 346. 

Pharaoh, rat of, i. 356. 

Pharisees, i. 209. 

Pharos, i. 318. 

Pheidias, i. 359, ii. 290. 

Pheison, i. 188. 

Pheneatians, iii. 232, 

Pheneus, i. 376. 

Pherecydes, ii. 260. 

Philadelphus, i. 104. 

Philae, i. 460. 

Philip, Acts of, i. 147; Gospel of, i. 142. 

Philo, i. 211, ii. 128, 137; of Alexandria on the Man-Doctrine, i. 197; Byblius, i. 122 ff.; of Byblos, i. 402; De Legatione of, ii. 237; two Horoi in, i. 367; inspiration i. 203; his method, i. 199; monotheist, i. 231. 

Philonean tractates, i. 199. 

Philoponus, ii. 172, iii. 209. 

Philosophers, iii. Ill; most ancient of, iii. 215; prince of, ii. 38. 

Philosophumena, of Hippolytus, i. 140. 

Philosophy, beginning of, i. 274, iii. 246; Egyptian, i. 28; inventor of, i. 138; piety and, iii. 3; pure, ii. 331; true, ii. 232; work of, i. 233. 

Philostratus, ii. 197. 

Philtre, immortal, i. 246. 

Philtres, i. 88. 

Phosilampes, ii. 107. 

Photius, i. 62, 152. 

Phrygian writings, i. 303. 

Phrygians, i. 350. 

Phylarchus, i. 303. 

Physician, good, i. 461, ii. 213. 

Physicists, theory of, i. 307, 312. 

Physiologus, i. 56, 330, 345, 356, 357, iii. 112. 

Physis, iii. 256. 

Picture, iii. 18, 276, 295. 

Pierret, i. 28. 

Pietschmann, i. 47 ff., 72, 112, 116, 119. 

Piety, iii. 3, 5, 243, 265. 

Pig taboos, i. 271. 

Pillars of Hermes, i. 112. 

Pilot, i. 296, 347; mind as, ii. 201. 

Pinax, of Bitos, i. 197, iii. 277. 

Pindar, i. 312, 366. 

Pine, i. 364. 

Pine-resin, i. 364. 

Piper, the, i. 183. 

Pistis Sophia, i. 84, 92, 94, 326, 371, 418, 426, ii. 43, 96; general title of, i. 142; song of powers in, ii. 241. 

Pitra, i. 6. 

Pitys the Thessalian, iii. 295. 

Pius, Bishop of Rome, i. 378. 

Plague, i. 364; great, i. 364. 

Plagues and famines, iii. 49. 

[p. 360]

Plain, of Forgetfulness (Lethe), i. 447; of Truth, i. 430, ii. 19, 49, 50, 97, iii. 171, 172, 189, 205, 208. 

Plane, iii. 174. 

Planetary chains, iii. 301. 

Planets, five, iii. 46. 

Plasm, sealing of the members of the, iii. 70. 

Plato, i. 62, 103, 113, 265, 274, 277, 297, 298, 299, 300, 333, 336, 337, 338, 340, 362, 392, 405, 406, 414, ii. 167; Atlantis of, i. 176; buys, i. 351; crater in, i. 450; definition of man by, i. 433; marriage scheme of, i. 336; myths of, i. 109; nuptial number of, i. 336; transformation of soul in, iii. 110; follows Trismegistus, iii. 248. 

Pleiades, i. 350. 

Plenum, space a, ii. 70. 

Pleroma, i. 85, 246, 335, ii. 28, 32, 93, 241; of bad, ii. 115; of evil, ii. 113; common fruit of the, ii. 241; of Good, ii. 117; and hysterema, ii. 239; of ideas, ii. 128; intelligible superspatial, ii. 196; monad, i, 405; one, ii. 133; of virtues, ii. 117. 

Pletho, i. 8. 

Plew, i. 115. 

Pleyte, i. 49. 

Pliny, iii. 296. 

Plotins Stellung zum Gnosticismus, iii. 278. 

Plotinus, ii. 42, 198, 228, 302; Life of, iii. 278; on metempsychosis, i. 434; soul of, iii. 32; yoga of, i. 251. 

Plucked green wheat-ear, i. 178. 

Plumes, i. 337. 

Plutarch, i. 84, 103, 223, 255, 453; Consolation of, i. 260; Yogin of, iii. 169. 

Pluto, i. 301, 362. 

Poemandres, early form of the, i. 374; higher criticism of the, i. 128; variant spellings of, i. 3. 

Poemandrist, Apology of a, ii. 298. 

Poimandres, the name, ii. 50. 

Pole-lords of heaven, i. 176. 

Poleis, i. 177. 

Poleitai, i. 177. 

Poles, i. 87; seven, i. 95, 402. 

Polichne, i. 292. 

Pontius (Pontus) Pilate, iii. 164. 

Poor, i. 373. 

Porphyry, i. 113, 123, 124, ii. 42, 229; Letter to Marcella, i. 260. 

Portrait, iii. 18. 

Poseidon, i. 176, 318; first cube, i. 275; trident of, i. 359. 

Poseidonius, i. 102. 

Possessions, ii. 327, 330. 

Pothos, i. 125. 

Poverty, i. 338. 

Powers, chariot of the, i. 238; invocation of the, ii. 249; song of the, ii. 42, 43. 

Pralaya, ii. 260, iii. 137. 

Prana, i. 363, ii. 168, iii. 146, 206. 

Prayer for gnosis, ii. 49. 

Prayers, for dead, i. 78; of Essenes, ii. 49; Hermes', i. 82. 

Praying-room, i. 209. 

Pre-existing, i. 150; Amygdalos the, i. 182. 

Presence, the, ii. 24, 47. 

Priam, i. 299. 

Prima Materia, i. 151. 

Prince, of eternity, i. 65, 132; of philosophers, ii. 38. 

Principles of man, ii. 149; and cosmos, ii. 207. 

Privation, i. 327; of sense, ii. 127. 

Probation, three stages of, ii. 236. 

Probationers, the, i. 185. 

Procession, ii. 89; of fate, ii. 49. 

Proclus, i. 101, 106, 435, ii. 169; on descent of souls, i. 435; on spheres, iii. 300. 

Proem to fourth gospel, ii. 371. 

Prometheus, i. 263, 314, iii. 274, 280, 282. 

Promise of silence, the, ii. 219. 

Pronoia, ii. 39. 

Prophetenpredigt, ii. 122. 

Proscription of worship of gods, ii. 399. 

Proserpina (Kore), i. 59. 

Protection, sole, iii. 265. 

Proteus, i. 176. 

Prototypes, iii. 56. 

Protrepticus, or Exhortation to the Greeks, ii. 300. 

Providence, ii. 39, 207, 211, 216, iii. 61, 195, 235, 258, 260; and fate, iii. 36, 55, 60; legislative, i. 237; ministers of, iii. 206, 211. 

[p. 361]

Psammetichus, i. 268. 

Pselcis, i. 117. 

Psellus, i. 7, ii. 38, 58. 

Pseudo-Appuleius, ii. 392. 

Pseudo-Manetho, i. 110, 115. 

Psychagogue and psychopomp, i. 159. 

Psychosis, iii. 99, 102, 168. 

Ptah, i. 457, iii. 148; the great, i. 130, 135; Hephaestus, i. 160, 382, iii. 96; noose of, i. 61; persons of, i. 132; hath spoken, i. 138, iii. 148; temple of, i. 130; workshop of, i. 457. 

Ptah-doctrine, i. 130. 

Ptah-Hotep, i. 74. 

Ptah-priests of Memphis, i. 135. 

Ptah-Thoth, i. 132. 

Ptolemies, i. 102, 103; libraries of the, iii. 277. 

Ptolemy, Gnostic, ii. 371; the saviour, i. 301; (II.), i. 103, 105; (IV.), i. 460; (IX.), i. 463; (X.), i. 466; (XI.), i. 466. 

Ptolemy Philadelphia, i. 104; Letter of Manetho to, i. 103. 

Pulse, i. 349. 

Pupil of the eye, i. 394. 

Pupilla Mundi, iii. 93. 

Pupilline, l'Ame, iii. 167. 

Pupils of the eyes, i. 84. 

Pure, and holy love, ii. 332; not lawful for, i. 265; matter, ii. 7; mind, ii. 320, 324, iii. 292; philosophy, ii. 331; shepherd, ii. 55. 

Purpose, iii. 258. 

Purgations, catharms or, iii. 210. 

Purity, mysteries of, i. 154; wedding garment of, ii. 249. 

Purusha, ii. 168. 

Pyanepsion, i. 350. 

Pyramid, ii. 85; iii. 254, 255; great, i. 69. 

Pyriphlegethon, ii. 361, 362. 

Pythagoras, i. 113, 274, 298, 392, iii. 317; his symbols, i. 274. 

Pythagorean, i. 305; triangle, iii. 175. 

Pythagoreans, i. 359. 

Pythagoric, messages, i. 275; opposites, i. 327. 

Pythagorics, i. 308, 327. 

Pythian oracle, ii. 42, 228. 

Pytho, ii. 300. 

Python, i. 298. 

Qabbalah, Myer's, i. 281. 

Questions, of Mary, i. 142; of Osiris to Horus, i. 290. 

Quick, i. 186. 

Quiet and Serene, iii. 253. 

Quintessence, iii. 102, 206; aether, ii. 92; and monad, i. 403. 

Ra, i. 131; and Apep, i. 57; heart of, i. 53, 68; herald of will of, i. 49; library of, i. 103; light-god, i. 473; tongue of, i. 49, 68. 

Race, i. 205, 207, ii. 20, 50, 162, 221, 290; of Elxai, ii. 242; of God, i. 253; without a king, i. 164; ineffable, i. 166; of Logos, ii. 18, 241; self-taught, i. 174, 220, ii. 241; within, iii. 5. 

Rachel, i. 178, 220. 

Raise the dead, i. 273. 

Raisins, i. 364. 

Ram of perfectioning, the, i. 212. 

Ramses III., i. 131. 

Raphael, i. 422. 

Rashness, ii. 224. 

Raven, i. 286, 352, iii. 181. 

Ray, iii. 288; of God, ii. 275. 

Ray-like, i. 224. 

Rays, hall of golden, i. 75. 

Reason, iii. 84; articulation of, ii. 224; common, i. 346; continuing, i. 247; of divinity, ii. 311, 318; highest whole, ii. 320; marriage with right, i. 223; self-perfect, i. 222, iii. 60; true, ii. 319. 

Rebecca, i. 217. 

Rebirth, i. 58, 353, ii. 219; author of, ii. 222, 243; of cosmos, ii. 357; hymn of, ii. 229; lord of, i. 50; manner of, ii. 221, 224, 226, 233, 264; sermon on, ii. 219, 227, 236; tradition of, ii. 220; way of, ii. 248. 

Reborn, ii. 239. 

Recitation Ode, i. 192, 193. 

Recognition of children, iii. 20. 

Recollection, i. 433. 

Recording Angel, i. 64. 

Red, ass, a, i. 306; earth, i. 150; Sea, i. 163. 

Red-skinned, i. 295, 305, 306. 

Regeneration, ii. 239; mystery of, ii. 240. 

Reincarnation, i. 137, ii. 76, 83; Hermes, teacher of, iii. 227. 

[p. 362]

Reitzenstein, i. 15, 51, 121, 143; monograph on "Aion," i. 387; general view of, i. 40 ff. 

Religion, of Hermes, i. 82; of joy, i. 73; of light, i. 73; of mind, i. 91, ii. 401, iii. 316.

Reminiscence, ii. 241, 372. 

Ren, i. 89. 

Repentance, mystery of, ii. 245; true, ii. 98. 

Resin, i. 332, 363, 366. 

Restoration, ii. 126, 128, iii. 246. 

Resurrection of dead, ii. 165. 

Return, the, ii. 246. 

Revealer, of hidden, i. 49; of light, i. 375. 

Revelations, divine, i. 216; hierophant of, i. 211. 

Revelling-place, i. 84, 97. 

Rhea, i. 151, 153, 278, 305, 334, 390, ii. 26; womb of, i. 335. 

Rib, i. 279. 

Richter, i. 200. 

Riddle, i. 273. 

Riess, i. 100, 101. 

Right hand, i. 348. 

Righteousness, i. 53, 60, 85, 263, ii. 225, 231. 

Ring Pass not, ii. 9. 

Rishis, ii. 242. 

Rising from dead, i. 173. 

Rite, black, iii. 107, 141, 149, 155; of flame, i. 93. 

Ritual, i. 58, 59, 65, 72, 74, 76, 77, 79, 84; of Azazel, i. 306; of Embalmment, i. 460; of Initiation in Acts of John, ii. 243. 

River, of Divine Reason, i. 244; of God, i. 244; of Heedlessness, i. 447; of Lethe, i. 416, 452. 

Road, Ancient, iii. 327. 

Robber in house, ii. 121. 

Robe, of fire, ii. 152; of glory, i. 361, ii. 43, 249; of Isis, i. 62; single, i. 373. 

Robes, her, i. 340; of Isis, i. 264; sacred, i. 361. 

Rock, God from, i. 95, 392, 399; the, i. 161. 

Rod of Hermes, i. 61. 

Root, of form, ii. 193; of matter, ii. 26; one, ii. 269; of universals, i. 184. 

Rootage of aeons, ii. 317. 

Rosetta stone, i. 117. 

Rossel, i. 11. 

Round-the-same, ii. 62. 

Rulers, seven, ii. 7, 9; workmen of, iii. 70. 

Rush, i. 312. 

Rusta, i. 70. 

Sacrificers, iii. 112. 

Saffron-coloured, i. 342. 

Sages, the seven, i. 207. 

Sah, i. 89. 

Sai-an-Sinsin, i. 79. 

Sais, i. 108, 273, ii. 280, iii. 293. 

Sakkara, i. 372; step-pyramid of, i. 465. 

Salmon, i. 147, 195, 196, 421. 

Salome, i. 147, 153; mother of St John, i. 38. 

Salt, i. 267, 397. 

Salvation, harbour of, ii. 120, 123; path of, ii. 171; port of, ii. 120. 

Sambhogakaya, ii. 45. 

Same, i. 327, ii. 268, 369. 

Sameness, ii. 207, 244. 

Samothracians, i. 168. 

Sampsaeans, i. 369. 

Samsara, ii. 167, 283. 

Sanchuniathon, i. 24, 112 ff., 113, 122, ii. 279. 

Saosis, i. 285. 

Sarah, i. 217, 220, 221. 

Sarapis, i. 301, 302, 342. 

Sassanean, i. 297. 

Satan, sons of, iii. 319. 

Satrap, iii. 133. 

Saturn, i. 416, 418, 419. 

Satyrs, i. 282. 

Saulasau, i. 165. 

Save my alone-begotten from lions, i. 170. 

Saving One, i. 340. 

Saviour, Books of the, i. 418; my, i. 241; Ptolemy the, i. 301; the, i. 224. 

Sayings, of Good Daimon, ii. 213 f.; of Heracleitus, ii. 213. 

Scaly-coat, i. 289. 

Scape-goat, i. 306. 

Scarab, i. 276, 356. 

Scarabaeus, i. 356. 

Scetis, i. 384. 

Scherer, i. 36. 

Schmidt, Carl, i. 50, 93. 

Schmitz, i. 34. 

Schneidewin, i. 143. 

Sciences, iii. 40, 85, 198; arts and, ii. 322, iii. 199. 

[p. 363]

Scipio, Dream of, i. 418. 

Scorpion, i. 282. 

Scourge of Christ, ii. 173. 

Scribe, of Gods, i. 53; of the nine Gods, i. 50; of the mysteries, iii. 223. 

Scripture-making, ii. 22. 

Scroll, secret, i. 77, 78. 

Scyth, ii. 253, 401. 

Sea, Great, iii. 163; of ignorance, ii. 123; infinite, i. 389; old man of, i. 176. 

Sea-hawk, bone of, i. 189, 343. 

Seal, i. 395, iii. 79; mighty type of, i. 395; which marked victims, iii. 223. 

Sealers, i. 306. 

Sealing members of plasm, iii. 70. 

Sebennyte, i. 104. 

Second, birth, i. 79; God, i. 230, ii. 127, 170, 365; man, i. 139, ii. 27; one, ii. 118, 268. 

Seeds of God, ii. 137. 

Seeing Israel, i. 198, 234. 

Seer, ii. 255, iii. Ill; of Gnosis, ii. 94; of God, iii. 298. 

Seething, i. 396. 

Seirias, i. 115. 

Seirios (see Sirius), i. 111. 

Sekhem, i. 89, 131. 

Sekhet, i. 457. 

Selene, i. 151, 278. 

Seleucus, iii. 289. 

Self-begotten, i. 150. 

Self-taught, ii. 242; race, i. 174, ii. 241. 

Semele, i. 161, 454. 

Semiramis, i. 297. 

Semitismus, i. 124. 

Semneion, i. 209. 

Sempiternity, iii. 9. 

Seneca, i. 102. 

Sensation, iii. 41; corpse of, ii. 121; energy and, of, iii. 40; opinion and, iii. 84; passion and, iii. 42. 

Sense, ii. 319 ff., 340, 345; cosmic, ii. 371, 372; discourse on, ii. 131, 132; higher, i. 227, ii. 338; one, ii. 139, 244; privation of, ii. 127; sermon about, ii. 129; single, ii. 389; whole, ii. 371. 

Sense-and-thought, ii. 132, 134, 137; of cosmos, ii. 133, 139. 

Sensible, ii, 286, 320, 340, 377; or hylic cosmos, ii. 167. 

Separator or Divider, ii. 70. 

Sepphora, i. 164, 217. 

Sept, i. 111. 

Sepulchres, ye are whited, i. 172. 

Serapeum, ii. 399, iii. 277. 

Seriadic, country, i. 104; land, i. 107, 110 ff.; monuments, i. 113. 

Sermon, Perfect, ii. 136; Secret, ii. 250; about sense, ii. 129; on rebirth, ii. 219, 227, 236. 

Sermons, classification of, iii. 306; Expository, i. 462, ii. 250, 264, iii. 33, 54, 309; of Fate, ii. 217; General, i. 462, ii. 141, 145, 236, 264, iii. 45, 77, 308. 

Serpent, i. 86, 87, 97, 98, 146, 344, ii. 4, 26, 301; of Darkness, ii. 31; death of, ii. 300; great, ii. 27, 35; winged, i. 398; of wisdom, i. 194, 480. 

Servant of God, i. 251. 

Servant-form, i. 398, 399. 

Servants of God, i. 212, 220. 

Seseli, i. 365. 

Sesostris, i. 297. 

Sesquioctave, i. 320. 

Set, i. 53, 57. 

Seth, i. 111, 114, 319, 329, 343, ii. 27; sons of, i. 114. 

Seth-Hermes, sons of, i. 113. 

Sethian, i. 139, 393, ii. 4, 27; gnosis, i. 192, 393. 

Seti, (I.), i. 50. 

Setme, i. 380. 

Seven, ii. 341; basis, i. 419; circles, ii. 76; cosmoi, i. 407; fortunes of heaven, i. 176; halls, i. 380; Kabiri, ii. 279; men, ii. 11; peals of laughter, iii. 137; poles, i. 95, 402; rulers, ii. 7, 9; sages, the, i. 207; sons of Sydyk, i. 127; spheres, iii. 60; times, i. 332; virgins, i. 176; wise ones, i. 458; worlds, the, ii. 179; youths, i. 176; zones, i. 413, ii. 42. 

Seven-robed Nature, i. 156. 

Sevenfold "Ha," iii. 137. 

Seventeen, i. 319. 

Seventy-two, i. 281. 

Sex, iii. 129, 145, 203. 

Shadow, ii. 9; casting, i. 326. 

Shakti, i. 52, ii. 107. 

Shame, garment of, i. 153, ii. 42. 

Sharing-with-all, ii. 225. 

Sharp-snout, i. 289, 354. 

[p. 364]

Shaven, i. 265. 

She of ten-thousand names, i. 333. 

Sheep, i. 356. 

Sheeted dead, the, i. 161. 

Shepherd, i. 371, ii. 43, 228, 229, 231; good, i. 373, ii. 213; of Hermas, i. 369, ii. 238, 248, iii. 229, 232, 319; of men, i. 375, ii. 231, 372; pure, ii. 55; of bright stars, i. 186, ii. 56; symbolic representation of, i. 372; true, i. 238; who hath his fold in the west, i. 373. 

Shore, other, ii. 89. 

Short-armed, i. 295. 

Shrine-bearers, iii. 225. 

Shu, i. 131, 133. 

Si-Osiri, i. 380. 

Sibylline, literature, ii. 330; oracles, iii. 235; writers, ii. 49. 

Sickness, health and, iii. 203. 

Siddhis, ii. 197. 

Siege of Mansoul, iii. 186. 

Sige (Silence), ii. 163. 

Sight, mortal and immortal, iii. 235; one, ii. 161; of peace, i. 246. 

Sigils, iii. 179. 

Signs of zodiac, i. 54, ii. 52. 

Silence, ii. 19, 20; heart of, i. 73; holy, ii. 163; promise of, ii. 219, 233; vow of, ii. 250. 

Simon, Jules, i. 434. 

Simon Magus, ii. 108. 

Simonian, gnosis, ii. 107, 317; tradition, i. 184, 188. 

Simonides, i. 296. 

Sinai, i. 384. 

Single, love, ii. 330; sense, ii. 389. 

Sinope, i. 302. 

Sins, forgiveness of, i. 251. 

Siren, i. 442. 

Siriad land, i. 114. 

Siriadic, i. 111. 

Sirius, i. 110, 314, 326. 

Sister-wife, i. 147, 301. 

Sistruni, i. 303, 344. 

Sittl, ii. 54. 

Six-and-fiftieth even measure, i. 305. 

Sixteen, i. 319. 

Sixty, iii. 168; spaces, iii. 192. 

Skiff (baris), i. 288. 

Skin, red, i. 305. 

Slave, i. 91, ii. 10; enharmonised, i. 183. 

Sleep, iii. 32. 

Slime, i. 125. 

Smu, i. 343. 

Snake, i. 329, 356, ii. 4, iii. 133; great, ii. 26. 

Snow, fire and, i. 95. 

Socrates, i. 406; Books on Rites, i. 311. 

Solar, boat, i. 270; table, i. 452. 

Soldier, ii. 276, iii. 50. 

Soli, i. 438. 

Solid, iii. 174. 

Solomon, iii. 283. 

Solon, i. 103, 108, 274. 

Son, of God, i. 138, 157, 198, 220, 226, ii. 28, 116, 118, 140, 222, 241, iii. 239, 275, 280, 282; only beloved, i. 224; eldest, i. 227; of man, i. 150, 160, ii. 43, 138; of the One, ii. 228, 251; only, ii. 196; of virgin, iii 160, 161; younger, ii. 192, 257. 

Sonchis, i. 274. 

Song, of holiness, ii. 50; of Linus, i. 293; of the powers, ii. 42, 43; of praise to Aeon, i. 408. 

Sons, of Elohim, i. 159; of Fire, iii. 136; of God, i. 198, 233, iii. 316; of His eternal Likeness, i. 234; of the one God, i. 234; of one man, i. 234; of Satan, iii. 319; of Seth, i. 113, 114. 

Sonship, ii. 43, 50, iii. 140; wings of, i. 390. 

Sophia, i. 335; Above, i. 74, ii. 76. 

Sophia-aspect of Logos, i. 49. 

Sophia-mythus, i. 334, 377, ii. 26, 30, 32, iii. 226. 

Sophist, i. 431. 

Sorrow, ii. 225. 

Sosibius, i. 302. 

Sothiac, i. Ill; cycles, iii. 290. 

Sothis, i. 80, 104, 115, 117, 121, 295, 342, iii. 276; a forgery, i. 107 ff. 

Sotoles, i. 302. 

Soul, i. 150, 414, 417, ii. 145, 182, 309, iii. 63, 194; animal, ii. 246; ascent of, ii. 41 ff.; of becoming, i. 49; and body, ii. 124, 130; cosmic, ii. 151, 216; daimonic, ii. 229; dual, ii. 169; essence of, i. 225; eye of, iii. 129; eyes in, i. 214; cause of all in genesis, i. 151; perfect glory of, ii. 165; gnosis virtue of, ii. 

[p. 365]

[paragraph continues] 167; group, i. 425; health of, ii. 257, iii. 265; rational impress in, i. 230; infant's, ii. 150, 216; Macrobius on descent of, i. 413; masculine power of, i. 152; metamorphoses of, ii. 163; mysteries of, in Phaedrus, i. 429; numbers which pre-exist in, iii. 173; parts of, ii. 274, iii. 5; passions of, i. 177; transformation of, in Plato, iii. 110; progression of, iii. 174; sluggish, ii. 157; transfiguration of, ii. 164; vehicles of, ii. 167; vision of, iii. 188; (II.), of, iii. 65; (III.), of, iii. 72; (IV.), of, iii. 75; (V.), of, iii. 77; (VI.), of, iii. 80. 

Soul-gnosis, iii. 137. 

Soul-making, iii. 188. 

Soul-regions, the sixty, iii. 168. 

Souls, colours of, i. 223; conductor, i. 159; discipline of, ii. 347; fountain of, i. 452; habitat of excarnate, iii. 210; intercourse of, ii. 155, 314; kinds of, iii. 78; of kings, iii. 127; lamenting of, iii. 108; equal to stars, iii. 100; ordering of, iii. 191; power of sight of, i. 214; Proclus on descent of, i. 435; royal, iii. 125; simile of animals in a cage and, iii. 190; two, iii. 298; warder of, iii. 195. 

Sound of heavens, i. 161. 

Sounding brass, i. 303. 

Source, i. 234, ii. 90, 176; one, ii. 150; of stars, i. 232. 

Sovereign, angel, i. 371; potency, i. 237. 

Sovereignties, iii. 198. 

Sower, the, i. 174. 

Space, ii. 60, 71, 212, 334, 376, iii. 63; dark, ii. 26; dry, ii. 75, 76; a plenum, ii. 70. 

Spaces, sixty, iii. 192. 

Species, ii. 313; genera and, ii. 378. 

Speech, ii. 206. 

Spermatic essence of Logos, i. 390. 

Sphere, ii. 126, 337; cosmos a, ii. 148; egg, i. 427; eighth, ii. 42 ff.; of fire, i. 428; God's deathless, ii. 230; watery, iii. 209. 

Spheres, boundary of the, ii. 195; cosmic, iii. 299; of destiny, iii. 293; eight, ii. 275; seven planetary, iii. 60, 300; Proclus on, iii. 300; six, ii. 276; Tartarean, i. 445; Servius on seven, i. 418. 

Sphericity, law of revolution, ii. 387. 

Sphinx, secret of, iii. 323. 

Spiegelberg, i. 112, 130, ii. 244. 

Spiral, fashion, ii. 271; orbits, iii. 177. 

Spirit, ii. 33, 168, 318, 332, 336, 390, 396, iii. 66, 81, bestower of, ii. 231; part played by, in conception, iii. 66; counterfeit, iii. 68, 281; Dionysus, i. 318; divine, iii. 258; Do not soil, iii. 174; fragrance of, i. 396; of God, ii. 81; Good, iii. 261; in harmony, i. 183; sensible, iii. 82; story of the, i. 371; virginal, i. 181, 182, ii. 240, 241, iii. 157. 

Spirit-air, ii. 34. 

Spirit-matter, ii. 332, 334. 

Spirit-word, ii. 5. 

Spirits, iii. 25, 111; animal, i. 363; delegate, i. 184. 

Spiritual, baptism, ii. 92; birth, i. 163; crucifixion, ii. 238; eyes, i. 214; prototype of humanity, i. 139; sun, ii. 253, 300; way, ii. 240. 

Spirituous body, iii. 210. 

Spit out and cleanse the mouth, i. 291. 

Sponges, iii. 210. 

Square, i. 319. 

Staff, i. 96, i. 373. 

Stahelin, i. 196. 

Stands, He who, ii. 170. 

Star, native, iii. 110; the one, i. 232. 

Star-courses, ii. 89. 

Star-flocks of gods, i. 327. 

Star-groups, iii. 53. 

Star-mixture, iii. 74. 

Starry cup of Bacchus, i. 414. 

Stars, iii. 45; fixed, ii. 341; groups of, ii. 273; long-haired, iii. 52; souls equal in number to, iii. 100; source of the, i. 322. 

Statues, ii. 351; of judges, i. 276. 

Stending, i. 310. 

Steward, ii. 358. 

Stewart, i. 429, 439. 

Stigmata, iii. 162. 

[p. 366]

Stock, Logos as, ii, 70. 

Stoics, i. 83, 318, 319, 323. 

Stone cut without hands, the, i. 162. 

Stones, iii. 39; ensouled, i. 151. 

Storks, i. 356. 

Stretchers, iii. 50. 

Strife, i. 359, ii. 362. 

Strive to know yourselves, ii. 256. 

Strivers, iii. 50. 

Strong, i. 27, 314. 

Subsistence, ii. 161. 

Substance, ii. 269, 270. 

Substantial, ii. 139. 

Successions of Kings, i. 315. 

Suchness, ii. 44. 

Sudan, i. 55. 

Suidas, i. 100, iii. 268. 

Suitors, i. 159. 

Sulphur, i. 262. 

Sumerian, ii. 79. 

Summa potestas, ii. 4. 

Sun, i. 416, 419, ii. 142, 273, 294, 339, 365, 366, iii. 21, 25, 31, 126; arms of, i. 331; as charioteer with crown of rays, ii. 281; circle of, iii. 52; delineation of, ii. 282; demiurge, ii. 269, 281; gates of, i. 162; generation of, iii. 262; a "head," ii. 270; hymn to, ii. 253; Osiris is, i. 332; passage of, i. 77; ray of spiritual, iii. 287; rays of the, iii. 288; spiritual, ii. 253; birth-day of staff of, i. 331. 

Sun-god, ii. 391. 

Sun-ship, i. 94. 

Sunshine, the real, ii. 252. 

Super-man, i. 301, ii. 93, iii. 323. 

Super-substantial bread, i. 86. 

Superfluity, i. 265, 267, 268. 

Superior One, ii. 292. 

Superstition, i. 278. 

Supplanter, i. 220. 

Suppliant, i. 376, ii. 219, 237, 238; of Hermes, ii. 236. 

Suriel, i. 422. 

Swallow, i. 286. 

Swan, i. 445, 449. 

Sweet-flag, i. 365. 

Swine, i. 175. 

Sydyk, i. 127. 

Syene, i. 269, 477. 

Syncellus, i. 104, iii. 152. 

Syncrasia, i. 193. 

Syncretism, i. 135, 136; theory of Neoplatonic, i. 26. 

Syria, i. 208. 

Syriktes, i. 183, 398. 

Syrinx, iii. 232. 

Ta-urt, i. 290. 

Taaut, i. 124, 127; cosmogony of, i. 126. 

Taautos, Asclepius pupil of, ii. 279; Books of, ii. 279. 

Tables of mulberry-wood, iii. 216. 

Taboos, fish, i. 269; pig, i. 271. 

Tabor, Mount, ii. 238. 

Talmud, i. 115, 425; Jeschu-stories, iii. 279. 

Tamar, i. 224. 

Tamarisk, i. 284. 

Tanes, iii. 49. 

Tanitic mouth, i. 282. 

Tantalus, cup of, ii. 198. 

Taphosiris, i. 293. 

Targum, i. 194. 

Tartarean spheres, i. 445. 

Tartarus, i. 152, 338, 439, ii. 361, 362; of seven zones, i. 421. 

Tat, and Asclepius, distinction between, ii. 264; dialogues with, ii. 237; Expository Sermons to, iii. 13, 16, 44, 216, 256, 257, 259, 262, 263, 264, 266; initiation of, iii. 310; priesthood, iii. 148. 

Tatenen, i. 131, 134. 

Tathagatas, ii. 44. 

Tatian, ii. 72. 

Tax-gatherers, i. 174. 

Taxis, ii. 43, iii. 145. 

Taylor on numbers, i. 432. 

Tcheser, i. 465. 

Teachers, common, iii. 287. 

Technactis, i. 272. 

Teephibis, i. 463. 

Tefnut, i. 131, 133. 

Teh, Tehu, Tehut, variants of Thoth, i. 48. 

Tehuti, i. 124; derivative of, i. 54; variants of, i. 112. 

Telescope of Zoroaster, i. 13. 

Tern, i. 66, 337; Young, i. 458. 

Templa, regiones coeli, ii. 273. 

Templar Codex of Fourth Gospel, i. 475. 

Temple-folk, iii. 255. 

Temple-watchman, iii. 162. 

Temu, i. 459. 

[p. 367]

Ten, the, ii. 16, 226, 245. 

Tent, ii. 211, iii. 20, 32; or tabernacle of soul, ii. 227. 

Tent-fellows, iii. 203. 

Teos, i. 463. 

Terebinth, i. 87. 

Termaximus, i. 53. 

Territory of Illumination, i. 70; of Initiation, i. 70. 

Tertullian, i. 71. 

Testaments, ii. 235. 

Tethys, i. 310. 

Tetraktys, i. 360. 

Thabion, ii. 279. 

Thales, i. 103, 160, 187, 274, 309. 

Thamus, i. 472, iii. 216. 

Thamyras, i. 445. 

That art thou, ii. 234. 

Thath, i. 112, 461, 462. 

Thautabaoth, i. 422. 

Thebes, i. 50, 272; library at, i. 465. 

Thekla, i. 147. 

Themistius, ii. 236. 

Thenen, i. 460. 

Theocritus, i. 373. 

Theodoret, i. 139, ii. 27. 

Theodoras, i. 348. 

Theodotus, Excerpts from, ii. 251. 

Theognis, ii. 156. 

Theophanies, i. 232. 

Theopompus, i. 326, 350. 

Theoretic Life, ii. 163. 

Theoretics, iii. 148, 245. 

Theoria, iii. 172. 

Theosebeia, iii. 273; advice to, iii. 283. 

Theosophical Review, i. 15, 95, 118, ii. 42. 

Therapeut, i. 26, 241, ii. 172; allegorical exercises, i. 177; community, i. 208; initiations, i. 251. 

Therapeutrides, i. 208, 219. 

Therapeuts, i. 30, 31 f., 200, 208, 212, 243, ii. 252, 311, 330, 402, iii. 59; prayers of the Essenes and, ii. 49. 

Thersites, i. 436, 446. 

Thesmophoria, i. 350. 

Thespesius (Aridaeus), i. 223, 453; vision of, ii. 363, iii. 192. 

Thessalians, i. 356. 

Theurgic rite of initiation, ii. 255; invocation, ii. 245. 

Theurgy, i. 83, ii. 163. 

Theuth, iii. 276. 

Theuth-Hermes, iii. 216. 

Thiasos, i. 206, 256. 

Third heaven, the, i. 166, 173. 

Third-born, i. 359. 

Thirty-six, ii. 341, iii. 50. 

Thomas, Gospel according to, i. 142, 155, iii. 37. 

Those-that-are, i. 80, 137, ii. 42. 

Thoth, i. 68, 124, 136, ii. 244; books of, i. 122, 124; eight-times-great, i. 119; his company of eight, i. 57 ff.; The Great Gnoses of, i. 50; first Hermes, i. 104; ibis symbol of, i. 48; incarnations of, i. 463; the initiator, i. 71; as Logos, i. 48, 63, 90, 135; first man, iii. 295; the measurer, i. 66; moon-god, i. 72; and the Osirified, i. 65; pre-eminence of, i. 67, 467; shrine of, i. 56; variants of name, iii. 234; the wise, i. 68, 134; the eternal wisdom, i. 71, 72; words of, i. 63. 

Thoth (Tehuti), i. 47 ff. 

Thoth (Tekh), i. 458. 

Thought, iii. 84. 

Thought-and-sense, ii. 136. 

Thouth, i. 124. 

Thoyth, i. 110, 112, ii. 279, iii. 234, 277, 278. 

Thoyth-Hermes, iii. 231. 

Thoythos, iii. 276, 295. 

Thracians, i. 169. 

Thraemer, i. 461. 

Threshold of the Good, ii. 97. 

Thrice-great, i. 53. 

Thrice-greatest, Egyptian equivalent of, i. 119; Hermes, iii. 198; the title, i. 66. 

Thrice-unknown Darkness, ii. 25. 

Throne, of Necessity, i. 447; of Truth, iii. 109, 173. 

Thrones, iii. 101. 

Through the Word, ii. 255. 

Thueris, i. 290. 

Thyestian banquets, i. 444. 

Thyiades, i. 310, 311, 312. 

Thyrsus, i. 311. 

Tiamat, i. 60. 

Tiedemann, i. 13, 16, 23. 

Tigris, i. 188. 

Time, ii. 192, 367, iii. 28, 63; archetype of, i. 229, ii. 193; artificer of, ii. 192; grandson of 

[p. 368]

[paragraph continues] God, i. 229; instruments of, iii. 100; lord of, i. 76; paradigm of, ii. 196. 

Time-watcher, iii. 222. 

Timaeus, i. 106, ii. 70, 167. 

Tinkling cymbal, i. 303. 

Titanic Passions, i. 311. 

Titans, i. 268, 303, iii. 50, 163; or stretchers, i. 282. 

Toil, iii. 98. 

Tombs of Osiris, i. 292, 293, 312, ii. 121. 

Tongue, of angels, ii. 32; of flesh, ii. 31; is fortune, i. 349; heart and, i. 136, iii. 208. 

Tongues of heaven, ii. 32. 

Tormentors, ii. 223. 

Torments of darkness, ii. 245. 

Tortoise, i. 359. 

Tosothrus-Asclepius, i. 465. 

Totemism, i. 353. 

Trajan, i. 145. 

Transfiguration, ii. 238; of soul, ii. 164. 

Transformation, body of, ii. 44. 

Transformations, ii. 145, iii. 111. 

Transmigration, ii. 166, iii. 194. 

Treasure, i. 167; of light, i. 246. 

Treasure-house, i. 211. 

Treasury, ii. 269. 

Tree of Gnosis, i. 428. 

Triad of disciples, i. 476. 

Triangle, iii. 172; equilateral, i. 305, 359; most perfect, i. 358; Pythagorean, iii. 175. 

Triangles, fairest of the, i. 336. 

Tribes, the twelve, i. 169. 

Trikayam, ii. 44. 

Trinity, i. 214, ii. 79, iii. 258, 268, 275. 

Triphyllians, i. 297. 

Tritons, i. 359. 

Triumphant Christ, ii. 117. 

Trojan War, i. 324, iii. 183. 

Trumpeters, ii. 289. 

Truth, ii. 225, 231, iii. 17; beauty of, ii. 121; gnosis of, i. 207; hall of, iii. 317; figure of man of, iii. 277; path to, iii. 5; plain of, i. 430, ii. 19, 49, 50, 97, iii. 171, 172, 189, 205, 208; is sweet, i. 349; throne of, iii. 109, 173. 

Turiya, i. 152. 

Turmoil, ii. 167. 

Turnebos, Adr., i. 10. 

Turning-back, ii. 98. 

Twelve, disciples, the, i. 169; fates of death, ii. 249; maidens, ii. 249; stoles, iii. 182; the, ii. 226, 245; tribes, i. 169; women in dark robes, ii. 249. 

Twice-great, i. 53. 

Twin-gods, i. 131. 

Two, combatants, i. 66; ways, i. 56. 

Tybi, i. 329. 

Typal Man, i. 168. 

Type, of aeons, ii. 282; of body, iii. 49. 

Types, of life, ii. 227, 245; of lives, iii. 102; of wisdom and intelligence, iii. 106. 

Typhon, bone of, i. 189. 

Typhon, i. 279, 295, iii. 191; bone of, i. 343; concerning, i. 304; conspiracy of, i. 315; foam of, i. 308; pursuing pig, i. 272; red-dish-yellow body, i. 309; virilia of, i. 335. 

Tyrant, i. 431. 

Under-girdings, i. 440. 

Under-meaning of myths, i. 201. 

Underworkers, iii. 50. 

Unfruitful, i. 175. 

Unguent, scent of, i. 393. 

Uniter of the earth, i. 59. 

Unlike, ii. 90, iii. 11. 

Unnu, i. 56. 

Unorder, ii. 126. 

Unseemliness, i. 154. 

Unseen World, i. 86, 223; Lord of the, i. 73. 

Untitled Apocalypse of the Codex Brucianus, ii. 107, 282, 303. 

Upanishads, ii. 163, 168, 234. 

Uranus, i. 151, ii. 144, 162, iii. 234. 

Urim and Thummin, i. 250. 

Ursin, i. 21, 110. 

Urtuhet, i. 294. 

Usertsen (I.), i. 458. 

Vahan, ii. 96. 

Valentinian, i. 94, ii. 32. 

Valentinus, i. 38; hymn of, ii. 284; letters of, ii. 283; psalm of, ii. 217, 312. 

Vanaprastha ashrama, ii. 73. 

Vaporous nature, iii. 209. 

Vapour, iii. 66, 200, 202, 203, 206. 

Vapours, iii. 206, 210. 

[p. 369]

Varro, i. 110, 407. 

Vase of genesis, iii. 26. 

Vedanta, ii. 107. 

Vedantavadins, ii. 107. 

Vegetative, iii. 210. 

Vehicles of the soul, ii. 167. 

Veii, bible of the, ii. 235. 

Venus (Isis), i. 382. 

Vergecius, Angelus, i. 10. 

Vestments, keeper of the, iii. 223. 

Vestures, ii. 152. 

Vettius Valens, i. 101, 102. 

Vices, horde of, ii. 245; and virtues, i. 377. 

Victim-sealing books, iii. 223, 224. 

Virgin, i. 179, 218, 403; birth, ii. 220, 240; church, i. 377; big with child, i. 182, ii. 240; precinct of the, iii. 161; sister, i. 147; son of, iii. 160, 161; womb of, i. 399, ii. 240; of the world, iii. 93, 125. 

Virgin-birth, mystery of the, i. 211. 

Virgin-mother, i. 74. 

Virgin-mothers, i. 220. 

Virgins, seven, i. 176. 

Virginal Spirit, i. 181, 182, ii. 240, 241, iii. 157. 

Virginity, i. 218, 219. 

Virtue, kinsmen of, i. 241; of perfect peace, i. 218; silence on their, ii. 250. 

Virtue-lovers, i. 244. 

Virtues, i. 216, ii. 245; company of, ii. 245; seven, ii. 248; lists of vices and, ii. 246. 

Vishnu Purana, iii. 180. 

Vision, and apocalypsis, ii. 20 ff.; of Aridaeus (Thespesius), i. 438, 452, ii. 363; of Beautiful, iii. 15, 53, 253; most blessed, i. 102; of Er, i. 413, 426, 428, ii. 15, 40, 187; glorious, ii. 161; power of godly, iii. 19; of Good, ii. 143; of Hades, i. 223; of great and little man, ii. 238; of Mercabah, i. 154; perfect, iii. 96; simple, ii. 221; of soul, iii. 188; of spiritual crucifixion, ii. 238; supreme, ii. 264; visions, ii. 210; of Crates, i. 380; of Zosimus, i. 380. 

Vital sheath, iii. 206. 

Voice, direct, iii. 147; of fire, ii. 5, 26; heavenly, i. 101; living, iii. 323. 

Void, ii. 64, 374. 

Vortex, i. 389, 390, 453, ii. 187. 

Vow of Silence, ii. 250. 

Vulcan, net of, i. 62. 

Vulcanic Crater, i. 452. 

Vulture, i. 90. 

Vyasa, ii, 235. 

Wagenfeld, i. 123, 124. 

Wagner, ii. 94. 

Wall, i. 90, 163. 

Walton, Alice, i. 461. 

War, i. 327; in heaven, iii. 118; Trojan, i. 324, iii. 183. 

Wardens, eight, i. 85, 121. 

Warder of the souls, iii. 195. 

Warriors, iii. 50. 

Wars, Civil, i. 352. 

Watcher, witness and, iii. 111. 

Watchers (Egregores), i. 126, iii. 137. 

Water, iii. 189; awesome, i. 394, 395; deathless, ii. 18; drainer of, ii. 39; fire and, iii. 66; above firmament, i. 188; first-born of, i. 398; living, i. 188, 190, 399; Osiris is, i. 156; sinuous, ii. 4; as source, i. 309; sprite, i. 367; very water, iii. 17. 

Water-earth, ii. 33, 34. 

Water-rats, i. 325. 

Watery sphere, iii. 209. 

Way, above, ii. 15, 41; of birth in God, ii. 244; of this birth, ii. 244; of death, ii. 18; of deathlessness, ii. 39; that leadeth to destruction, i. 182; of devotion, ii. 119; of gnosis, ii. 98; up to God, ii. 280; to worship God, ii. 212; out of ignorance, ii. 237; inner, i. 101; of life, i. 182, ii. 15, 40, 41; middle, ii. 96; up to mount, ii. 150, 171; old, old, ii. 98; of rebirth, ii. 248; straight, ii. 189, iii. 327, ii. 40, 287. 

Weasel, i. 356. 

Weasel-armed, i. 295. 

Web of ignorance, ii. 121. 

Wedding garment, ii. 42, ii. 249. 

Well of Life, i. 79. 

Wending up the Mount, ii. 219. 

Wessely, i. 82, 86, 93, 97. 

Whale, belly of, i. 425. 

Wheat-ear, i. 178, 179. 

Wheel, karmic, ii. 83. 

Wheels of Ezekiel, iii. 173. 

[p. 370]

Whether blest child of Kronos, i. 185. 

Whirlwinds, fiery, i. 409. 

White, cock, i. 342; rock, i. 162, 163. 

Whole, ii. 310; sense, ii. 371. 

Whoring, iii. 166. 

Whorl, i. 441, ii. 187. 

Wilamowitz, i. 185, 195, ii. 300. 

Will, ii. 142; of God, ii. 160, 220, 395. 

Wind, i. 396. 

Windows, not eyes, iii. 109. 

Winds, four, i. 84. 

Wine, of ignorance, ii. 120; of, i. 268. 

Winged globe, i. 390. 

Wings, i. 432; feathers of their, i. 430; of sonship, i. 390. 

Wisdom, i. 206, 220, 221, 223, 225, ii. 251, iii. 163; mass of archaic, ii. 236; brotherhood for sake of, i. 233; dark, i 87, 91; disciples of, iii. 303; of Egypt, i. 44, 69, ii. 98, iii. 321; church of, iii. 323; Greek, i. 193; in harmony, i. 183; harmony of, i. 237; husband of, i. 218; Indian, ii. 198; lady of all, iii. 208; laws of, i. 120; mother, i. 224, 228; practisers of, i. 206; serpent of, i. 194, 480; spark of, i. 206; supreme master of, i. 68; tradition of, i. 208; that understands in silence, iii. 162. 

Wisdom-discipline, iii. 225. 

Wisdom-lover, i. 431. 

Wise, Thoth the, i. 134. 

Withdrawn volumes, ii. 236. 

Witness, the, ii. 50, 51; and watcher, iii. 111. 

Wolf, i. 87, 90, 325. 

Wolf-town, i. 354. 

Wolves, i. 436. 

Woman, first, i. 139, ii. 27; strange, iii. 166. 

Womb, i. 396, ii. 128; ever-virgin, i. 222; fecund, ii. 390; of Great Mother, iii. 324; tore asunder His, i. 182; impure, i. 398; of Rhea, i. 335; is Silence, ii. 241; of Virgin, i. 399. 

Women, band of seven, ii. 248; maladies of, iii. 225. 

Wonder, ii. 93, iii. 246. 

Wood, cutting of, i. 293. 

Word, of creator, iii. 256; He who soweth the, ii. 18; language of the, i. 54; the proceeding thought, i. 137; spoken, ii. 343; by whom all things were made, i. 136; through the, ii. 233, 255. 

Word-play, ii. 106. 

Words, of Ammon, iii. 215; whom it is custom to call angels, i. 243; ladder of, i. 139; of Thoth, i. 63; three more-than-mighty, i. 165. 

Work, great, iii. 314, 326. 

World, old age of, ii. 356; end of, ii. 400; fast to the, ii. 239; inner, iii. 325; intelligible, ii. 273, 286, 302; map of, iii. 187; noetic, iii. 80; orderer of, iii. 208; shrine of all, ii. 351; stranger to, ii. 220; unseen, i. 223; virgin of, iii. 93. 

World-citizens, i. 206. 

World-egg, ii. 33; Orphic tradition of, i. 387, 388. 

World-eye, apple of the, iii. 167. 

World-illusion, ii. 220, 237. 

World-soul, i. 414, ii. 36, 70, 184, 260, iii. 173. 

World-tree, the, ii. 317. 

Worlds, number of, 183, iii. 171; plurality of, iii. 170; seven subject, ii. 179. 

Worm, i. 171. 

Worms, iii. 51. 

Worse, i. 328. 

Worship, ii. 323; of animals, i. 353. 

Xenocrates, i. 298, 299. 

Xenophanes, i. 351. 

Xois, i. 320. 

Yahweh, iii. 166, 167. 

Ye are Gods, i. 163. 

Ye shall leave your parents, i. 249. 

Ye are whited sepulchres, i. 172. 

Year, great, iii. 290. 

Year-god, i. 402. 

Years, thousand, i. 432; ten thousand, iii. 171; three thousand, i. 326. 

Yedidyah ha-Alakhsanderi, i. 200. 

Yoga, ii. 163; of Plotinus, i. 251. 

Yoga-practices, ii. 197. 

Yogin, Plutarch's, iii. 169. 

[p. 371]

Yoke of horses, i. 430. 

Yonge, i. 201. 

Young Tern, i. 458. 

Younger son, ii. 192, 257. 

Youths, seven, i. 176. 

Ysdnw, iii. 297. 

Zeesar, i. 165. 

Zeller, i. 32, 36, ii. 392. 

Zervan Akarana, i. 400. 

Zeus, i. 151, 279, 305, 313, 327, 330, 359; above, ii. 359; below, ii. 359; bull of, iii. 183; cosmic breath, i. 313; date of, i. 149; essence-chief, ii. 341; gifts of, iii. 274; lame, i. 343; Phrygius, i. 172; sons of, iii. 217. 

Zion, foundation of, i. 162. 

Zodia, iii. 53. 

Zodiac, i. 414, 416, ii. 245; signs of the, ii. 52. 

Zoega, i. 400. 

Zone, regal, iii. 198. 

Zones, ii; 41, iii. 97, 194, 211; seven, i. 413, ii. 42. 

Zophasemin, i. 126. 

Zoroaster, i. 325, 437, iii. 274, 278, 296; the Mage, i. 324, iii. 317; The Telescope of, i. 13. 

Zorokothora, iii. 211. 

Zosimus, i. 157, 270, ii. 249, 265, iii. 273; and the Anthropos-doctrine, i. 196; visions of, i. 380. 

    
Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3, by G.R.S. Mead, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 372]

[p. 373]

Works by G. R. S. MEAD, B.A., M. R. A. S.

 

FRAGMENTS OF A FAITH FORGOTTEN

Some short Sketches among the Gnostics, mainly of the First Two Centuries--a Contribution to the Study of Christian Origins based on the most Recently Discovered Materials. 

I. Introduction.--Outlines of the Background of the Gnosis; Literature and Sources of Gnosticism. 

II. The Gnosis according to its Foes.--Gnostic Fragments recovered from the Polemical Writings of the Church Fathers; the Gnosis in the Uncanonical Acts. 

III. The Gnosis according to its Friends.--Greek Original Works in Coptic Translation; the Askew, Bruce, and Akhmim Codices. 

Classified Bibliographies and Index are appended. 

(Second and Revised Edition now Ready.) 

xxviii., 650 pp. large octavo. Cloth. 10s. 6d. net. 

SOME PRESS NOTICES.

"Mr. Mead has done his work in a scholarly and painstaking fashion."--The Guardian. 

"The ordinary student of Christian evidences, if he confines his reading to the 'Fathers,' learns nothing of these opinions [the so-called Gnostic 'heresies'] except by way of refutation and angry condemnation. In Mr. Mead's pages, however, they are treated with impartiality and candour. . . . . These remarks will suffice to show the unique character of this volume, and to indicate that students may find here matter of great service to the rational interpretation of Christian thought."--Bradford Observer. 

"Whatever may be the worth of the Gnostics' speculations, there seems to be little doubt that these early heretics, among whom were some deep thinkers, as well as men of blameless character, have not been very impartially dealt with by their orthodox opponents, and those who wish to see their views treated in a more sympathetic way than has been usual with ecclesiastical historians, will do well to read this able volume of Mr. G. R. S. Mead. . . . . The book, Mr. Mead explains, is not intended primarily for the student, but for the general reader, and it certainly should not be neglected by anyone who is interested in the history of early Christian thought."--The Scotsman. 

"The work is one of great labour and learning, and deserves study as a sympathetic estimate of a rather severely-judged class of heretics."--Glasgow Herald. 

"Written in a clear and elegant style. . . . . The bibliographies in the volume are of world-wide range, and will be most valuable to students of theosophy"--Asiatic Quarterly. 

"Mr. Mead writes with precision and clearness on subjects usually associated with bewildering technicalities and mystifications. Even the long-suffering 'general reader' could go through this large volume with pleasure. That is a great deal to say of a book on such a subject."--Light. 

"This striking work will certainly be read not only with the greatest interest in the select circle of the cultured, but by that much larger circle of those longing to learn all about Truth. . . . . May be summed up as an extraordinarily clear exposition of the Gnosis of the Saints and the Sages of philosophic Christianity."--The Roman Herald. 

"Mr. Mead does us another piece of service by including a complete copy of the Gnostic Hymn of the Robe of Glory . . . . and a handy epitome of the Pistis Sophia is another item for which the student will be grateful."--The Literary Guide. 

"The author has naturally the interest of a theosophist in Gnosticism, and approaches the subject accordingly from a point of view different from our own. But while his point of view emerges in the course of the volume, this does not affect the value of his work for those who do not share his special standpoint. . . . . Mr. Mead has at any rate rendered us an excellent service, and we shall look forward with pleasure to his future studies."--The Primitive Methodist Quarterly. 

"The writing of the present work has been a congenial task to Mr. Mead, and he has brought to bear, lovingly and zealously, upon the portraiture of the figure of Christ and of early Christianity all the knowledge which a deep study of Oriental religions from their emotional side could furnish. The book is published by the Theosophical Publishing Society, and bears, of course, the marks of its associations; but it may be stated at the outset that there is very little of what is commonly regarded as the Theosophic method apparent in the work, which is the product of a scholarly though, withal, very devotional spirit. . . . . In his endeavour to realise the object which he has set himself, Mr. Mead has traversed a wide field. . . . . In fine, we have in his volume a bird's-eye view of the whole field 

[p. 374]

of early Gnosticism written for the general reader in a style and method requiring no knowledge of the ancient tongues."--The Monist. 

"We are glad to see that the Theosophists. . . . . are settling down to the study of religion. . . . . Though we do not appreciate their fundamental philosophy, so far as we understand it, we think they may do good work if they produce books like this of Mr. Mead--comprehensive, interesting, and scholarly though evidently biassed. . . . . Readers not familiar with the learned German works on Gnosticism will find here an account of its varying phases and of the influences which helped to produce it. The chapters entitled 'Some Rough Outlines of the Background of the Gnosis' are well written, and they tend to focus the philosophic and religious movement of the ancient world. . . . . There is a very excellent bibliography."--The Spectator. 

"Mr. Mead, whose translation of the Pistis Sophia was a welcome boon, gives us here 'some short sketches among the Gnostics, mainly of the first two centuries.' Most readers, unless they are Theosophists, will think them too long, and Mr. Mead's enthusiasm for the Forgotten Faith of Gnosticism will remind them of the proverb: 'The cow in the meadow, knee deep in clover, often looks over the hedge and longs for the common.' . . . . Justice was not done to the Gnostics by their opponents, and we cannot wonder. Moderns, like Harnack, however, have tried to make amends, and Mr. Mead has done his best. We commend this book to all who are tired of Christianity, and who want something deeper than the Lord's Prayer, more sublime than Paul's hymn to Love, and more practical than the Sermon on the Mount."--The Christian World. 

"Mr. Mead is a sympathetic student, and regards the theosophists, of whom he is one, as the inheritors, more or less, of the 'Knowledge' of the early Gnostics, who, while anathematised as heretics, powerfully influenced the thought of the Christian Church in its earlier centuries. Mr. Mead is as far removed from the received orthodoxy as the men whose speculations he discusses."--The Manchester Guardian. 

"L'opera, cui l'autore da modestamenti il nome di Brevi studi, e invero il frutto di dotte e pazientissime ricerche, di vasta e profunda erudizione; e d'interesse grande per il soggetto che tratta ed e accessibile anche a chi non sia uno studioso di religione comparata od un teologo, per la maniera abile e piacevole con cui il sogetto e trattato. L'autore stesso spiega perche volle cosi l'opera sua con queste parole: 'poiche io stimo tal sogetto di profundo interesse umano e non di mera importanza accademica.' Il libro, che vide la luce proprio all' alba del nuovo secolo, risponde ad un bisogno del memento o, meglio, risponde ad un bisogno che sempre si e fatto e si fara sentire, ma che mai forse come nell' epocha presente ebbe fra noi tanta intensita."--La Nuova Parola. 

GERMAN TRANSLATION. 

FRAGMENTE EINES VERSCHOLLENEN GLAUBENS. Ins Deutsche ubersetzt von A. von Ulrich. Berlin: C. A. Schwetschke und Sohn. 

This is the First Attempt that has been made to bring together All the Existing Sources of Information on the Earliest Christian Philosophers. 

Apollonius of Tyana: 

THE PHILOSOPHER-REFORMER OF THE FIRST CENTURY A.D.

 

A critical Study of the only existing Record of his Life, with some Account of the War of Opinion concerning him, and an Introduction on the Religious Associations and Brotherhoods of the Times and the possible Influence of Indian Thought on Greece. 

SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS.

i. Introductory. ii. The Religious Associations and Communities of the First Century. iii. India and Greece. iv. The Apollonius of Early Opinion. v. Texts, Translations and Literature. vi. The Biographer of Apollonius. vii. Early Life. viii. The Travels of Apollonius. ix. The Shrines of the Temples and the Retreats of Religion. x. The Gymnosophists of Upper Egypt. xi. Apollonius and the Rulers of the Empire. xii. Apollonius the Prophet and Wonder-Worker. xiii. His Mode of Life. xiv. Himself and his Circle. xv. From his Sayings and Sermons. xvi. From his Letters. xvii. The Writings of Apollonius. xviii. Bibliographical Notes. 

160 pp. large 8vo. Cloth. 3s 6d. net. 

SOME PRESS OPINIONS. 

"Mr. Mead is already favourably known to scholars as a well-informed writer on the origins of religion. His particular province of study is that which passes by the name of 'occult'--a word that may be little more than a euphemism for our ignorance. . . . Mr. Mead's work is careful, scholarly, and critical, yet deeply sympathetic with those spiritual ideals of life which are far greater than all the creeds. . . . . Will be found very useful to English readers."--Bradford Observer. 

"With much that Mr. Mead says about Apollonius we are entirely disposed to agree."--Spectator. 

[p. 375]

"Mr. Mead's sympathetic monograph is based upon a careful study of the literature of the subject. . . . . Writes with moderation, and has rendered good service by examining Apollonius from a fresh point of view."--Manchester Guardian. 

"We give a specially cordial welcome to Mr. G. R. S. Mead's 'Apollonius of Tyana. . . . . It is a book which all well-instructed spiritualists will be able to appreciate and understand."--Light. 

"A charming and enlightening little work, full of knowledge, bright with sympathy, and masterly in style."--The Coming Day. 

"It is not only interesting, it is fair, and to a great degree scholarly, although it is slight and popular in conception. The spirit and tone are admirable. Mr. Mead neither flouts what he thinks mistaken nor states uncritically what he believes. . . . . He uses his authorities with care and judgment, and gives exact references. Some good suggestions are made in the book."--Literature. 

"Through this jungle of fable, controversy, and misunderstanding, Mr. Mead has heroically set himself to cut his way to the man as he was. Practically he regards him as a theosophist of the first century, who had been initiated into the loftier orders and commissioned to regenerate the cults at many of the larger sanctuaries. The author has studied the original authorities carefully, and also the work of his predecessors. It is, of course, impossible to say whether his attempt to get back to the real Apollonius has been successful. In most respects his account is plausible, and quite possibly may represent the facts. . . . . At any rate, impartial students will be grateful for his sympathetic vindication of Apollonius from the too frequent charge that he was nothing better than a charlatan. He thinks that Apollonius must surely have visited some of the Christian societies, and have met with Paul, if not earlier, at least at Rome in 66. It seems to us very problematical that he should have taken any interest in the Christians, though the probability would be much enhanced if Mr. Mead's view of primitive Christianity could be substantiated."--The Primitive Methodist Quarterly Review. 

"Students of the religious history of the earlier centuries of the Christian era are already indebted to Mr. Mead for his elucidations of more than one obscure document of that remote age. His account of Apollonius of Tyana will be all the more welcome because, treating its subject without theological or denominational prepossessions, it reveals the ancient philosopher in a new light, which may very well be also a true one. . . . . Mr. Mead gives a readable and well-studied account of him, reviewing what little remains known of his life, and inquiring, without controversy, what must have been the character of one who had so real an influence on the religious life of his time. . . . . The book is rich in suggestions of the actualities of the religious life of the ancient world when Christianity was still in its infancy. It is well worthy of the attention of all who are interested in the subject."--The Scotsman. 

"This little book is an attempt to tell us all that is definitely known of one of the most extraordinary figures in history. . . . It is done in the main with absolute impartiality, and with considerable learning. It is not a satisfactory book, but it is useful and interesting, and, in default of anything better, it may be recommended."--Saturday Review. 

"The task Mr. Mead has set himself is to recover from Philostratus' highly romantic narrative the few facts which can be really known, and to present to the public a plain and simple story which shall accord with the plain and simple life of the humble Tyanean; and he has achieved no little success. His book is thoroughly readable, the manner of writing most attractive, and his enthusiasm evidently sincere. . . . . Mr. Mead's last work is a thoroughly scholarly one, and he has contributed a very valuable page to philosophical history."--Chatham and Rochester Observer. 

"Mr. Mead's works are always worth reading. They are characterised by clearness, sanity, and moderation; they are scholarly, and are always conceived in a profoundly religious spirit. The bibliographies are excellent. With Mr. Mead's workmanship we have only one fault to find. In order to give elevation to the utterances of his hero, he not only affects poetical expressions--which is permissible--and poetical inversions of speech--which are not permissible--but he indulges in a whole page of irregular blank verse. Mr. Mead is master of an excellent prose style, and Pegasus is a sorry hack when Pegasus goes lame."--Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 

"This well-written volume affords a critical study of the only existing record of the life of Apollonius of Tyana. . . . . His principles, his mode of teaching, his travels in the east and in the south and west, his mode of life, his sayings, letters, and writings and bibliographical notes, are all set forth in a clear and interesting style."--Asiatic Quarterly Review. 

"Verfasser will auf Grund der philostratischen Biographie ein Bild vom Leben und Wirken des Apollonius geben. Es fehlt ihm dazu nich an besonnenen Urteil, eben so wenig an der notigen Belesenheit in der einschlagigen Litteratur. . . . . Verf. halt sich auch, obwohl offenbar selbst Theologe, frei von der theologischen Voreingenommenheit, die bei der Beurteilung des Apollonius so fruh und so lange Unheil gestiftet hat."--Wochenschrift fur klassische Philologie. 

O k. Mead grafei lian glafyrus, pragmateuetai de to thema toy kritikw'tata kai meta megales noynexeias kai didei emin oytu ten axiopistoteran eikona tou andros.--Erevna.

[p. 376]

THE GOSPELS AND THE GOSPEL: 

A STUDY IN THE MOST RECENT RESULTS OF THE LOWER AND THE HIGHER CRITICISM.

SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS.

Preamble--A Glimpse at the History of the Evolution of Biblical Criticism--The "Word of God" and the "Lower Criticism"--The Nature of the Tradition of the Gospel Autographs--Autobiographical Traces in the Existing Documents--An Examination of the Earliest Outer Evidence--The Present Position of the Synoptical Problem--The Credibility of the Synoptists--The Johannine Problem--Summary of the Evidence from all Sources--The Life-side of Christianity--The Gospel of the Living Christ.

200 pp. Large octavo. Cloth, 4s. 6d. net. 

SOME PRESS NOTICES.

"A clear, intelligent, and interesting account of the history of the development of Biblical criticism . . . . a thoughtful and learned, yet readable book, which well deserves the attention of readers interested in its subject."--The Scotsman. 

"Mr. Mead begins with a sketch of the recent progress of Biblical criticism. The tone is not altogether what one would wish--the 'Conservatives' were, after all, fighting for what they held to be very precious--but it is substantially true."--Spectator. 

"Mr. Mead describes his book as 'a study in the most recent results of the higher and the lower criticism.' The description is incomplete rather than inadequate, for the study is made from a neo-Gnostic point of view, and under neo-Gnostic prepossessions. . . . Mr. Mead has shown, in previous volumes, how the fascinating glamour of their writings has attracted him, and, though they are mainly represented by imperfect but suggestive fragments, he has done his best to reconstruct them and to revive, where possible, their lingering vitality. His work, on these lines, has met with due appreciation. . . . . He regards Gnosticism as a suppressed religion which may yet result in an all-embracing creed, which will combine and focus the scattered rays now dispersed abroad among divergent faiths."--Sheffield Daily Telegraph. 

"In his modest preamble the author describes himself as neither scientist nor theologian, but as 'a friendly spectator, who, as a devoted lover of both science and religion, has no partisan interest to serve, and, as a believer in the blessings of that true tolerance which permits perfect liberty in all matters of opinion and belief, has no desire to dictate to others what their decision should be on any one of the many controversial points touched upon.' Further on he strongly advises the 'disturbed' reader, 'who fears to plunge deeper into the free waters of criticism,' to 'leave the matter alone, and content himself with the creeds and cults of the churches.' We, therefore, cannot complain if in the sequel he puts forth conclusions widely different from those generally held, even in this 'advanced' age, by the average thoughtful student. He claims to treat the subject 'without fear or favour,' and, while disclaiming the 'ultra-rationalism' of the 'extreme school' of criticism, he nevertheless 'feels himself compelled largely to accept the proofs brought forward of the unhistorical nature of much in the Gospel narratives, and also the main positions in all subjects of Gospel criticism which do not involve a mystical or practical religious element.' As a theosophist, he seems to have a peculiar affection, on mystical grounds, for the fourth Gospel, which, however, he sees fit to class with Hermes Trismegistus. It would be far too elaborate a task to attempt to deal with the details of his argument here. Its results claim to be based on Nestle's deservedly popular work. Anyone who wishes to see Nestle theosophically interpreted may well read Mr. Mead's lucid and interesting pages for himself. . . . . There are many other points we should criticise if we had space. But there are many points, on the other hand, which call for hearty commendation; not least, Mr. Mead's crusade against book-worship."--The Guardian. 

"This work consists of various chapters which have appeared from time to time in a Review devoted to the study of religion from an entirely independent point of view, and perused by a class of readers belonging to many Churches of Christendom, to schools or sects of Brahmanism, Buddhism, Mohammedanism, Zoroastrianism, and others who follow no religion. The author considers that the controversies which have been waged under the term of the 'Higher Criticism' have almost exclusively been that of progressive knowledge of physical facts (natural, historical, and literary) and the conservatism of theological traditional views, and never, at any time, between Science and Religion in their true meaning."--Asiatic Quarterly Review. 

"While Mr. Mead is thus in general agreement with the extreme left wing in criticism, he is very far from adopting their rationalistic point of view. . . . . As to dates, the author assigns all the Gospels to the reign of Hadrian. The phenomena of the Synoptic 

[p. 377]

[paragraph continues] Gospels, he thinks, point to concerted effort, and he believes that they were written in Egypt. It is not surprising that he lays much stress on Gnosticism, but he has no wish to revive it. He rather pleads that we should study it with a view to recovering precious truths that have been lost. The book is written in a pleasant style, and we have read it with interest, but we cannot regard it as Mr. Mead's most successful effort."--The Primitive Methodist Quarterly. 

"This anlysis of the 'Gospels,' however, is preliminary to a vindication of that eternal 'Gospel' which lies beneath all such literature. Mr. Mead contends that this Gospel may be discovered in Gnostic writings which were condemned by the early Christian Church as heresies. He admits freely that the forms of the ancient 'Gnosis' cannot now be revived, but he finds in the popular Evangelical doctrine of the living Christ an adumbration of the ancient wisdom of the condemned Gnostics. But the Christ of Mr. Mead's teaching is one of a sacred brotherhood, including Buddha, Krishna, Zoroaster, and other great enlighteners of the race. These are all living spiritual energies, inspiring and guiding mankind in its toilsome quest for truth and righteousness. Readers will find in Mr. Mead's thoughtful and scholarly pages much that will help in that rational and spiritual reconstruction which is the great religious task of the hour."--Yorkshire Daily Observer. 

"O embrithes ereynetes tun arxun tou xristianismou k. G. R. S. Mead edemosieysen arti meleten peri teis xristianikeis filosofias exoxus didaktike'n. . . . O k. Mead eine eis tun koryfaiun skapaneun teis ereynetikeis tautes irgasias kai pan o, ti grafei krinu idiazouses prosoxeis axion. . . . Empneomenos ypo teis ygious tautes arxeis o k. Mead synetelesen esxatus thaymasion ergon."--Erevna.

DID JESUS LIVE 100 B.C. ?

An Enquiry into the Talmud Jesus Stories, the Toldoth Jeschu, and some Curious Statements of Epiphanius--Being a Contribution to the Study of Christian Origins. 

440, xvi. pp. Large octavo. Cloth, 9s. net. 

SOME PRESS NOTICES.

"A close and learned investigation. . . . . Mr. Mead is a theosophical scholar whose previous works dealing with Gnosticism and Gospel criticism are of some value not only to theosophists, but to theologians."--The Times. 

"On the examination of these little known tales Mr. Mead expends an amount of patience, labour, and learning which the ordinary man . . . . would deem ridiculous. Happily, however, the world is not yet peopled exclusively with fat, plump, commonplace people, and those who follow Mr. Mead can be sure of reward in matter which will set them thinking. . . . These researches are contributions to the study of the origins of Christianity, and their uniqueness lies in the fact that very few writers ever enter the fields where Mr. Mead works with such praiseworthy diligence. The ordinary reader trusts too implicitly, in these matters, to his Geikie and his Farrar, and even the student who has the dash of the heretic in him is too easily contented with his Renan. For both these classes of readers Mr. Mead's chapters will open up new fields of thought. The reader will find himself in the midst of those fierce fanaticisms, and weird, occult theosophies which were part of the atmosphere in which infant Christianity grew. Without an adequate acquaintance with these, Christian origins cannot be understood. This knowledge Mr. Mead's readers will obtain if they follow him closely, and their view of the beginnings of Christianity will be correspondingly full and true."--The Yorkshire Daily Observer. 

"Mr. Mead's previous wanderings in historic by-ways have resulted in much curious lore associated with Gnosticism and the Neo-Platonists, and he seems to have been attracted to this adjacent field as one likely to contain hidden treasure. . . . . For those who desire an introduction to this branch of literature, Mr. Mead has made it easily accessible."--The Sheffield Daily Telegraph. 

"Written by a professed theosophist, this work is yet entirely free from the taint of dogmatism of any kind. It is indeed a valuable contribution to the literature on the subject, which is as abundant as it is chaotic. The author has collected and reviewed this mass, and has summarised and criticised it until he has shaped it into something of a coherent whole. The Rabbinical and other Hebrew legendary and historical matter dealing with the reputed origin and life of the Messiah is carefully sifted, and the subject is approached with befitting reverence. . . . . That the book is most valuable from a suggestive point of view cannot be denied. It merits the attention of all interested in Christian criticism."--The Scotsman. 

[p. 378]

"This book, with its remarkable title, deals in a very critical spirit with the origins of Christianity. . . . Although critical in the highest degree, the author does not dogmatise, and preserves a philosophical calm thought."--The Chatham and Rochester Observer. 

"The author of this learned work is not propounding a mere theological riddle, nor can he be said to be coming forward wantonly merely to increase the number of puzzles that confront the student of Christian origins. . . . . The author has been a very diligent student of the Talmud, and perhaps his lengthened account of that extraordinary body of traditions is one of the best in our language. . . . . The argument throughout is marked by great erudition and remarkable modesty."--The Glasgow Herald. 

"The question is not a fool's question. It is serious, and Mr. Mead takes it seriously."--The Expository Times. 

"Mr. Mead has done much first-rate work, on untraditional lines, in early Church history, and has propounded theorems of which a good deal more will be heard. He always writes as a scholar, with complete avoidance of infelicities of theological utterance such as too often have handicapped suggestive heterodoxies."--The Literary World. 

"The materials for the further pursuit of the inquiry are all brought together in this volume, and the author is at very evident pains to hold the balance carefully as between the different authorities whom he quotes. He has read everything of any importance that has been published relating to the subject of which he treats. He is evidently a very widely read man, and is possessed of much critical acumen, as also of all the best qualifications of historical inquiry and original research. The work will, we doubt not, be largely read by Christian theologians."--The Asiatic Quarterly Review. 

"This is the fifth book by Mr. Mead that we have had the pleasure of bringing before our readers. In our notices of his earlier volumes we have been glad to recognise, whether we agreed with him or not, the learning, the earnestness, the scientific method, and the deep religious spirit by which they have been animated. The title of the present volume will, we anticipate, cause many readers to regard it as a piece of cranky speculation. . . . It is not, however, a work to be dismissed with a mere shrug of the shoulders. . . . Mr. Mead has brought out not simply an interesting but a valuable work, even apart from the special thesis which he investigates."--The Primitive Methodist Quarterly Review. 

"I would direct the attention of educated scholarly men to a very remarkable book . . . . written by G. R. S. Mead. . . . . I invite our educated and serious-minded Protestant clergymen everywhere to read this book and tell me, privately, what they think about it."--Standish O' Grady, in The All Ireland Review. 

"A much more remarkable collection of apocrypha is the subject of a curious book by Mr. Mead, known to the small public who are interested in such things as learned in the fantasies of Gnosticism. . . . . We have not often read a learned book from which we dissent so widely with more genuine interest, and we are bound to recognise the dignified and scholarly fashion in which Mr. Mead puts forward his theses, strange and Impossible as some of them seem to us to be.--The Pilot. 

PISTIS SOPHIA: A Gnostic Gospel.

(With Extracts from the Books of the Saviour appended.) Originally translated from Greek into Coptic, and now for the first time Englished from Schwartze's Latin Version of the only known Coptic MS., and checked by Amelineau's French version. With an Introduction and Bibliography. 394, xliv. pp. large octavo. Cloth. 7s. 6d. net. 

(Out of Print. A Revised Edition is contemplated.) 

SOME PRESS OPINIONS.

"The 'Pistis Sophia' has long been recognised as one of the most important Gnostic documents we possess, and Mr. Mead deserves the gratitude of students of Church History and of the History of Christian Thought, for his admirable translation and edition of this curious Gospel."--Glasgow Herald. 

"Mr. Mead has done a service to other than Theosophists by his translation of the, 'Pistis Sophia.' This curious work has not till lately received the attention which it deserves. . . . . He has prefixed a short Introduction, which includes an excellent bibliography. Thus, the English reader is now in a position to judge for himself of the scientific value of the only Gnostic treatise of any considerable length which has come down to us."--Guardian. 

"From a scholar's point of view the work is of value as illustrating the philosophico-mystical tendencies of the second century."--Record. 

"Mr. Mead deserves thanks for putting in an English dress this curious document from the early ages of Christian philosophy."--Manchester Guardian. 

[p. 379] 

THE THEOSOPHY OF THE GREEKS. 

 

PLOTINUS. 

With Bibliography. Octavo. Cloth, 1s. net. 

 

THE THEOSOPHY OF THE VEDAS. 

 

THE UPANISHADS: 2 Volumes. 

Half Octavo. Cloth, 1s. 6d. each net. 

VOLUME I.

Contains a Translation of the Isha, Kena, Katha, Prashna, Mundaka, and Mandukya Upanishads, with a General Preamble, Arguments, and Notes by G. R. S. Mead and J. C. Chattopadhyaya (Roy Choudhuri). 

VOLUME II. 

Contains a Translation of the Taittiriya, Aitareya, and Shvetashvatara Upanishads, with Arguments and Notes. 

FRENCH TRANSLATION.

LA THEOSOPHIE DES VEDAS: NEUF UPANISHADS. 

Traduction francaise, de E. Marcault. Paris: Librairie de l'Art Independant, 10 rue Saint-Lazare. 

SIMON MAGUS: An Essay. 

Quarto. Wrappers, 5s. net. (Out of print.) 

 

THE WORLD MYSTERY: Four Essays. 

Contents: The World-Soul; The Vestures of the Soul; The Web of Destiny; True Self-reliance. Octavo. Cloth, 3s. 6d. net. (Out of print.) 

 

Orpheus. 

With three Charts and Bibliography. Will serve as an Introduction to Hellenic Theology. Octavo. Cloth, 4s. 6d. net. (Out of print. ) 




===== BOOK: thol.txt =====



The Hollow Land, by William Morris, [1856], at sacred-texts.com

The Hollow Land

by William Morris

London : Longmans, Green, & Co.

[1856]

   "We find in ancient story wonders many told,
    Of heroes in great glory, with spirit free and bold;
    Of joyances and high-tides, of weeping and of woe,
    Of noble reckon striving, mote ye now wonders know."
      --Niebelungen Lied (see Carlylefs Miscellanies)

The Hollow Land, by William Morris, [1856], at sacred-texts.com

CONTENTS

[*Struggling in the World]

[*Failing in the World]

[*Fytte the Second]

[*Fytte the Third]

The Hollow Land, by William Morris, [1856], at sacred-texts.com

[f01]

STRUGGLING IN THE WORLD.

Do you know where it is--the Hollow Land?

I have been looking for it now so long, trying to find it again the Hollow Land for there I saw my love first.

I wish to tell you how I found it first of all; but I am old, my memory fails me: you must wait and let me think if I perchance can tell you how it happened. Yea, in my ears is a confused noise of trumpet-blasts singing over desolate moors, in my ears and eyes a clashing and clanging of horse-hoofs, a ringing and glittering of steel; drawn-back lips, set teeth, shouts, shrieks, and curses.

How was it that no one of us ever found it till that day? for it is near our country: but what time have we to look for it, or any good thing; with such biting carking cares hemming us in on every side-cares about great things-mighty things: mighty things, O my brothers! or rather little things enough, if we only knew it. Lives passed in turmoil, in making one another unhappy; in bitterest misunderstanding of our brothers' hearts, making those sad whom God has not made sad, alas, alas! What chance for any of us to find the Hollow Land? What time even to look for it?

Yet who has not dreamed of it? Who, half miserable yet the while, for that he knows it is but a dream, has not felt the cool waves round his feet, the roses crowning him, and through the leaves of beech and lime the many whispering winds of the Hollow Land?

Now, my name was Florian, and my house was the house of the Lilies; and of that house was my father lord, and after him my eldest brother Amald; and me they called Florian de Liliis.

Moreover, when my father was dead, there arose a feud between the Lilies' house and Red Harald; and this that follows is the history of it.

Lady Swanhilda, Red Harald's mother, was a widow, with one son. Red Harald; and when she had been in widowhood two years, being of princely blood, and besides comely and fierce. King Urrayne sent to demand her in marriage. And I remember seeing the procession leaving the town, when I was quite a child; and many young knights and squires attended the Lady Swanhilda as pages, and amongst them, Amald, my eldest brother.

And as I gazed out of the window, I saw him walking by the side of her horse, dressed in white and gold very delicately; but as he went it chanced that he stumbled. Now he was one of those that held a golden canopy over the lady's head, so that it now sunk into wrinkles, and the lady had to bow her head full low, and even then the gold brocade caught in one of the long slim gold flowers that were wrought round about the crown she wore. She flushed up in her rage, and her smooth face went suddenly into the carven wrinkles of a wooden water-spout, and she caught at the brocade with her left hand, and pulled it away furiously, so that the warp and woof were twisted out of their place, and many gold threads were left dangling about the crown; but Swanhilda stared about when she rose, then smote my brother across the mouth with her gilded sceptre, and the red blood flowed all about his garments; yet he only turned exceeding pale, and dared say no word, though he was heir to the house of the Lilies: but my small heart swelled with rage, and I vowed revenge, and, as it seems, he did too.

So when Swanhilda had been queen three years, she suborned many of King Urrayne's knights and lords, and slew her husband as he slept, and reigned in his stead. And her son, Harald, grew up to manhood, and was counted a strong knight, and well spoken of, by then I first put on my armour.

Then, one night, as I lay dreaming, I felt a hand laid on my face, and starting up saw Arnald before me fully armed. He said, "Florian, rise and arm."

I did so, all but my helm, as he was.

He kissed me on the forehead; his lips felt hot and dry; and when they bought torches, and I could see his face plainly, I saw he was very pale. He said: "Do you remember, Florian, this day sixteen years ago? It is a long time, but I shall never forget it unless this night blots out its memory."

I knew what he meant, and because my heart was wicked, I rejoiced exceedingly at the thought of vengeance, so that I could not speak, but only laid my palm across his lips.

"Good; you have a good memory, Florian. See now, I waited long and long: I said at first, I forgive her; but when the news came concerning the death of the king, and how that she was shameless, I said I will take it as a sign, if God does not punish her within certain years, that he means me to do so; and I have been watching and watching now these two years for an opportunity, and behold it is come at last; and I think God has certainly given her into OUR hands, for she rests this night, this very Christmas eve, at a small walled town on the frontier, not two hours' gallop from this; they keep little ward there, and the night is wild: moreover, the prior of a certain house of monks, just without the walls, is my fast friend in this matter, for she has done him some great injury. In the courtyard below a hundred and fifty knights and squires, all faithful and true, are waiting for us: one moment and we shall be gone."

Then we both knelt down, and prayed God to give her into our hands: we put on our helms, and went down into the courtyard.

It was the first time I expected to use a sharp sword in anger, and I was full of joy as the muffled thunder of our horse-hoofs rolled through the bitter winter night.

In about an hour and a half we had crossed the frontier, and in half an hour more the greater part bad halted in a wood near the Abbey, while I and a few others went up to the Abbey gates, and knocked loudly four times with my sword-hilt, stamping on the ground meantime. A long, low whistle answered me from within, which I in my turn answered: then the wicket opened, and a monk came out, holding a lantern. He seemed yet in the prime of life, and was a tall, powerful man. He held the lantern to my face, then smiled, and said, "The banners hang low." I gave the countersign, "The crest is lopped off." "Good my son," said he; "the ladders are within here. I dare not trust any of the brethren to carry them for you, though they love not the witch either, but are timorsome."

"No matter," I said, "I have men here." So they entered and began to shoulder the tall ladders: the prior was very busy. "You will find them just the right length, my son, trust me for that." He seemed quite a jolly, pleasant man, I could not understand his nursing furious revenge; but his face darkened strangely whenever he happened to mention her name.

As we were starting he came and stood outside the gate, and putting his lantern down that the light of it might not confuse his sight, looked earnestly into the night, then said: "The wind has fallen, the snow flakes get thinner and smaller every moment, in an hour it will be freezing hard, and will be quite clear; everything depends'upon the surprise being complete; stop a few minutes yet, my son." He went away chuckling, and returned presently with two more sturdy monks carrying something: they threw their burdens down before my feet, they consisted of all the white albs in the abbey: "There, trust an old man, who has seen more than one stricken fight in his carnal days; let the men who scale the walls put these over their arms, and they will not be seen in the least. God make your sword sharp, my son."

So we departed, and when I met Amald again, he said that what the prior had done was well thought of; so we agreed that I should take thirty men, an old squire of our house, well skilled in war, along with them, scale the walls as quietly as possible, and open the gates to the rest.

I set off accordingly, after that with low laughing we had put the albs all over us, wrapping the ladders also in white. Then we crept very warily and slowly up to the wall; the moat was frozen over, and on the ice the snow lay quite thick; we all thought that the guards must be careless enough, when they did not even take the trouble to break the ice in the moat So we listened--there was no sound at all, the Christmas midnight mass had long ago been over, it was nearly three o'clock, and the moon began to clear, there was scarce any snow falling now, only a flake or two from some low hurrying cloud or other: the wind sighed gently about the round towers there, but it was bitter cold, for it had begun to freeze again; we listened for some minutes, about a quarter of an hour I think, then at a sign from me, they raised the ladders carefully, muffled as they were at the top with swathings of wool. I mounted first, old Squire Hugh followed last; noiselessly we ascended, and soon stood altogether on the walls; then we carefully lowered the ladders again with long ropes; we got our swords and axes from out of the folds of our priests' raiments, and set forward, till we reached the first tower along the wall; the door was open, in the chamber at the top there was a fire slowly smouldering, nothing else; we passed through it, and began to go down the spiral staircase, I first, with my axe shortened in my hand.-"What if we were surprised there," I thought, and I longed to be out in the air again;-"What if the door were fast at the bottom."

As we passed the second chamber, we heard some one within snoring loudly: I looked in quietly, and saw a big man with long black hair, that fell off his pillow and swept the ground, lying snoring, with his nose turned up and his mouth open, but he seemed so sound asleep that we did not stop to slay him. Praise be! The door was open, without even a whispered word, without a pause, we went on along the streets, on the side that the drift had been on, because our garments were white, for the wind being very strong all that day, the houses on that side had caught in their cornices and carvings, and on the rough stone and wood of them, so much snow, that except here and there where the black walls grinned out, they were quite white; no man saw us as we stole along, noiselessly because of the snow, till we stood within 100 yards of the gates and their house of guard. And we stood because we heard the voice of some one singing:

  "Queen Mary's crown was gold,
   King Joseph's crown was red,
   But Jesus' crown was diamond
   That lit up all the bed
   Mariae Virginis"

So they had some guards after all; this was clearly the sentinel that sang to keep the ghosts off;-Now for a fight.-We drew nearer, a few yards nearer, then stopped to free ourselves from our monks' clothes.

  "Ships sail through the Heaven
   With red banners dress'd,
   Carrying the planets seven
   To see the white breast
   Mariae Virginis"

Thereat he must have seen the waving of some alb or other as it shivered down to the ground, for his spear fell with a thud, and he seemed to be standing open-mouthed, thinking something about ghosts; then, plucking up heart of grace, he roared out like ten bull-calves, and dashed into the guard-house.

We followed smartly, but without hurry, and came up to the door of it just as some dozen half-armed men came tumbling out under our axes: thereupon, while our men slew them, I blew a great blast upon my horn, and Hugh with some others drew bolt and bar and swung the gates wide open.

Then the men in the guard-house understood they were taken in a trap, and began to stir with great confusion; so lest they should get quite waked and armed, I left Hugh at the gates with ten men, and myself led the rest into that house. There while we slew all those that yielded not, came Arnald with the others, bringing our horses with them; then all the enemy threw their arms down. And we counted our prisoners and found them over fourscore; therefore, not knowing what to do with them (for they were too many to guard, and it seemed unknightly to slay them all), we sent up some bowmen to the walls, and turning our prisoners out of gates, bid them run for their lives, which they did fast enough, not knowing our numbers, and our men sent a few flights of arrows among them that they might not be undeceived.

Then the one or two prisoners that we had left, told us, when we had crossed our axes over their heads, that the people of the good town would not willingly fight us, in that they hated the queen; that she was guarded at the palace by some fifty knights, and that beside, there were no others to oppose us in the town; so we set out for the palace, spear in hand.

We had not gone far, before we heard some knights coming, and soon, in a turn of the long street, we saw them riding towards us; when they caught sight of us they seemed astonished, drew rein, and stood in some confusion.

We did not slacken our pace for an instant, but rode right at them with a yell, to which I lent myself with all my heart.

After all they did not run away, but waited for us with their spears held out; I missed the man I had marked, or hit him rather just on the top of the helm; he bent back, and the spear slipped over his head, but my horse still kept on, and I felt presently such a crash that I reeled in my saddle, and felt mad. He had lashed out at me with his sword as I came on, hitting me in the ribs (for my arm was raised), but only flatlings.

I was quite wild with rage, I turned, almost fell upon him, caught him by the neck with both hands, and threw him under the horse-hoofs, sighing with fury: I heard Arnald's voice close to me, "Well fought, Florian": and I saw his great stern face bare among the iron, for he had made a vow in remembrance of that blow always to fight unhelmed; I saw his great sword swinging, in wide gyres, and hissing as it started up, just as if it were alive and liked it.

So joy filled all my soul, and I fought with my heart, till the big axe I swung felt like nothing but a little hammer in my hand, except for its bitterness: and as for the enemy, they went down like grass, so that we destroyed them utterly, for those knights would neither yield nor fly, but died as they stood, so that some fifteen of our men also died there.

Then at last we came to the palace, where some grooms and such like kept the gates armed, but some ran, and some we took prisoners, one of whom died for sheer terror in our hands, being stricken by no wound; for he thought we would eat him.

These prisoners we questioned concerning the queen, and so entered the great hall. There Arnald sat down in the throne on the dais, and laid his naked sword before him on the table: and on each side of him sat such knights as there was room for, and the others stood round about, while I took ten men, and went to look for Swanhilda.

I found her soon, sitting by herself in a gorgeous chamber. I almost pitied her when I saw her looking so utterly desolate and despairing; her beauty too had faded, deep lines cut through her face. But when I entered she knew who I was, and her look of intense hatred was so fiend-like, that it changed my pity into horror of her.

"Knight", she said "who are you, and what do you want, thus discourteously entering my chamber?"

"I am Florian de Liliis, and I am to conduct you to judgment."

She sprang up, "Curse you and your whole house, you I hate worse than any--girl's face--guards! guards!" and she stamped on the ground, her veins on the forehead swelled, her eyes grew round and flamed out, as she kept crying for her guards, stamping the while, for she seemed quite mad.

Then at last she remembered that she was in the power of her enemies, she sat down, and lay with her face between her hands, and wept passionately.

"Witch," I said between my closed teeth, "will you come, or must we carry you down to the great hall?"

Neither would she come, but sat there, clutching at her dress and tearing her hair.

Then I said, "Bind her, and carry her down." And they did so.

I watched Arnald as we came in, there was no triumph on his stern white face, but resolution enough, he had made up his mind.

They placed her on a seat in the midst of the hall over against the dais. He said, "Unbind her, Florian." They did so, she raised her face, and glared defiance at us all, as though she would die queenly after all.

Then rose up Arnald and said, "Queen Swanhilda, we judge you guilty of death, and because you are a queen and of a noble house, you shall be slain by my knightly sword, and I will even take the reproach of slaying a woman, for no other hand than mine shall deal the blow."

Then she said, "O false knight, show your warrant from God, man, or devil."

"This warrant from God, Swanhilda," he said, holding up his sword, "listen!  Fifteen years ago, when I was just winning my spurs, you struck me, disgracing me before all the people; you cursed me, and mean that curse well enough. Men of the house of the Lilies, what sentence for that?"

"Death!" they said.

"Listen!  Afterwards you slew my cousin, your husband, treacherously, in the most cursed way, stabbing him in the throat, as the stars in the canopy above him looked down on the shut eyes of him. Men of the house of Lily, what sentence for that?"

"Death!" they said.

"Do you hear them. Queen? There is warrant from man; for the devil, I do not reverence him enough to take warrant from him, but, as I look at that face of yours, I think that even he has left you."

And indeed just then all her pride seemed to leave her, she fell from the chair, and wallowed on the ground moaning, she wept like a child, so that the tears lay on the oak floor; she prayed for another month of life; she came to me and kneeled, and kissed my feet, and prayed piteously, so that water ran out of her mouth.

But I shuddered, and drew away; it was like hav ing an adder about one; I cou'd have pitied her had she died bravely, but for one like her to whine and whine!  Pah!

Then from the dais rang Amald's voice terrible, much changed. "Let there be an end of all this." And he took his sword and strode through the hall towards her; she rose from the ground and stood up, stooping a little, her head sunk between her shoulders, her black eyes turned up and gloaming, like a tigress about to spring. When he came within some six paces of her something in his eye daunted her, or perhaps the flashing of his terrible sword in the torch-light; she threw her arms up with a great shriek, and dashed screaming about the hall. Amald's lip never once curled with any scorn, no line in his face changed: he said, "Bring her here and bind her."

But when one came up to her to lay hold on her she first of all ran at him, hitting with her head in the belly. Then while he stood doubled up for want of breath, and staring with his head up, she caught his sword from the girdle, and cut him across the shoulders, and many others she wounded sorely before they took her. Then Arnald stood by the chair to which she was bound, and poised his sword, and there was a great silence.

Then he said, "Men of the House of the Lilies, do you justify me in this, shall she die?" Straightway rang a great shout through the hall, but before it died away the sword had swept round, and therewithal was there no such thing as Swanhilda left upon the earth, for in no battle-field had Arnald struck truer blow.

Then he turned to the few servants of the palace and said, "Go now, bury this accursed woman, for she is a king's daughter." Then to us all, "Now knights, to horse and away, that we may reach the good town by about dawn." So we mounted and rode off.

What a strange Christmas-day that was, for there, about nine o'clock in the morning, rode Red Harald into the good town to demand vengeance; he went at once to the king, and the king promised that before nightfall that very day the matter should be judged; albeit the king feared somewhat, because every third man you met in the streets had a blue cross on his shoulder, and some likeness of a lily, cut out or painted, stuck in his hat; and this blue cross and lily were the bearings of our house, called "De Liliis." Now we had seen Red Harald pass through the streets, with a white banner borne before him, to show that he came peaceably as for this time; but I know he was thinking of other things than peace.

And he was called Red Harald first at this time, because over all his arms he wore a great scarlet cloth, that fell in heavy folds about his horse and all about him. Then, as he passed our house, some one pointed it out to him, rising there with its carving and its barred marble, but stronger than many a castle on the hill-tops, and its great overhanging battlement cast a mighty shadow down the wall and across the street; and above all rose the great tower, or banner floating proudly from the top, whereon was emblazoned on a white ground a blue cross, and on a blue ground four white lilies. And now faces were gazing from all the windows, and all the battlements were thronged; so Harald turned, and rising in his stirrups, shook his clenched fist at our house; natheless, as he did so, the east wind, coming down the street, caught up the corner of that scarlet cloth and drove it over his face, and therewithal disordering his long black hair, well nigh choked him, so that he bit both his hair and that cloth.

So from base to cope rose a mighty shout of triumph and defiance, and he passed on.

Then Arnald caused it to be cried, that all those who loved the good House of the Lilies should go to mass that morning in Saint Mary's Church, hard by our house. Now this church belonged to us, and the abbey that served it, and always we appointed the abbot of it on condition that our trumpets should sound all together when on high masses they sing the "Gloria in Excelsis." It was the largest and most beautiful of all the churches in the town, and had two exceeding high towers, which you could see from far off, even when you saw not the town or any of its other towers: and in one of these towers were twelve great bells, named after the twelve Apostles, one name being written on each one of them; as Peter, Matthew, and so on; and in the other tower was one great bell only, much larger than any of the others, and which was called Mary. Now this bell was never rung but when our house was in great danger, and it had this legend on it, "When Mary rings the earth shakes;" and indeed from this we took our war cry, which was, "Mary rings;" somewhat justifiable indeed, for the last time that Mary rang, on that day before nightfall there were four thousand bodies to be buried, which bodies wore neither cross nor lily.

So Arnald gave me in charge to tell the abbot to cause Mary to be tolled for an hour before mass that day.

The abbot leaned on my shoulder as I stood within the tower and looked at the twelve monks laying their hands to the ropes. Far up in the dimness I saw the wheel before it began to swing round about; then it moved a little; the twelve men bent down to the earth and a roar rose that shook the tower from base to spirevane: backwards and forwards swept the wheel, as Mary now looked downwards towards earth, now looked up at the shadowy cone of the spire, shot across by bars of light from the dormers.

And the thunder of Mary was caught up by the wind and carried through all the country; and when the good man heard it, he said goodbye to wife and child, slung his shield behind his back, and set forward with his spear sloped over his shoulder, and many a time, as he walked toward the good town, he tightened the belt that went about his waist, that he might stride the faster, so long and furiously did Mary toll.

And before the great bell, Mary, had ceased ringing, all the ways were full of armed men.

But at each door of the church of Saint Mary stood a row of men armed with axes, and when any came, meaning to go into the church, the two first of these would hold their axes (whose helves were about four feet long) over his head, and would ask him, "Who went over the moon last night?" then if he answered nothing or at random they would bid him turn back, which he for the more part would be ready enough to do; but some, striving to get through that row of men, were slain outright; but if he were one of those that were friends to the House of the Lilies he would answer to that question, "Mary and John."

By the time the mass began the whole church was full, and in the nave and transept thereof were three thousand men, all of our house and all armed. But Arnald and myself, and Squire Hugh, and some others sat under a gold-fringed canopy near the choir; and the abbot said mass, having his mitre on his head. Yet, as I watched him, it seemed to me that he must have something on beneath his priest's vestments, for he looked much fatter than usual, being really a tall lithe man.

Now, as they sung the "Kyrie," some one shouted from the other end of the church, "My lord Arnld, they are slaying our people without;" for, indeed, all the square about the church was full of our people, who for the press had not been able to enter, and were standing there in no small dread of what might come to pass.

Then the abbot turned round from the altar, and began to fidget with the fastenings of his rich robes. And they made a lane for us up to the west door; then I put on my helm and we began to go up the nave, then suddenly the singing of the monks and all stopped. I heard a clinking and a buzz of voices in the choir. I turned, and saw that the bright noon sun was shining on the gold of the priest's vestments, as they lay on the floor, and on the mail that the priests carried.

So we stopped, the choir gates swung open, and the abbot marched out at the head of his men, all fully armed, and began to strike up the psalm "Exsurgat Deus."

When we got to the west door, there was indeed a tumult, but as yet no slaying; the square was all a-flicker with steel, and we beheld a great body of knights, at the head of them Red Harald and the king, standing over against us; but our people, pressed against the houses, and into the comers of the square, were, some striving to enter the doors, some beside themselves with rage, shouting out to the others to charge; withal, some were pale and some were red with the blood that had gathered to the wrathful faces of them.

Then said Arnald to those about him, "Lift me up." So they laid a great shield on two lances, and these four men carried, and thereon stood Arnald, and gazed about him.

Now the king was unhelmed, and his white hair (for he was an old man) flowed down behind him on to his saddle; but Amaid's hair was cut short, and was red.

And all the bells rang.

Then the king said, "O Arnald of the Lilies, will you settle this quarrel by the judgment of God?" And Amaid thrust up his chin, and said, "Yea." "How then," said the king, "and where?" "Will it please you try now?" said Arnald.

Then the king understood what he meant, and took in his hand from behind tresses of his long white hair, twisting them round his hand in his wrath, but yet said no word, till I suppose his hair put him in mind of something, and he raised it in both his hands above his head, and shouted out aloud, "O knights, hearken to this traitor." Whereat, indeed, the lances began to move ominously. But Arnald spoke.

"O you king and lords, what have we to do with you? Were we not free in the old time, up among the hills there? Wherefore give way, and we will go to the hills again; and if any man try to stop us, his blood be on his own head; wherefore now," (and he turned) "all you House of the Lily, both soldiers and monks, let us go forth together fearing nothing, for I think there is not bone enough or muscle enough in these fellows here that have a king that they should stop us withal, but only skin and fat."

And truly, no man dared to stop us, and we went.

The Hollow Land, by William Morris, [1856], at sacred-texts.com

[f02]

FAILING IN THE WORLD

Now at that time we drove cattle in Red Harald's land. And we took no hoof but from the Lords and rich men, but of these we had a mighty drove, both oxen and sheep, and horses, and besides, even hawks and hounds, and huntsman or two to take care of them.

And, about noon, we drew away from the cornlands that lay beyond the pastures, and mingled with them, and reached a wide moor, which was called "Goliath's Land." I scarce know why, except that it belonged neither to Red Harald or us, but was debatable.

And the cattle began to go slowly, and our horses were tired, and the sun struck down very hot upon us, for there was no shadow, and the day was cloudless.

All about the edge of the moor, except on the sidefrom which we had come was a rim of hills, not very high, but very rocky and steep, otherwise the moor itself was flat; and through these hills was one pass, guarded by our men, which pass led to the Hill castle of the Lilies.

It was not wonderful, that of this moor many wild stories were told, being such a strange lonely place, some of them one knew, alas to be over true. In the old time, before we went to the good town, this moor had been the mustering place of our people, and our house had done deeds enough of blood and horror to turn our white lilies red, and our blue cross to a fiery one. But some of those wild tales I never believed; they had to do mostly with men losing their way without any apparent cause, (for there were plenty of landmarks,) finding some well-known spot, and then, just beyond it, a place they had never even dreamed of.

"Florian! FIorian!" said Arnald, "for God's sake stop! as every one else is stopping to look at the hills yonder; I always thought there was a curse upon us. What does God mean by shutting us up here? Look at the cattle; O Christ, they have found it out too! See, some of them are turning to run back again towards Harald's land. Oh! unhappy, unhappy, from that day forward!"

He leaned forward, rested his head on his horse's neck, and wept like a child. I felt so irritated with him, that I could almost have slain him then and there. Was he mad? had these wild doings of ours turned his strong wise head?

"Are you my brother Arnald, that I used to think such a grand man when I was a boy?" I said, "or are you changed too, like everybody, and everything else? What do you mean?"

"Look! look!" he said, grinding his teeth in agony. I raised my eyes: where was the one pass between the rim of stern rocks? Nothing: the enemy behind us--that grim wall in front: what wonder that each man looked in his fellow's face for help, and found it not. Yet I refused to believe that there was any troth either in the wild stories that I had heard when I was a boy, or in this story told me so clearly by my eyes now.

I called out cheerily, "Hugh, come here!" He came. "What do you think of this? Some mere dodge on Harald's part? Are we cut off?" "Think! Sir Florian? God forgive me for ever thinking at all; I have given up that long and long ago, because thirty years ago I thought this, that the House of Lilies would deserve anything in the way of bad fortune that God would send them: so I gave up thinking, and took to fighting. But if you think that Harald had anything to do with this, why-why-in God's name, I wish I could think so!"

I felt a dull weight on my heart. Had our house been the devil's servants all along? I thought we were God's servants.

The day was very still, but what little wind there was, was at our backs. I watched Hugh's face, not being able to answer him. He was the cleverest man at war that I have known, either before or since that day; sharper than any hound in ear and scent, clearer sighted than any eagle; he was listening now intently. I saw a slight smile cross his face; heard him mutter, "Yes! I think so: verily that is better, a great deal better." Then he stood up in his stirrups, and shouted, "Hurrah for the Lilies! Mary rings!" "Mary rings!" I shouted, though I did not know the reason for his exultation: my brother lifted his head, and smiled too, grimly. Then as I listened I heard clearly the sound of a trumpet, and enemy's trumpet too.

"After all, it was only mist, or some such thing," I said, for the pass between the hills was clear enough now.

"Hurrah! only mist," said Amald, quite elated; "Mary rings!" and we all began to think of fighting: for after all what joy is equal to that?

There were five hundred of us; two hundred spears, the rest archers; and both archers and men at arms were picked men.

"How many of them are we to expect?" said I. "Not under a thousand, certainly, probably more, Sir Florian." (My brother Arnald, by the way, had knighted me before we left the good town, and Hugh liked to give me the handle to my name. How was it, by the way, that no one had ever made him a knight?)

"Let every one look to his arms and horse, and come away from these silly cows' sons!" shouted Arnald.

Hugh said, "They will be here in an hour, fair Sir."

So we got clear of the cattle, and dismounted, and both ourselves took food and drink, and our horses; afterwards we tightened our saddle-girths, shook our great pots of helmets on, except Amald, whose rustyred hair had been his only head-piece in battle for years and years, and stood with our spears close by our horses, leaving room for the archers to retreat between our ranks; and they got their arrows ready, and planted their stakes before a little peat moss: and there we waited, and saw their pennons at last floating high above the corn of the fertile land, then heard their many horse-hoofs ring upon the hard-parched moor, and the archers began to shoot.

It had been a strange battle; we had never fought better, and yet withal it had ended in a retreat; indeed all along every man but Arnald and myself, even Hugh, had been trying at least to get the enemy between him and the way toward the pass; and now we were all drifting that way, the enemy trying to cut us off, but never able to stop us, because he could only throw small bodies of men in our way, whom we scattered and put to flight in their turn.

I never cared less for my life than then; indeed, in spite of all my boasting and hardness of belief, I should have been happy to have died, such a strange weight of apprehension was on me; and yet I got no scratch even. I had soon put off my great helm, and was fighting in my mail-coif only: and here I swear that three knights together charged me, aiming at my bare face, yet never touched me. For, as for one, I put his lance aside with my sword, and the other two in some most wonderful manner got their spears locked in each other's armour, and so had to submit to be knocked off their horses.

And we still neared the pass, and began to see distinctly the ferns that grew on the rocks, and the fair country between the rift in them, spreading out there, blue-shadowed. Whereupon came a great rush of men of both sides, striking side blows at each other, spitting, cursing, and shrieking, as they tore away like a herd of wild hogs. So, being careless of lfe, as I said, I drew rein, and turning my horse, waited quietly for them. And I knotted the reins, and laid them on the horse's neck, and stroked him, that he whinnied, then got both my hands to my sword.

Then, as they came on, I noted hurriedly that the first man was one of Arnald's men, and one of our men behind him leaned forward to prod him with his spear, but could not reach so far, till he himself was run through the eye with a spear, and throwing his arms up fell dead with a shriek. Also I noted concerning this first man that the laces of his helmet were loose, and when he saw me he lifted his left hand to his head, took off his helm and cast it at me, and still tore on; the helmet flew over my head, and I sitting still there, swung out, hitting him on the neck; his head flew right off, for the mail no more held than a piece of silk. "Mary rings," and my horse whinnied again, and we both of us went at it, and fairly stopped that rout, so that there was a knot of quite close and desperate fighting, wherein we had the best of that fight and slew most of them, albeit my horse was slain and my mail-coif cut through. Then I bade a squire fetch me another horse, and began meanwhile to upbraid those knights for running in such a strange disorderly race, instead of standing and fighting cleverly. Moreover we had drifted even in this successful fight still nearer to the pass, so that the conies who dwelt there were beginning to consider whether they should not run into their holes.

But one of those knights said: "Be not angry with me. Sir Florian, but do you think you will go to Heaven?"

"The saints! I hope so," I said, but one who stood near him whispered to him to hold his peace, so I cried out: "O friend! I hold this world and all therein so cheap now, that I see not anything in it but shame which can any longer anger me; wherefore speak: out."

"Then, Sir Florian, men say that at your christening some fiend took on him the likeness of a priest and strove to baptize you in the Devil's name, but God had mercy on you so that the fiend could not choose but baptize you in the name of the most holy Trinity: and yet men say that you hardly believe any doctrine such as other men do, and will at the end only go to Heaven round about as it were, not at all by the intercession of our Lady; they say too that you can see no ghosts or other wonders, whatever happens to other Christian men."

I smiled.  "Well, friend, I scarcely call this a disadvantage, moreover what has it to do with the matter in hand?"

How was this in Heaven's name? We had been quite still, resting while this talk was going on, but we could hear the hawks chattering from the rocks, we were so close now.

And my heart sunk within me, there was no reason why this should not be true; there was no reason why anything should not be true.

"This, Sir Florian," said the knight again, "how would you feel inclined to fight if you thought that everything about you was mere glamour; this earth here, the rocks, the sun, the sky? I do not know where I am for certain, I do not know that it is not midnight instead of undem: I do not know if I have been fighting men or only simulacra but I think, we all think, that we have been led into some devil's trap or other, and--and may God forgive me my sins! I wish I had never been born."

There now! he was weeping --they all wept --how strange it was to see those rough, bearded men blubbering there, and snivelling till the tears ran over their armour and mingled with the blood, so that it dropped down to the earth in a dim, dull, red rain.

My eyes indeed were dry, but then so was my heart; I felt far worse than weeping came to, but nevertheless I spoke cheerily.

"Dear friends, where are your old men's hearts gone to now? See now! This is a punishment for our sins, is it? Well, for our forefathers' sins or our own? If the first, O brothers, be very sure that if we bear it manfully God will have something very good in store for us hereafter; but if for our sins, is it not certain that He cares for us yet, for note that He suffers the wicked to go their own ways pretty much; moreover brave men, brothers, ought to be the masters of simulacra come, is it so hard to die once for all?"

Still no answer came from them, they sighed heavily only. I heard the sound of more than one or two swords as they rattled back to the scabbards: nay, one knight, stripping himself of surcoat and hauberk, and drawing his dagger, looked at me with a grim smile, and said, "Sir Florian, do so!" Then he drew the dagger across his throat and he fell back dead.

They shuddered, those brave men, and crossed themselves. And I had no heart to say a word more, but mounted the horse which had been brought to me and rode away slowly for a few yards; then I became aware that there was a great silence over the whole field.

So I lifted my eyes and looked, and behold no man struck at another.

Then from out of a band of horsemen came Harald, and he was covered all over with a great scarlet cloth as before, put on over the head, and flowing all about his horse, but rent with the fight. He put off his helm and drew back his mail-coif, then took a trumpet from the hand of a herald and blew strongly.

And in the midst of his blast I heard a voice call out: "O Florian! come and speak to me for the last time!"

So when I turned I beheld Arnald standing by himself, but near him stood Hugh and ten others with drawn swords.

Then I wept, and so went to him weeping; and he said, "Thou seest, brother, that we must die, and I think by some horrible and unheard-of death, and the House of the Lilies is just dying too; and now I repent me of Swanhilda's death; now I know that it was a poor cowardly piece of revenge, instead of a brave act of justice; thus has God shown us the right.

"O Florian! curse me! So will it be straighter; truly thy mother when she bore thee did not think of this; rather saw thee in the tourney at this time, in her fond hopes, glittering with gold and doing knightly; or else mingling thy brown locks with the golden hair of some maiden weeping for the love of thee. God forgive me! God forgive me!"

"What harm, brother?" I said, "this is only failing in the world; what if we had not failed, in a little while it would have made no difference; truly just now I felt very miserable, but now it has passed away, and I am happy."

"O brave heart!" he said, "yet we shall part just now, Florian, farewell."

"The road is long," I said, "farewell."

Then we kissed each other, and Hugh and the others wept.

Now all this time the trumpets had been ringing, ringing, great doleful peals, then they ceased, and above all sounded Red Harald's voice.

(So I looked round towards that pass, and when I looked I no longer doubted any of those wild tales of glamour concerning Goliath's Land; and for though the rocks were the same, and though the conies still stood gazing at the doors of their dwellings, though the hawks still cried out shrilly, though the fern still shook in the wind, yet beyond, oh such a land! not to be described by any because of its great beauty, lying, a great hollow land, the rocks going down on this side in precipices, then reaches and reaches of loveliest country, trees and flowers, and corn, then the hills, green and blue, and purple, till their ledges reached the white snowy mountains at last. Then with all manner of strange feelings, "my heart in the midst of my body was even like melting wax.")

"O you House of the Lily! you are conquered yet I will take vengeance only on a few, therefore let all those who wish to live come and pile their swords, and shields, and helms behind me in three great heaps, and swear fealty afterwards to me; yes, all but the false knights Arnald and Florian."

We were holding each other's hands and gazing, and we saw all our knights, yea, all but Squire Hugh and his ten heroes, pass over the field singly, or in groups of three or four, with their heads hanging down in shame, and they cast down their notched swords and dinted, lilied shields, and brave-crested helms into three great heaps, behind Red Herald, then stood behind, no man speaking to his fellow, or touching him.

Then dolefully the great trumpets sang over the dying House of the Lily, and Red Harald led his men forward, but slowly: on they came, spear and mail glittering in the sunlight; and I turned and looked at that good land, and a shuddering delight seized my soul.

But I felt my brother's hand leave mine, and saw him turn his horse's head and ride swiftly toward the pass; that was a strange pass now.

And at the edge he stopped, turned round and called out aloud, "I pray thee, Harald, forgive mel now farewell all!"

Then the horse gave one bound forward, and we heard the poor creature's scream when he felt that he must die, and we heard afterwards (for we were near enough for that even) a clang and a crash.

So I turned me about to Hugh, and he understood me though I could not speak.

We shouted all together, "Mary rings," then laid our bridles on the necks of our horses, spurred forward, and in five minutes they were all slain, and I was down among the horse-hoofs.

Not slain though, not wounded. Red Harald smiled grimly when he saw me rise and lash out again; he and some ten others dismounted, and holding their long spears out, I went back--back, back, I saw what it meant, and sheathed my sword, and their laughter rolled all about me, and I too smiled.

Presently they all stopped, and I felt the last foot of turf giving under my feet; I looked down and saw the crack there widening; then in a moment I fell, and a cloud of dust and earth rolled after me; then again their mirth rose into thunder-peals of laughter. But through it all I heard Red Harald shout, "Silence! Evil dogs!"

For as I fell I stretched out my arms, and caught a tuft of yellow broom some three feet from the brow, and hung there by the hands, my feet being loose in the air.

Then Red Harald came and stood on the precipice above me, his great axe over his shoulder; and he looked down on me not ferociously, almost kindly, while the wind from the Hollow Land blew about his red raiment, tattered and dusty now.

And I felt happy, though it pained me to hold straining by the broom, yet I said, "I will hold out to the last"

It was not long, the plant itself gave way and I fell, and as I fell I fainted.

I had thought when I fell that I should never wake again; but I woke at last: for a long time I was quite dizzied and could see nothing at all: horrible doubts came creeping over me; I half expected to see presently great half-formed shapes come rolling up to me to crush me; some thing fiery, not strange, too utterly horrible to be strange, but utterly vile and ugly, the sight of which would have killed me when I was upon the earth, come rolling up to torment me. In fact I doubted if I were in hell.

I knew I deserved to be, but I prayed, and then it came into my mind that I could not pray if I were in hell.

Also there seemed to be a cool green light all about me, which was sweet. Then presently I heard a glorious voice ring outclear, close to me

  "Christ keep the Hollow Land
   Through the sweet spring-tide,
   When the apple-blossoms bless
   The lowly bent hill side."

Thereat my eyes were slowly unsealed, and I saw the blessedest sight I have ever seen before or since: for I saw my Love.

She sat about five yards from me on a great grey stone that had much moss on it, one of the many scattered along the side of the stream by which I lay; she was clad in loose white raiment close to her hands and throat; her feet were bare, her hair hung loose a long way down, but some of it lay on her knees: I said "white" raiment, but long spikes of light scarlet went down from the throat, lost here and there in the shadows of the folds, and growing smaller and smaller, died before they reached her feet.

I was lying with my head resting on soft moss that some one had gathered and placed under me. She, when she saw me moving and awake, came and stood over me with a gracious smile.  She was so lovely and tender to look at, and so kind, yet withal no one, man or woman, had ever frightened me half so much.

She was not fair in white and red, like many beautiful women are, being rather pale, but like ivory for smoothness, and her hair was quite golden, not light yellow, but dusky golden.

I tried to get up on my feet, but was too weak, and sank back again. She said: "No, not just yet, do not trouble yourself or try to remember anything just at present."

There withal she kneeled down, and hung over me closer.

"To-morrow you may, perhaps, have something hard to do or bear, I know, but now you must be as happy as you can be, quietly happy. Why did you start and turn pale when I came to you? Do you not know who I am? Nay, but you do, I see; and I have been waiting here so long for you; so you must have expected to see me. You cannot be frightened of me, are you?"

But I could not answer a word, but all the time strange knowledge, strange feelings were filling my brain and my heart, she said: "You are tired; rest, and dream happily."

So she sat by me, and sang to lull me to sleep, while I turned on my elbow, and watched the waving of her throat: and the singing of all the poets I had ever heard, and of many others too, not born till years long after I was dead, floated all about me as she sang, and I did indeed dream happily.

When I awoke it was the time of the cold dawn, and the colours were gathering themselves together, whereat in fatherly approving fashion the sun sent all across the east long bars of scarlet and orange that after faded through yellow to green and blue. And she sat by me still; I think she had been sitting there and singing all the time; all through hot yesterday, for I had been sleeping day-long and night-long, all through the falling evening under moonlight and starlight the night through.

And now it was dawn, and I think too that neither of us had moved at all; for the last thing I remembered before I went to sleep was the tips of her fingers brushing my cheek, as she knelt over me with downdrooping arm, and still now I felt them there. Moreover she was just finishing some fainting measure that died before it had time to get painful in its passion.

Dear Lord! how I loved her! Yet did I not dare to touch her, or even speak to her. She smiled with delight when she saw I was awake again, and slid down her hand on to mine, but some shuddering dread made me draw it away again hurriedly; then I saw the smile leave her face: what would I not have given for courage to hold her body quite tight to mine? But I was so weak.

She said:

"Have you been very happy?"

"Yea," I said.

It was the first word I had spoken there, and my voice sounded strange.

"Ah!" she said, "you will talk more when you get used to the air of the Hollow Land. Have you been thinking of your past life at all? If not, try to think of it. What thing in Heaven or Earth do you Wish for most?"

Still I said no word; but she said in a wearied way: "Well now, I think you will be strong enough to get to your feet and walk; take my hand and try." Therewith she held it out: I strove hard to be brave enough to take it, but could not; I only turned away shuddering, sick, and grieved to the heart's core of me; then struggling hard with hand and knee and elbow, I scarce rose, and stood up totteringly; while she watched me sadly, still holding out her hand.

But as I rose, in my swinging to and fro the steel sheath of my sword struck her on the hand so that the blood flowed from it, which she stood looking at for a while, then dropped it downwards, and turned to look at me, for I was going.

Then as I walked she followed me, so I stopped and turned and said almost fiercely: "I am going alone to look for my brother."

The vehemence with which I spoke, or something else, burst some blood-vessel within my throat, and we both stood there with the blood running from us on to the grass and summer flowers.

She said: "If you find him, wait with him till I come."

"Yea," and I turned and left her, following the course of the stream upwards, and as I went I heard her low singing that almost broke my heart for its sadness.

And I went painfully because of my weakness, and because also of the great stones; and sometimes I went along a spot of earth where the river had been used to flow in flood-time, and which was now bare of everything but stones; and the sun, now risen high, poured down on everything a great flood of fierce light and scorching heat, and burnt me sorely, so that I almost fainted.

But about noontide I entered a wood close by the stream, a beech-wood, intending to rest myself; the herbage was thin and scattered there, sprouting up from amid the leaf-sheaths and nuts of the beeches, which had fallen year after year on that same spot; the outside boughs swept low down, the air itself seemed green when you entered within the shadow of the branches, they over-roofed the place so with tender green, only here and there showing spots of blue.

But what lay at the foot of a great beech tree but some dead knight in armour, only the helmet off? A wolf was prowling round about it, who ran away snarling when he saw me coming.

So I went up to that dead knight, and fell on my knees before him, laying my head on his breast, for it was Arnald. He was quite cold, but had not been dead for very long; I would not believe him dead, but went down to the stream and brought him water, tried to make him drink-what would you? He was as dead as Swanhilda: neither came there any answer to my cries that afternoon but the moaning of the wood doves in the beeches. So then I sat down and took his head on my knees, and closed the eyes, and wept quietly while the sun sank lower.

But a little after sunset I heard a rustle through the leaves, that was not the wind, and looking up my eyes met the pitying eyes of that maiden.

Something stirred rebelliously within me; I ceased weeping, and said: "It is unjust, unfair: What right had Swanhilda to live? Did not God give her up to us? How much better was he than ten Swanhildas?

And look you--See!  He is DEAD."

Now this I shrieked out, being mad; and though I trembled when I saw some stormy wrath that vexed her very heart and loving lips, gathering on her face, I yet sat there looking at her and screaming, screaming, till all the place rang.

But when growing hoarse and breathless I ceased; she said, with straitened brow and scornful mouth: "So! Bravely done! Must I then, though I am a woman, call you a liar, for saying God is unjust? You to punish her, had not God then punished her already? How many times when she woke in the dead night do you suppose she missed seeing King Urrayne's pale face and hacked head lying on the pillow by her side? Whether by night or day, what things but screams did she hear when the wind blew loud round about the Palace corners? And did not that face too, often come before her, pale and bleeding as it was long ago, and gaze at her from unhappy eyes! Poor eyesi With changed purpose in them--no more hope of converting the world when that blow was once struck, truly it was very wicked-no more dreams, but only fierce struggles with the Devil for very life, no more dreams but failure at last, and death, happier so in the Hollow Land."

She grew so pitying as she gazed at his dead face that I began to weep again unreasonably, while she saw not that I was weeping, but looked only on Arnald's face, but after turned on me frowning. "Unjust! Yes, truly unjust enough to take away life and all hope from her; you have done a base cowardly act, you and your brother here, disguise it as you may; you deserve all God's judgment--you"

But I turned my eyes and wet face to her, and said: "Do not curse me there--do not look like Swanhilda: for see now, you said at first that you have been waiting long for me, give me your hand now, for I love you so."

Then she came and knelt by where I sat, and I caught her in my arms and she prayed to be forgiven.

"O, Florian! I have indeed waited long for you, and when I saw you my heart was filled with joy, but you would neither touch me nor speak to me, so that I became almost mad, forgive me, we will be so happy now. 0! do you know this is what I have been waiting for all these years; it made me glad, I know, when I was a little baby in my mother's arms to think I was born for this; and afterwards, as I grew up, I used to watch every breath of wind through the beech-boughs, every turn of the silver poplar leaves, thinking it might be you or some news of you."

Then I rose and drew her up with me; but she knelt again by my brother's side, and kissed him, and said:

"O brother! The Hollow Land is only second best of the places God has made, for Heaven also is the work of His hand."

Afterwards we dug a deep grave among the beechroots and there we buried Amald de Liliis.

And I have never seen him since, scarcely even in dreams; surely God has had mercy on him, for he was very leal and true and brave; he loved many men, and was kind and gentle to his friends, neither did he hate any but Swanhilda.

But as for us two, Margaret and me, I cannot tell you concerning our happiness, such things cannot be told; only this I know, that we abode continually in the Hollow Land until I lost it.

Moreover this I can tell you. Margaret was walking with me, as she often walked near the place where I had first seen her; presently we came upon a woman sitting, dressed in scarlet and gold raiment, with her head laid down on her knees; likewise we heard her sobbing.

"Margaret, who is she?" I said: "I knew not that any dwelt in the Hollow Land but us two only."

She said, "I know not who she is, only sometimes; these many years, I have seen her scarlet robe flaming from far away, amid the quiet green grass: but I was never so near her as this.

Florian, I am afraid: let us come away."

The Hollow Land, by William Morris, [1856], at sacred-texts.com

[f03]

FYTTE THE SECOND

Such a horrible grey November day it was, the fog-smell all about, the fog creeping into our very bones.

And I sat there, trying to recollect, at any rate something, under those fir-trees that I ought to have known so well.

Just think now; I had lost my best years some-where; for I was past the prime of life, my hair and beard were scattered with white, my body was growing weaker, my memory of all things was very faint

My raiment, purple and scarlet and blue once, was so stained that you could scarce call it any colour, was so tattered that it scarce covered my body, though it seemed once to have fallen in heavy folds to my feet, and still, when I rose to walk, though the miserable November mist lay in great drops upon my bare breast, yet was I obliged to wind my raiment over my arm, it dragged so (wretched, slimy, textureless thing!) in the brown mud.

On my head was a light morion, which pressed on my brow and pained me; so I put my hand up to take it ofi; but when I touched it I stood still in my walk shuddering; I nearly fell to the earth with shame and sick horror; for I laid my hand on a lump of Slimy earth with worms coiled up in it I could scarce forbear from shrieking, but breathing such a prayer as I could think of, I raised my hand again and seized it firmly. Worse horror stilll The rust had eaten it into holes, and I gripped my own hair as well as the rotting steel, the sharp edge of which cut into my fingers; but setting my teeth, gave a great wrench, for I knew that if I let go of it then, no power on the earth or under it could make me touch it again. God be praised! I tore it off and cast it far from me; I saw the earth, and the worms and green weeds and sun-begotten slime, whirling out from it radiatingly, as it spun round about.

I was girt with a sword too, the leathern belt of which had shrunk and squeezed my waist: dead leaves had gathered in knots about the buckles of it, the gilded handle was encrusted with clay in many parts, the velvet sheath miserably worn.

But, verily, when I took hold of the hilt, and pent in my hand; lo! then, I drew out my own true blade and shook it flawless from hilt to point, gleaming white in that mist.

Therefore it sent a thrill of joy to my heart, to know that there was one friend left me yet: I sheathed it again carefully, and undoing it from my waist, hung it about my neck.

Then catching up my rags in my arms, I drew them up till my legs and feet were altogether clear from them, afterwards folded my arms over my breast, gave a long leap and ran, looking downward, but not giving heed to my way.

Once or twice I fell over stumps of trees, and such-like, for it was a cut-down wood that I was in, but I rose always, though bleeding and confused, and went on still; sometimes tearing madly through briars and gorse bushes, so that my blood dropped on the dead leaves as I went.

I ran in this way for about an hour; then I heard a gurgling and splashing of waters; I gave a great shout and leapt strongly, with shut eyes, and the black water closed over me.

When I rose again, I saw near me a boat with a man in it; but the shore was far off; I struck out toward the boat, but my clothes which I had knotted and folded about me, weighed me down terribly.

The man looked at me, and began to paddle toward me with the oar he held in his left hand, having in his right a long, slender spear, barbed like a fish-hook; perhaps, I thought, it is some fishing spear; moreover his raiment was of scarlet, with upright stripes of yellow and black all over it.

When my eye caught his, a smile widened his mouth as if some one had made a joke; but I was beginning to sink, and indeed my head was almost under water just as he came and stood above me, but before it went quite under, I saw his spear gleam, then felt it in my shoulder, and for the present, felt nothing else.

When I woke I was on the bank of that river; the flooded waters went hurrying past me; no boat on them now; from the river the ground went up in gentle slopes till it grew a great hill, and there, on that hill-top, Yes, I might forget many things, almost everything, but not that, not the old castle of my fathers up among the hills, its towers blackened now and shattered, yet still no enemy's banner waved from it.

So I said I would go and die there? and at this thought I drew my sword, which yet hung about my neck, and shook it in the air till the true steel quivered, then began to pace towards the castle. I was quite naked, no rag about me; I took no heed of that only thanking God that my sword was left, and so toiled up the hill. I entered the castle soon by the outer court; I knew the way so well, that I did not lift my eyes from the groimd, but walked on over the lowered drawbridge through the unguarded gates, and stood in the great hall at lastmy father's hall as bare of everything but my sword as when I came into the world fifty years before: I had as little clothes, as little wealth, less memory and thought, I verily believe, than then.

So I lifted up my eyes and gazed; no glass in the windows, no hangings on the walls; the vaulting yet held good throughout, but seemed to be going; the mortar had fallen out from between the stones, and grass and fern grew in the joints; the marble pavement was in some places gone, and water stood about in puddles, though one scarce knew how it had got there.

No hangings on the walls--no; yet, strange to say, instead of them, the walls blazed from end to end with scarlet paintings, only striped across with green damp-marks in many places, some falling bodily from the wall, the plaster hanging down with the fading colour on it.

In all of them, except for the shadows and the faces of the figures, there was scarce any colour but scarlet and yellow. Here and there it seemed the painter, whoever it was, had tried to make his trees or his grass green, but it would not do; some ghastly thoughts must have filled his head, for all the green went presently into yellow, out-sweeping through the picture dismally. But the faces were painted to the very life, or it seemed so; there were only five of them, however, that were very marked or came much in the foreground; and four of these I knew well, though I did not then remember the names of those that had borne them. They were Red Harald, Swanhilda, Amald, and myself. The fifth I did not know; it was a woman's and very beautiful.

Then I saw that in some parts a small penthouse roof had been built over the paintings, to keep them from the weather. Near one of these stood a man painting, clothed in red, with stripes of yellow and black: Then I knew that it was the same man who had saved me from drowning by spearing me through the shoulder; so I went up to him, and saw furthermore that he was girt with a heavy sword. He turned round when he saw me coming, and asked me fiercely what I did there. I asked why he was painting in my castle.

Thereupon, with that same grim smile widening his mouth as heretofore, he said, "I paint God's judgments."

And as he spoke, he rattled the sword in his scabbard; but I said,

"Well, then, you paint them very badly. Listen; I know God's judgments much better than you do. See now; I will teach you God's judgments, and you shall teach me painting."

While I spoke he still rattled his sword, and when I had done, shut his right eye tight, screwing his nose on one side; then said:

"You have got no clothes on, and may go to the devil! What do you know about God's judgments?"

"Well, they are not all yellow and red, at all events; you ought to know better."

He screamed out, "O you fool! Yellow and red! Gold and blood, what do they make?"

"Well," I said; "what?"

"HELL!" And, coming close up to me, he struck me with his open hand in the face, so that the colour with which his hand was smeared was dabbed about my face. The blow almost threw me down; and, while I staggered, he rushed at me furiously with his sword. Perhaps it was good for me that I had got no clothes on; for, being utterly unencumbered, I leapt this way and that, and avoided his fierce, eager strokes till I could collect myself somewhat; while he had a heavy scarlet cloak on that trailed on the ground, and which he often trod on, so that he stumbled.

He very nearly slew me during the first few minutes, for it was not strange that, together with other matters, I should have forgotten the art of fence: but yet, as I went on, and sometimes bounded about the hall under the whizzing of his sword, as he rested sometimes, leaning on it, as the point sometimes touched my head and made my eyes start out, I remembered the old joy that I used to have, and the swy, swy, of the sharp edge, as one gazed between one's horse's ears; moreover, at last, one fierce swift stroke, just touching me below the throat, tore up the skin all down my body, and fell heavy on my thigh, so that I drew my breath in and turned white; then first, as I swung my sword round my head, our blades met, oh! to hear that tchink again! and I felt the notch my sword made in his, and swung out at him; but he guarded it and returned on me; I guarded right and left, and grew warm, and opened my mouth to shout, but knew not what to say; and our sword points fell on the floor together: then, when we had panted awhile, I wiped from my face the blood that had been dashed over it, shook my sword and cut at him, then we spun round and round in a mad waltz to the measured music of our meeting swords, and sometimes either wounded the other somewhat but not much, till I beat down his sword on to his head, that he fell grovelling, but not cut through. Verily, thereupon my lips opened mightily with "Mary rings."

Then, when he had gotten to his feet, I went at him again, he staggering back, guarding wildly; I cut at his head; he put his sword up confusedly, so I fitted both hands to my hilt, and smote him mightily under the arm: then his shriek mingled with my shout, made a strange sound together; he rolled over and over, dead, as I thought.

I walked about the hall in great exultation at first, striking my sword point on the floor every now and then, till I grew faint with loss of blood; then I went to my enemy and stripped off some of his clothes to bind up my wounds withal; afterwards I found in a corner bread and wine, and I eat and drank thereof.

Then I went back to him, and looked, and a thought struck me, and I took some of his paints and brushes, and kneeling down, painted his face thus, with stripes of yellow and red, crossing each other at right angles; and in each of the squares so made I put a spot of black, after the manner of the painted letters in the prayer-books and romances when they are ornamented.

So I stood back as painters use, folded my arms, and admired my own handiwork. Yet there struck me as being something so utterly doleful in the man's white face, and the blood running all about him, and washing off the stains of paint from his face and hands, and splashed clothes, that my heart misgave me, and I hoped that he was not dead; I took some water from a vessel he had been using for his painting, and, kneeling, washed his face.

Was it some resemblance to my father's dead face, which I had seen when I was young, that made me pity him? I laid my hand upon his heart, and felt it beating feebly; so I lifted him up gently, and carried him towards a heap of straw that he seemed used to lie upon; there I stripped him and looked to his wounds, and used leech-craft, the memory of which God gave me for this purpose, I suppose, and within seven days I found that he would not die.

Afterwards, as I wandered about the castle, I came to a room in one of the upper storeys, that had still the roof on, and windows in it with painted glass, and there I found green raiment and swords and armour, and I clothed myself.

So when he got well I asked him what his name was, and he me, and we both of us said, "Truly I know not." Then said I, "but we must call each other some name, even as men call days."

"Call me Swerker," he said, "some priest I knew once had that name."

"And me Wulf," said I, "though wherefore I know not."

Then I tried to learn painting till I thought I should die, but at last learned it through very much pain and grief.

And, as the years went on and we grew old and grey, we painted purple pictures and green ones instead of the scarlet and yellow, so that the walls looked altered, and always we painted God's judgments.

And we would sit in the sunset and watch them with the golden light changing them, as we yet hoped God would change both us and our works. Often too we would sit outside the walls and look at the trees and sky, and the ways of the few men and women we saw; therefrom sometimes befell adventures.

Once there went past a great funeral of some king going to his own country, not as he had hoped to go, but stiff and colourless, spices filling up the place of his heart.

And first went by very many knights, with long bright hauberks on, that fell down before their knees as they rode, and they all had tilting-helms on with the same crest, so that their faces were quite hidden: and this crest was two hands clasped together tightly as though they were the hands of one praying forgiveness from the one he loves best; and the crest was wrought in gold.

Moreover, they had on over their hauberks surcoats which were half scarlet and half purple, strewn about with golden stars.

Also long lances, that had forked knights'-pennons, half purple and half scarlet, strewn with golden stars.

And these went by with no sound but the fall of their horse-hoofs.

And they went slowly, so slowly that we counted them all, five thousand five hundred and fifty-five. Then went by many fair maidens whose hair was loose and yellow, and who were all clad in green raiment ungirded, and shod with golden shoes. These also we counted, being five hundred; moreover some of the outermost of them, viz., one maiden to every twenty, had long silver trumpets, which they swung out to right and left, blowing them, and their sound was very sad.

Then many priests, and bishops, and abbots, who wore white albs and golden copes over them; and they all sang together mournfully, "Propter amnen Babylonis;" and these were three hundred.

After that came a great knot of the Lords, who were tilting helmets and surcoats emblazoned with each one his own device; only each had in his hand a small staff two feet long whereon was a pennon of scarlet and purple. These also were three hundred.

And in the midst of these was a great car hung down to the ground with purple, drawn by grey horses whose trappings were half scarlet, half purple. And on this car lay the King, whose head and hands were bare; and he had on him a surcoat, half purple and half scarlet, strewn with golden stars. And his head rested on a tilting helmet, whose crest was the hands of one praying passionately for forgiveness.

But his own hands lay by his side as if he had just fallen asleep.

And all about the car were little banners, half purple and half scarlet, strewn with golden stars. Then the King, who counted but as one, went by also.

And after him came again many maidens clad in ungirt white raiment strewn with scarlet flowers, and their hair was loose and yellow and their feet bare: and, except for the falling of their feet and the rustle of the wind through their raiment, they went past quite silently. These also were five hundred.

Then lastly came many young knights with long bright hauberks falling over their knees as they rode, and surcoats, half scarlet and half purple, strewn with golden stars; they bore long lances with forked pennons which were half purple, half scarlet, strewn with golden stars; their heads and their hands were bare, but they bore shields, each one of them, which were of bright steel wrought cunningly in the midst with that bearing of the two hands of one who prays for forgiveness; which was done in gold. These were but five hundred.

Then they all went by winding up and up the hill roads, and, when the last of them had departed out of our sight, we put down our heads and wept, and I said, "Sing us one of the songs of the Hollow Land." Then he whom I had called Swerker put his hand into his bosom, and slowly drew out a long, long tress of black hair, and laid it on his knee and smoothed it, weeping on it: So then I left him there and went and armed myself, and brought armour for him.

And then came back to him and threw the armour down so that it clanged, and said:

"O Harald, let us go!"

He did not seem surprised that I called him by the right name, but rose and armed himself, and then be looked a good knight; so we set forth. And in a turn of the long road we came suddenly upon a most fair woman, clothed in scarlet, who sat and sobbed, holding her face between her bands, and her hair was very black.

And when Harald saw her, he stood and gazed at her for long through the bars of bis helmet, then suddenly turned, and said:

"Florian, I must stop here; do you go on to the Hollow Land. Farewell."

"Farewell." And then I went on, never turning back, and him I never saw more.

And so I went on, quite lonely, but happy, till I had reached the Hollow Land.

Into which I let myself down most carefully, by the jutting rocks and bushes and strange trailing flowers, and there lay down and fell asleep.

The Hollow Land, by William Morris, [1856], at sacred-texts.com

[f04]

FYTTE THE THIRD

And I was waked by some one singing; I felt very happy; I felt young again; I had fair delicate raiment on, my sword was gone, and my armour; I tried to think where I was, and could not for my happiness; I tried to listen to the words of the song. Nothing, only an old echo in my ears, only all manner of strange scenes from my wretched past life before my eyes in a dim, far-off manner: then at last, slowly, without effort, I heard what she sang.

   "Christ keep the Hollow Land
    All the summer-tide;
    Still we cannot understand
    Where the waters glide;

   Only dimly seeing them
    Coldly slipping through
    Many green-lipp'd cavern mouths.
    Where the hills are blue."

"Then," she said, "come now and look for it, love, a hollow city in the Hollow Land."

I kissed Margaret, and we went.

Through the golden streets under the purple shadows of the houses we went, and the slow fanning backward and forward of the many-coloured banners cooled us: we two alone: there was no one with us. No soul will ever be able to tell what we said, how we looked.

At last we came to a fair palace, cloistered off in the old time, before the city grew golden from the din and hubbub of traffic; those who dwelt there in the old ungolden times had had their own joys, their own sorrows, apart from the joys and sorrows of the multitude: so, in like manner, was it now cloistered off from the eager leaning and brotherhood of the golden dwellings: so now it had its own gaiety, its own solemnity, apart from theirs; unchanged, and changeable, were its marble walls, whatever else changed about it.

We stopped before the gates and trembled, and clasped each other closer; for there among the marble leafage and tendrils that were round and under and over the archway that held the golden valves were wrought two figures of a man and woman winged and garlanded, whose raiment flashed with stars; and their faces were like faces we had seen or half seen in some dream long and long and long ago so that we trembled with awe and delight; and turned, and seeing Margaret, saw that her face was that face seen or half seen long and long and long ago; and in the shining of her eyes I saw that other face, seen in that way and no other long and long and long ago--my face.

And then we walked together toward the golden gates, and opened them, and no man gainsaid us.

And before us lay a great space of flowers.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: thow.txt =====



The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

THE HOUSE OF THE WOLFINGS

A TALE OF THE HOUSE OF THE WOLFINGS AND ALL THE KINDREDS OF THE MARK

WRITTEN IN PROSE AND IN VERSE

by William Morris

Reeves and Turner

[1889]

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

CONTENTS

[*Chapter I--The Dwellings of Mid-Mark]

[*Chapter II--The Flitting of the War-Arrow]

[*Chapter III--Thiodolf Talketh with the Wood-Sun]

[*Chapter Iv--The House Fareth to the War]

[*Chapter V--Concerning the Hall-Sun]

[*Chapter VI--They Talk on the Way to the Folk-Thing]

[*Chapter VII--They Gather to the Folk-Mote]

[*Chapter VIII--The Folk-Mote of the Markmen]

[*Chapter IX--The Ancient Man of the Daylings]

[*Chapter X--That Carline Cometh to the Roof of the Wolfings]

[*Chapter XI--The Hall-Sun Speaketh]

[*Chapter XII--Tidings of the Battle in Mirkwood]

[*Chapter XIII--The Hall-Sun Saith Another Word]

[*Chapter XIV--The Hall-Sun is Careful Concerning the Passes of the Wood]

[*Chapter XV--They Hear Tell of the Battle on the Ridge]

[*Chapter XVI--How the Dwarf-Wrought Hauberk Was Brought Away From the Hall of the Daylings]

[*Chapter XVII--The Wood-Sun Speaketh With Thiodolf]

[*Chapter XVIII--Tidings Brought to the Wain-Burg]

[*Chapter XIX--Those Messengers Come to Thiodolf]

[*Chapter XX--Otter and His Folk Come into Mid-Mark]

[*Chapter XXI--They Bicker About the Ford]

[*Chapter XXII--Otter Falls on Against his Will]

[*Chapter XXIII--Thiodolf Meeteth the Romans in the Wolfing Meadow]

[*Chapter XXIV--The Goths are Overthrown by the Romans]

[*Chapter XXV--The Host of the Markmen Cometh into the Wild-Wood]

[*Chapter XXVI--Thiodolf Talketh with the Wood-Sun]

[*Chapter XXVII--They Wend to the Morning Battle]

[*Chapter XXVIII--Of the Storm of Dawning]

[*Chapter XXI--Of Thiodolf's Storm]

[*Chapter XXX--Thiodolf is Borne out of the Hall and Otter is Laid Beside Him]

[*Chapter XXXI--Old Asmund Speaketh Over the War-Dukes: the Dead are Laid in Mound]

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f01]

    Whiles in the early Winter eve
    We pass amid the gathering night
    Some homestead that we had to leave
    Years past; and see its candles bright
    Shine in the room beside the door
    Where we were merry years agone
    But now must never enter more,
    As still the dark road drives us on.
    E'en so the world of men may turn
    At even of some hurried day
    And see the ancient glimmer burn
    Across the waste that hath no way;
    Then with that faint light in its eyes
    A while I bid it linger near
    And nurse in wavering memories
    The bitter-sweet of days that were.

CHAPTER I--THE DWELLINGS OF MID-MARK

The tale tells that in times long past there was a dwelling of men beside a great wood.  Before it lay a plain, not very great, but which was, as it were, an isle in the sea of woodland, since even when you stood on the flat ground, you could see trees everywhere in the offing, though as for hills, you could scarce say that there were any; only swellings-up of the earth here and there, like the upheavings of the water that one sees at whiles going on amidst the eddies of a swift but deep stream.

On either side, to right and left the tree-girdle reached out toward the blue distance, thick close and unsundered, save where it and the plain which it begirdled was cleft amidmost by a river about as wide as the Thames at Sheene when the flood-tide is at its highest, but so swift and full of eddies, that it gave token of mountains not so far distant, though they were hidden.  On each side moreover of the stream of this river was a wide space of stones, great and little, and in most places above this stony waste were banks of a few feet high, showing where the yearly winter flood was most commonly stayed.

You must know that this great clearing in the woodland was not a matter of haphazard; though the river had driven a road whereby men might fare on each side of its hurrying stream.  It was men who had made that Isle in the woodland.

For many generations the folk that now dwelt there had learned the craft of iron-founding, so that they had no lack of wares of iron and steel, whether they were tools of handicraft or weapons for hunting and for war. It was the men of the Folk, who coming adown by the river-side had made that clearing.  The tale tells not whence they came, but belike from the dales of the distant mountains, and from dales and mountains and plains further aloof and yet further.

Anyhow they came adown the river; on its waters on rafts, by its shores in wains or bestriding their horses or their kine, or afoot, till they had a mind to abide; and there as it fell they stayed their travel, and spread from each side of the river, and fought with the wood and its wild things, that they might make to themselves a dwelling-place on the face of the earth.

So they cut down the trees, and burned their stumps that the grass might grow sweet for their kine and sheep and horses; and they diked the river where need was all through the plain, and far up into the wild-wood to bridle the winter floods: and they made them boats to ferry them over, and to float down stream and track up-stream: they fished the river's eddies also with net and with line; and drew drift from out of it of far- travelled wood and other matters; and the gravel of its shallows they washed for gold; and it became their friend, and they loved it, and gave it a name, and called it the Dusky, and the Glassy, and the Mirkwood-water; for the names of it changed with the generations of man.

There then in the clearing of the wood that for many years grew greater yearly they drave their beasts to pasture in the new-made meadows, where year by year the grass grew sweeter as the sun shone on it and the standing waters went from it; and now in the year whereof the tale telleth it was a fair and smiling plain, and no folk might have a better meadow.

But long before that had they learned the craft of tillage and taken heed to the acres and begun to grow wheat and rye thereon round about their roofs; the spade came into their hands, and they bethought them of the plough-share, and the tillage spread and grew, and there was no lack of bread.

In such wise that Folk had made an island amidst of the Mirkwood, and established a home there, and upheld it with manifold toil too long to tell of.  And from the beginning this clearing in the wood they called the Mid-mark: for you shall know that men might journey up and down the Mirkwood-water, and half a day's ride up or down they would come on another clearing or island in the woods, and these were the Upper-mark and the Nether-mark: and all these three were inhabited by men of one folk and one kindred, which was called the Mark-men, though of many branches was that stem of folk, who bore divers signs in battle and at the council whereby they might be known.

Now in the Mid-mark itself were many Houses of men; for by that word had they called for generations those who dwelt together under one token of kinship.  The river ran from South to North, and both on the East side and on the West were there Houses of the Folk, and their habitations were shouldered up nigh unto the wood, so that ever betwixt them and the river was there a space of tillage and pasture.

Tells the tale of one such House, whose habitations were on the west side of the water, on a gentle slope of land, so that no flood higher than common might reach them.  It was straight down to the river mostly that the land fell off, and on its downward-reaching slopes was the tillage, "the Acres," as the men of that time always called tilled land; and beyond that was the meadow going fair and smooth, though with here and there a rising in it, down to the lips of the stony waste of the winter river.

Now the name of this House was the Wolfings, and they bore a Wolf on their banners, and their warriors were marked on the breast with the image of the Wolf, that they might be known for what they were if they fell in battle, and were stripped.

The house, that is to say the Roof, of the Wolfings of the Mid-mark stood on the topmost of the slope aforesaid with its back to the wild-wood and its face to the acres and the water.  But you must know that in those days the men of one branch of kindred dwelt under one roof together, and had therein their place and dignity; nor were there many degrees amongst them as hath befallen afterwards, but all they of one blood were brethren and of equal dignity.  Howbeit they had servants or thralls, men taken in battle, men of alien blood, though true it is that from time to time were some of such men taken into the House, and hailed as brethren of the blood.

Also (to make an end at once of these matters of kinship and affinity) the men of one House might not wed the women of their own House: to the Wolfing men all Wolfing women were as sisters: they must needs wed with the Hartings or the Elkings or the Bearings, or other such Houses of the Mark as were not so close akin to the blood of the Wolf; and this was a law that none dreamed of breaking.  Thus then dwelt this Folk and such was their Custom.

As to the Roof of the Wolfings, it was a great hall and goodly, after the fashion of their folk and their day; not built of stone and lime, but framed of the goodliest trees of the wild-wood squared with the adze, and betwixt the framing filled with clay wattled with reeds.  Long was that house, and at one end anigh the gable was the Man's-door, not so high that a man might stand on the threshold and his helmcrest clear the lintel; for such was the custom, that a tall man must bow himself as he came into the hall; which custom maybe was a memory of the days of onslaught when the foemen were mostly wont to beset the hall; whereas in the days whereof the tale tells they drew out into the fields and fought unfenced; unless at whiles when the odds were over great, and then they drew their wains about them and were fenced by the wain-burg.  At least it was from no niggardry that the door was made thus low, as might be seen by the fair and manifold carving of knots and dragons that was wrought above the lintel of the door for some three foot's space.  But a like door was there anigh the other gable-end, whereby the women entered, and it was called the Woman's-door.

Near to the house on all sides except toward the wood were there many bowers and cots round about the penfolds and the byres: and these were booths for the stowage of wares, and for crafts and smithying that were unhandy to do in the house; and withal they were the dwelling-places of the thralls.  And the lads and young men often abode there many days and were cherished there of the thralls that loved them, since at whiles they shunned the Great Roof that they might be the freer to come and go at their pleasure, and deal as they would.  Thus was there a clustering on the slopes and bents betwixt the acres of the Wolfings and the wild-wood wherein dwelt the wolves.

As to the house within, two rows of pillars went down it endlong, fashioned of the mightiest trees that might be found, and each one fairly wrought with base and chapiter, and wreaths and knots, and fighting men and dragons; so that it was like a church of later days that has a nave and aisles: windows there were above the aisles, and a passage underneath the said windows in their roofs.  In the aisles were the sleeping-places of the Folk, and down the nave under the crown of the roof were three hearths for the fires, and above each hearth a luffer or smoke-bearer to draw the smoke up when the fires were lighted.  Forsooth on a bright winter afternoon it was strange to see the three columns of smoke going wavering up to the dimness of the mighty roof, and one maybe smitten athwart by the sunbeams.  As for the timber of the roof itself and its framing, so exceeding great and high it was, that the tale tells how that none might see the fashion of it from the hall-floor unless he were to raise aloft a blazing faggot on a long pole: since no lack of timber was there among the men of the Mark.

At the end of the hall anigh the Man's-door was the dais, and a table thereon set thwartwise of the hall; and in front of the dais was the noblest and greatest of the hearths; (but of the others one was in the very midmost, and another in the Woman's-Chamber) and round about the dais, along the gable-wall, and hung from pillar to pillar were woven cloths pictured with images of ancient tales and the deeds of the Wolfings, and the deeds of the Gods from whence they came.  And this was the fairest place of all the house and the best-beloved of the Folk, and especially of the older and the mightier men: and there were tales told, and songs sung, especially if they were new: and thereto also were messengers brought if any tidings were abroad: there also would the elders talk together about matters concerning the House or the Mid-mark or the whole Folk of the Markmen.

Yet you must not think that their solemn councils were held there, the folk-motes whereat it must be determined what to do and what to forbear doing; for according as such councils, (which they called Things) were of the House or of the Mid-mark or of the whole Folk, were they held each at the due Thing-steads in the Wood aloof from either acre or meadow, (as was the custom of our forefathers for long after) and at such Things would all the men of the House or the Mid-mark or the Folk be present man by man.  And in each of these steads was there a Doomring wherein Doom was given by the neighbours chosen, (whom now we call the Jury) in matters between man and man; and no such doom of neighbours was given, and no such voice of the Folk proclaimed in any house or under any roof, nor even as aforesaid on the tilled acres or the depastured meadows.  This was the custom of our forefathers, in memory, belike, of the days when as yet there was neither house nor tillage, nor flocks and herds, but the Earth's face only and what freely grew thereon.

But over the dais there hung by chains and pulleys fastened to a tie-beam of the roof high aloft a wondrous lamp fashioned of glass; yet of no such glass as the folk made then and there, but of a fair and clear green like an emerald, and all done with figures and knots in gold, and strange beasts, and a warrior slaying a dragon, and the sun rising on the earth: nor did any tale tell whence this lamp came, but it was held as an ancient and holy thing by all the Markmen, and the kindred of the Wolf had it in charge to keep a light burning in it night and day for ever; and they appointed a maiden of their own kindred to that office; which damsel must needs be unwedded, since no wedded woman dwelling under that roof could be a Wolfing woman, but would needs be of the houses wherein the Wolfings wedded.

This lamp which burned ever was called the Hall-Sun, and the woman who had charge of it, and who was the fairest that might be found was called after it the Hall-Sun also.

At the other end of the hall was the Woman's-Chamber, and therein were the looms and other gear for the carding and spinning of wool and the weaving of cloth.

Such was the Roof under which dwelt the kindred of the Wolfings; and the other kindreds of the Mid-mark had roofs like to it; and of these the chiefest were the Elkings, the Vallings, the Alftings, the Beamings, the Galtings, and the Bearings; who bore on their banners the Elk, the Falcon, the Swan, the Tree, the Boar, and the Bear.  But other lesser and newer kindreds there were than these: as for the Hartings above named, they were a kindred of the Upper-mark.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f02]

CHAPTER II--THE FLITTING OF THE WAR-ARROW

Tells the tale that it was an evening of summer, when the wheat was in the ear, but yet green; and the neat-herds were done driving the milch- kine to the byre, and the horseherds and the shepherds had made the night- shift, and the out-goers were riding two by two and one by one through the lanes between the wheat and the rye towards the meadow.  Round the cots of the thralls were gathered knots of men and women both thralls and freemen, some talking together, some hearkening a song or a tale, some singing and some dancing together; and the children gambolling about from group to group with their shrill and tuneless voices, like young throstles who have not yet learned the song of their race.  With these were mingled dogs, dun of colour, long of limb, sharp-nosed, gaunt and great; they took little heed of the children as they pulled them about in their play, but lay down, or loitered about, as though they had forgotten the chase and the wild-wood.

Merry was the folk with that fair tide, and the promise of the harvest, and the joy of life, and there was no weapon among them so close to the houses, save here and there the boar-spear of some herdman or herd-woman late come from the meadow.

Tall and for the most part comely were both men and women; the most of them light-haired and grey-eyed, with cheek-bones somewhat high; white of skin but for the sun's burning, and the wind's parching, and whereas they were tanned of a very ruddy and cheerful hue.  But the thralls were some of them of a shorter and darker breed, black-haired also and dark-eyed, lighter of limb; sometimes better knit, but sometimes crookeder of leg and knottier of arm.  But some also were of build and hue not much unlike to the freemen; and these doubtless came of some other Folk of the Goths which had given way in battle before the Men of the Mark, either they or their fathers.

Moreover some of the freemen were unlike their fellows and kindred, being slenderer and closer-knit, and black-haired, but grey-eyed withal; and amongst these were one or two who exceeded in beauty all others of the House.

Now the sun was set and the glooming was at point to begin and the shadowless twilight lay upon the earth.  The nightingales on the borders of the wood sang ceaselessly from the scattered hazel-trees above the greensward where the grass was cropped down close by the nibbling of the rabbits; but in spite of their song and the divers voices of the men-folk about the houses, it was an evening on which sounds from aloof can be well heard, since noises carry far at such tides.

Suddenly they who were on the edges of those throngs and were the less noisy, held themselves as if to listen; and a group that had gathered about a minstrel to hear his story fell hearkening also round about the silenced and hearkening tale-teller: some of the dancers and singers noted them and in their turn stayed the dance and kept silence to hearken; and so from group to group spread the change, till all were straining their ears to hearken the tidings.  Already the men of the night-shift had heard it, and the shepherds of them had turned about, and were trotting smartly back through the lanes of the tall wheat: but the horse-herds were now scarce seen on the darkening meadow, as they galloped on fast toward their herds to drive home the stallions.  For what they had heard was the tidings of war.

There was a sound in the air as of a humble-bee close to the ear of one lying on a grassy bank; or whiles as of a cow afar in the meadow lowing in the afternoon when milking-time draws nigh: but it was ever shriller than the one, and fuller than the other; for it changed at whiles, though after the first sound of it, it did not rise or fall, because the eve was windless.  You might hear at once that for all it was afar, it was a great and mighty sound; nor did any that hearkened doubt what it was, but all knew it for the blast of the great war-horn of the Elkings, whose Roof lay up Mirkwood-water next to the Roof of the Wolfings.

So those little throngs broke up at once; and all the freemen, and of the thralls a good many, flocked, both men and women, to the Man's-door of the hall, and streamed in quietly and with little talk, as men knowing that they should hear all in due season.

Within under the Hall-Sun, amidst the woven stories of time past, sat the elders and chief warriors on the dais, and amidst of all a big strong man of forty winters, his dark beard a little grizzled, his eyes big and grey.  Before him on the board lay the great War-horn of the Wolfings carved out of the tusk of a sea-whale of the North and with many devices on it and the Wolf amidst them all; its golden mouth-piece and rim wrought finely with flowers.  There it abode the blowing, until the spoken word of some messenger should set forth the tidings borne on the air by the horn of the Elkings.

But the name of the dark-haired chief was Thiodolf (to wit Folk-wolf) and he was deemed the wisest man of the Wolfings, and the best man of his hands, and of heart most dauntless.  Beside him sat the fair woman called the Hall-Sun; for she was his foster-daughter before men's eyes; and she was black-haired and grey-eyed like to her fosterer, and never was woman fashioned fairer: she was young of years, scarce twenty winters old.

There sat the chiefs and elders on the dais, and round about stood the kindred intermingled with the thralls, and no man spake, for they were awaiting sure and certain tidings: and when all were come in who had a mind to, there was so great a silence in the hall, that the song of the nightingales on the wood-edge sounded clear and loud therein, and even the chink of the bats about the upper windows could be heard.  Then amidst the hush of men-folk, and the sounds of the life of the earth came another sound that made all turn their eyes toward the door; and this was the pad-pad of one running on the trodden and summer-dried ground anigh the hall: it stopped for a moment at the Man's-door, and the door opened, and the throng parted, making way for the man that entered and came hastily up to the midst of the table that stood on the dais athwart the hall, and stood there panting, holding forth in his outstretched hand something which not all could see in the dimness of the hall-twilight, but which all knew nevertheless.  The man was young, lithe and slender, and had no raiment but linen breeches round his middle, and skin shoes on his feet.  As he stood there gathering his breath for speech, Thiodolf stood up, and poured mead into a drinking horn and held it out towards the new-comer, and spake, but in rhyme and measure:

   "Welcome, thou evening-farer, and holy be thine head,
    Since thou hast sought unto us in the heart of the Wolfings' stead;
    Drink now of the horn of the mighty, and call a health if thou wilt
    O'er the eddies of the mead-horn to the washing out of guilt.
    For thou com'st to the peace of the Wolfings, and our very guest thou    art,
    And meseems as I behold thee, that I look on a child of the Hart."

 

But the man put the horn from him with a hasty hand, and none said another word to him until he had gotten his breath again; and then he said:

   "All hail ye Wood-Wolfs' children! nought may I drink the wine,
    For the mouth and the maw that I carry this eve are nought of mine;
    And my feet are the feet of the people, since the word went forth that tide,
    'O Elf here of the Hartings, no longer shalt thou bide
    In any house of the Markmen than to speak the word and wend,
    Till all men know the tidings and thine errand hath an end.'
    Behold, O Wolves, the token and say if it be true!
    I bear the shaft of battle that is four-wise cloven through,
    And its each end dipped in the blood-stream, both the iron and the horn,
    And its midmost scathed with the fire; and the word that I have borne
    Along with this war-token is, 'Wolfings of the Mark
    Whenso ye see the war-shaft, by the daylight or the dark,
    Busk ye to battle faring, and leave all work undone
    Save the gathering for the handplay at the rising of the sun.
    Three days hence is the hosting, and thither bear along
    Your wains and your kine for the slaughter lest the journey should be long.
    For great is the Folk, saith the tidings, that against the Markmen come;
    In a far off land is their dwelling, whenso they sit at home,
    And Welsh [*1] is their tongue, and we wot not of the word that is in their mouth,
    As they march a many together from the cities of the South.'"

Therewith he held up yet for a minute the token of the war-arrow ragged and burnt and bloody; and turning about with it in his hand went his ways through the open door, none hindering; and when he was gone, it was as if the token were still in the air there against the heads of the living men, and the heads of the woven warriors, so intently had all gazed at it; and none doubted the tidings or the token.  Then said Thiodolf:

   "Forth will we Wolfing children, and cast a sound abroad:
    The mouth of the sea-beast's weapon shall speak the battle-word;
    And ye warriors hearken and hasten, and dight the weed of war,
    And then to acre and meadow wend ye adown no more,
    For this work shall be for the women to drive our neat from the mead,
    And to yoke the wains, and to load them as the men of war have need."

Out then they streamed from the hall, and no man was left therein save the fair Hall-Sun sitting under the lamp whose name she bore.  But to the highest of the slope they went, where was a mound made higher by man's handiwork; thereon stood Thiodolf and handled the horn, turning his face toward the downward course of Mirkwood-water; and he set the horn to his lips, and blew a long blast, and then again, and yet again the third time; and all the sounds of the gathering night were hushed under the sound of the roaring of the war-horn of the Wolfings; and the Kin of the Beamings heard it as they sat in their hall, and they gat them ready to hearken to the bearer of the tidings who should follow on the sound of the war-blast.

But when the last sound of the horn had died away, then said Thiodolf:
    "Now Wolfing children hearken, what the splintered War-shaft saith,
    The fire scathed blood-stained aspen! we shall ride for life or death,
    We warriors, a long journey with the herd and with the wain;
    But unto this our homestead shall we wend us back again,
    All the gleanings of the battle; and here for them that live
    Shall stand the Roof of the Wolfings, and for them shall the meadow thrive,
    And the acres give their increase in the harvest of the year;
    Now is no long departing since the Hall-Sun bideth here
    'Neath the holy Roof of the Fathers, and the place of the Wolfing kin,
    And the feast of our glad returning shall yet be held therein.
    Hear the bidding of the War-shaft!  All men, both thralls and free,
    'Twixt twenty winters and sixty, beneath the shield shall be,
    And the hosting is at the Thing-stead, the Upper-mark anigh;
    And we wend away to-morrow ere the Sun is noon-tide high."

Therewith he stepped down from the mound, and went his way back to the hall; and manifold talk arose among the folk; and of the warriors some were already dight for the journey, but most not, and a many went their ways to see to their weapons and horses, and the rest back again into the hall.

By this time night had fallen, and between then and the dawning would be no darker hour, for the moon was just rising; a many of the horse-herds had done their business, and were now making their way back again through the lanes of the wheat, driving the stallions before them, who played together kicking, biting and squealing, paying but little heed to the standing corn on either side.  Lights began to glitter now in the cots of the thralls, and brighter still in the stithies where already you might hear the hammers clinking on the anvils, as men fell to looking to their battle gear.

But the chief men and the women sat under their Roof on the eve of departure: and the tuns of mead were broached, and the horns filled and borne round by young maidens, and men ate and drank and were merry; and from time to time as some one of the warriors had done with giving heed to his weapons, he entered into the hall and fell into the company of those whom he loved most and by whom he was best beloved; and whiles they talked, and whiles they sang to the harp up and down that long house; and the moon risen high shone in at the windows, and there was much laughter and merriment, and talk of deeds of arms of the old days on the eve of that departure: till little by little weariness fell on them, and they went their ways to slumber, and the hall was fallen silent.

Footnotes

^1 Welsh with these men means Foreign, and is used for all people of Europe who are not of Gothic or Teutonic blood.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f03]

CHAPTER III--THIODOLF TALKETH WITH THE WOOD-SUN

 But yet sat Thiodolf under the Hall-Sun for a while as one in deep thought; till at last as he stirred, his sword clattered on him; and then he lifted up his eyes and looked down the hall and saw no man stirring, so he stood up and settled his raiment on him, and went forth, and so took his ways through the hall-door, as one who hath an errand.

The moonlight lay in a great flood on the grass without, and the dew was falling in the coldest hour of the night, and the earth smelled sweetly: the whole habitation was asleep now, and there was no sound to be known as the sound of any creature, save that from the distant meadow came the lowing of a cow that had lost her calf, and that a white owl was flitting about near the eaves of the Roof with her wild cry that sounded like the mocking of merriment now silent.

Thiodolf turned toward the wood, and walked steadily through the scattered hazel-trees, and thereby into the thick of the beech-trees, whose boles grew smooth and silver-grey, high and close-set: and so on and on he went as one going by a well-known path, though there was no path, till all the moonlight was quenched under the close roof of the beech-leaves, though yet for all the darkness, no man could go there and not feel that the roof was green above him.  Still he went on in despite of the darkness, till at last there was a glimmer before him, that grew greater till he came unto a small wood-lawn whereon the turf grew again, though the grass was but thin, because little sunlight got to it, so close and thick were the tall trees round about it.  In the heavens above it by now there was a light that was not all of the moon, though it might scarce be told whether that light were the memory of yesterday or the promise of to-morrow, since little of the heavens could be seen thence, save the crown of them, because of the tall tree-tops.

Nought looked Thiodolf either at the heavens above, or the trees, as he strode from off the husk-strewn floor of the beech wood on to the scanty grass of the lawn, but his eyes looked straight before him at that which was amidmost of the lawn: and little wonder was that; for there on a stone chair sat a woman exceeding fair, clad in glittering raiment, her hair lying as pale in the moonlight on the grey stone as the barley acres in the August night before the reaping-hook goes in amongst them.  She sat there as though she were awaiting someone, and he made no stop nor stay, but went straight up to her, and took her in his arms, and kissed her mouth and her eyes, and she him again; and then he sat himself down beside her.  But her eyes looked kindly on him as she said:

"O Thiodolf, hardy art thou, that thou hast no fear to take me in thine arms and to kiss me, as though thou hadst met in the meadow with a maiden of the Elkings: and I, who am a daughter of the Gods of thy kindred, and a Chooser of the Slain!  Yea, and that upon the eve of battle and the dawn of thy departure to the stricken field!"

"O Wood-Sun," he said "thou art the treasure of life that I found when I was young, and the love of life that I hold, now that my beard is grizzling.  Since when did I fear thee, Wood-Sun?  Did I fear thee when first I saw thee, and we stood amidst the hazelled field, we twain living amongst the slain?  But my sword was red with the blood of the foe, and my raiment with mine own blood; and I was a-weary with the day's work, and sick with many strokes, and methought I was fainting into death.  And there thou wert before me, full of life and ruddy and smiling both lips and eyes; thy raiment clean and clear, thine hands stained with blood: then didst thou take me by my bloody and weary hand, and didst kiss my lips grown ashen pale, and thou saidst 'Come with me.'  And I strove to go, and might not; so many and sore were my hurts.  Then amidst my sickness and my weariness was I merry; for I said to myself, This is the death of the warrior, and it is exceeding sweet.  What meaneth it?  Folk said of me; he is over young to meet the foeman; yet am I not over young to die?"

Therewith he laughed out amid the wild-wood, and his speech became song, and he said:
    "We wrought in the ring of the hazels, and the wine of war we drank:
    From the tide when the sun stood highest to the hour wherein she sank:
    And three kings came against me, the mightiest of the Huns,
    The evil-eyed in battle, the swift-foot wily ones;
    And they gnashed their teeth against me, and they gnawed on the shield-rims there,
    On that afternoon of summer, in the high-tide of the year.
    Keen-eyed I gazed about me, and I saw the clouds draw up
    Till the heavens were dark as the hollow of a wine-stained iron cup,
    And the wild-deer lay unfeeding on the grass of the forest glades,
    And all earth was scared with the thunder above our clashing blades.

   "Then sank a King before me, and on fell the other twain,
    And I tossed up the reddened sword-blade in the gathered rush of the rain
    And the blood and the water blended, and fragrant grew the earth.

   "There long I turned and twisted within the battle-girth
    Before those bears of onset: while out from the grey world streamed
    The broad red lash of the lightening and in our byrnies gleamed.
    And long I leapt and laboured in that garland of the fight
    'Mid the blue blades and the lightening; but ere the sky grew light
    The second of the Hun-kings on the rain-drenched daisies lay;
    And we twain with the battle blinded a little while made stay,
    And leaning on our sword-hilts each on the other gazed.

   "Then the rain grew less, and one corner of the veil of clouds was raised,
    And as from the broidered covering gleams out the shoulder white
    Of the bed-mate of the warrior when on his wedding night
    He layeth his hand to the linen; so, down there in the west
    Gleamed out the naked heaven: but the wrath rose up in my breast,
    And the sword in my hand rose with it, and I leaped and hewed at the Hun;
    And from him too flared the war-flame, and the blades danced bright in the sun
    Come back to the earth for a little before the ending of day.

   "There then with all that was in him did the Hun play out the play,
    Till he fell, and left me tottering, and I turned my feet to wend
    To the place of the mound of the mighty, the gate of the way without end.
    And there thou wert.  How was it, thou Chooser of the Slain,
    Did I die in thine arms, and thereafter did thy mouth-kiss wake me again?"

 

Ere the last sound of his voice was done she turned and kissed him; and then she said; "Never hadst thou a fear and thine heart is full of hardihood."

Then he said:

   "'Tis the hardy heart, beloved, that keepeth me alive,
    As the king-leek in the garden by the rain and the sun doth thrive,
    So I thrive by the praise of the people; it is blent with my drink and my meat;
    As I slumber in the night-tide it laps me soft and sweet;
    And through the chamber window when I waken in the morn
    With the wind of the sun's arising from the meadow is it borne
    And biddeth me remember that yet I live on earth:
    Then I rise and my might is with me, and fills my heart with mirth,
    As I think of the praise of the people; and all this joy I win
    By the deeds that my heart commandeth and the hope that lieth therein."

"Yea," she said, "but day runneth ever on the heels of day, and there are many and many days; and betwixt them do they carry eld."

"Yet art thou no older than in days bygone," said he.  "Is it so, O Daughter of the Gods, that thou wert never born, but wert from before the framing of the mountains, from the beginning of all things?"

But she said:

   "Nay, nay; I began, I was born; although it may be indeed
    That not on the hills of the earth I sprang from the godhead's seed.
    And e'en as my birth and my waxing shall be my waning and end.
    But thou on many an errand, to many a field dost wend
    Where the bow at adventure bended, or the fleeing dastard's spear
    Oft lulleth the mirth of the mighty.  Now me thou dost not fear,
    Yet fear with me, beloved, for the mighty Maid I fear;
    And Doom is her name, and full often she maketh me afraid
    And even now meseemeth on my life her hand is laid."

 

But he laughed and said:

   "In what land is she abiding?  Is she near or far away?
    Will she draw up close beside me in the press of the battle play?
    And if then I may not smite her 'midst the warriors of the field
    With the pale blade of my fathers, will she bide the shove of my shield?"

But sadly she sang in answer:

   "In many a stead Doom dwelleth, nor sleepeth day nor night:
    The rim of the bowl she kisseth, and beareth the chambering light
    When the kings of men wend happy to the bride-bed from the board.
    It is little to say that she wendeth the edge of the grinded sword,
    When about the house half builded she hangeth many a day;
    The ship from the strand she shoveth, and on his wonted way
    By the mountain-hunter fareth where his foot ne'er failed before:
    She is where the high bank crumbles at last on the river's shore:
    The mower's scythe she whetteth; and lulleth the shepherd to sleep
    Where the deadly ling-worm wakeneth in the desert of the sheep.
    Now we that come of the God-kin of her redes for ourselves we wot,
    But her will with the lives of men-folk and their ending know we not.
    So therefore I bid thee not fear for thyself of Doom and her deed,
    But for me: and I bid thee hearken to the helping of my need.
    Or else--Art thou happy in life, or lusteth thou to die
    In the flower of thy days, when thy glory and thy longing bloom on high?"

 

But Thiodolf answered her:

   "I have deemed, and long have I deemed that this is my second life,
    That my first one waned with my wounding when thou cam'st to the ring of strife.
    For when in thine arms I wakened on the hazelled field of yore,
    Meseemed I had newly arisen to a world I knew no more,
    So much had all things brightened on that dewy dawn of day.
    It was dark dull death that I looked for when my thought had died away.
    It was lovely life that I woke to; and from that day henceforth
    My joy of the life of man-folk was manifolded of worth.
    Far fairer the fields of the morning than I had known them erst,
    And the acres where I wended, and the corn with its half-slaked thirst;
    And the noble Roof of the Wolfings, and the hawks that sat thereon;
    And the bodies of my kindred whose deliverance I had won;
    And the glimmering of the Hall-Sun in the dusky house of old;
    And my name in the mouth of the maidens, and the praises of the bold,
    As I sat in my battle-raiment, and the ruddy spear well steeled
    Leaned 'gainst my side war-battered, and the wounds thine hand had healed.
    Yea, from that morn thenceforward has my life been good indeed,
    The gain of to-day was goodly, and good to-morrow's need,
    And good the whirl of the battle, and the broil I wielded there,
    Till I fashioned the ordered onset, and the unhoped victory fair.
    And good were the days thereafter of utter deedless rest
    And the prattle of thy daughter, and her hands on my unmailed breast.
    Ah good is the life thou hast given, the life that mine hands have won.
    And where shall be the ending till the world is all undone?
    Here sit we twain together, and both we in Godhead clad,
    We twain of the Wolfing kindred, and each of the other glad."

But she answered, and her face grew darker withal:

   "O mighty man and joyous, art thou of the Wolfing kin?
    'Twas no evil deed when we mingled, nor lieth doom therein.
    Thou lovely man, thou black-haired, thou shalt die and have done no ill.
    Fame-crowned are the deeds of thy doing, and the mouths of men they fill.
    Thou betterer of the Godfolk, enduring is thy fame:
    Yet as a painted image of a dream is thy dreaded name.
    Of an alien folk thou comest, that we twain might be one indeed.
    Thou shalt die one day.  So hearken, to help me at my need."

His face grew troubled and he said: "What is this word that I am no chief of the Wolfings?"

"Nay," she said, "but better than they.  Look thou on the face of our daughter the Hall-Sun, thy daughter and mine: favoureth she at all of me?"

He laughed: "Yea, whereas she is fair, but not otherwise.  This is a hard saying, that I dwell among an alien kindred, and it wotteth not thereof. Why hast thou not told me hereof before?"

She said: "It needed not to tell thee because thy day was waxing, as now it waneth.  Once more I bid thee hearken and do my bidding though it be hard to thee."

He answered: "Even so will I as much as I may; and thus wise must thou look upon it, that I love life, and fear not death."

Then she spake, and again her words fell into rhyme:

   "In forty fights hast thou foughten, and been worsted but in four;
    And I looked on and was merry; and ever more and more
    Wert thou dear to the heart of the Wood-Sun, and the Chooser of the Slain.
    But now whereas ye are wending with slaughter-herd and wain
    To meet a folk that ye know not, a wonder, a peerless foe,
    I fear for thy glory's waning, and I see thee lying alow."

Then he brake in: "Herein is little shame to be worsted by the might of the mightiest: if this so mighty folk sheareth a limb off the tree of my fame, yet shall it wax again."

But she sang:

   "In forty fights hast thou foughten, and beside thee who but I
    Beheld the wind-tossed banners, and saw the aspen fly?
    But to-day to thy war I wend not, for Weird withholdeth me
    And sore my heart forebodeth for the battle that shall be.
    To-day with thee I wend not; so I feared, and lo my feet,
    That are wont to the woodland girdle of the acres of the wheat,
    For thee among strange people and the foeman's throng have trod,
    And I tell thee their banner of battle is a wise and a mighty God.
    For these are the folk of the cities, and in wondrous wise they dwell
    'Mid confusion of heaped houses, dim and black as the face of hell;
    Though therefrom rise roofs most goodly, where their captains and their kings
    Dwell amidst the walls of marble in abundance of fair things;
    And 'mid these, nor worser nor better, but builded otherwise
    Stand the Houses of the Fathers, and the hidden mysteries.
    And as close as are the tree-trunks that within the beech-wood thrive
    E'en so many are their pillars; and therein like men alive
    Stand the images of god-folk in such raiment as they wore
    In the years before the cities and the hidden days of yore.
    Ah for the gold that I gazed on! and their store of battle gear,
    And strange engines that I knew not, or the end for which they were.
    Ah for the ordered wisdom of the war-array of these,
    And the folks that are sitting about them in dumb down-trodden peace!
    So I thought now fareth war-ward my well-beloved friend,
    And the weird of the Gods hath doomed it that no more with him may I wend!
    Woe's me for the war of the Wolfings wherefrom I am sundered apart,
    And the fruitless death of the war-wise, and the doom of the hardy heart!"

Then he answered, and his eyes grew kind as he looked on her:

   "For thy fair love I thank thee, and thy faithful word, O friend!
    But how might it otherwise happen but we twain must meet in the end,
    The God of this mighty people and the Markmen and their kin?
    Lo, this is the weird of the world, and what may we do herein?"

Then mirth came into her face again as she said:

"Who wotteth of Weird, and what she is till the weird is accomplished? Long hath it been my weird to love thee and to fashion deeds for thee as I may; nor will I depart from it now."  And she sang:

   "Keen-edged is the sword of the city, and bitter is its spear,
    But thy breast in the battle, beloved, hath a wall of the stithy's gear.
    What now is thy wont in the handplay with the helm and the hauberk of rings?
    Farest thou as the thrall and the cot-carle, or clad in the raiment of kings?"

He started, and his face reddened as he answered:

   "O Wood-Sun thou wottest our battle and the way wherein we fare:
    That oft at the battle's beginning the helm and the hauberk we bear;
    Lest the shaft of the fleeing coward or the bow at adventure bent
    Should slay us ere the need be, ere our might be given and spent.
    Yet oft ere the fight is over, and Doom hath scattered the foe,
    No leader of the people by his war-gear shall ye know,
    But by his hurts the rather, from the cot-carle and the thrall:
    For when all is done that a man may, 'tis the hour for a man to fall."

She yet smiled as she said in answer:

   "O Folk-wolf, heed and hearken; for when shall thy life be spent
    And the Folk wherein thou dwellest with thy death be well content?
    Whenso folk need the fire, do they hew the apple-tree,
    And burn the Mother of Blossom and the fruit that is to be?
    Or me wilt thou bid to thy grave-mound because thy battle-wrath
    May nothing more be bridled than the whirl wind on his path?
    So hearken and do my bidding, for the hauberk shalt thou bear
    E'en when the other warriors cast off their battle-gear.
    So come thou, come unwounded from the war-field of the south,
    And sit with me in the beech-wood, and kiss me, eyes and mouth."

And she kissed him in very deed, and made much of him, and fawned on him, and laid her hand on his breast, and he was soft and blithe with her, but at last he laughed and said:

   "God's Daughter, long hast thou lived, and many a matter seen,
    And men full often grieving for the deed that might have been;
    But here my heart thou wheedlest as a maid of tender years
    When first in the arms of her darling the horn of war she hears.
    Thou knowest the axe to be heavy, and the sword, how keen it is;
    But that Doom of which thou hast spoken, wilt thou not tell of this,
    God's Daughter, how it sheareth, and how it breaketh through
    Each wall that the warrior buildeth, yea all deeds that he may do?
    What might in the hammer's leavings, in the fire's thrall shall abide
    To turn that Folks' o'erwhelmer from the fated warrior's side?"

Then she laughed in her turn, and loudly; but so sweetly that the sound of her voice mingled with the first song of a newly awakened wood-thrush sitting on a rowan twig on the edge of the Wood-lawn.  But she said:

   "Yea, I that am God's Daughter may tell thee never a whit
    From what land cometh the hauberk nor what smith smithied it,
    That thou shalt wear in the handplay from the first stroke to the last;
    But this thereof I tell thee, that it holdeth firm and fast
    The life of the body it lappeth, if the gift of the Godfolk it be.
    Lo this is the yoke-mate of doom, and the gift of me unto thee."

Then she leaned down from the stone whereon they sat, and her hand was in the dewy grass for a little, and then it lifted up a dark grey rippling coat of rings; and she straightened herself in the seat again, and laid that hauberk on the knees of Thiodolf, and he put his hand to it, and turned it about, while he pondered long: then at last he said:

   "What evil thing abideth with this warder of the strife,
    This burg and treasure chamber for the hoarding of my life?
    For this is the work of the dwarfs, and no kindly kin of the earth;
    And all we fear the dwarf-kin and their anger and sorrow and mirth."

She cast her arms about him and fondled him, and her voice grew sweeter than the voice of any mortal thing as she answered:

   "No ill for thee, beloved, or for me in the hauberk lies;
    No sundering grief is in it, no lonely miseries.
    But we shall abide together, and that new life I gave,
    For a long while yet henceforward we twain its joy shall have.
    Yea, if thou dost my bidding to wear my gift in the fight
    No hunter of the wild-wood at the changing of the night
    Shall see my shape on thy grave-mound or my tears in the morning find
    With the dew of the morning mingled; nor with the evening wind
    Shall my body pass the shepherd as he wandereth in the mead
    And fill him with forebodings on the eve of the Wolfings' need.
    Nor the horse-herd wake in the midnight and hear my fateful cry;
    Nor yet shall the Wolfing women hear words on the wind go by
    As they weave and spin the night down when the House is gone to the war,
    And weep for the swains they wedded and the children that they bore.
    Yea do my bidding, O Folk-wolf, lest a grief of the Gods should weigh
    On the ancient House of the Wolfings and my death o'ercloud its day."

And still she clung about him, while he spake no word of yea or nay: but at the last he let himself glide wholly into her arms, and the dwarf-wrought hauberk fell from his knees and lay on the grass.

So they abode together in that wood-lawn till the twilight was long gone, and the sun arisen for some while.  And when Thiodolf stepped out of the beech-wood into the broad sunshine dappled with the shadow of the leaves of the hazels moving gently in the fresh morning air, he was covered from the neck to the knee by a hauberk of rings dark and grey and gleaming, fashioned by the dwarfs of ancient days.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f04]

CHAPTER IV--THE HOUSE FARETH TO THE WAR

Now when Thiodolf came back to the habitations of the kindred the whole House was astir, both thrall-men and women, and free women hurrying from cot to stithy, and from stithy to hall bearing the last of the war-gear or raiment for the fighting-men.  But they for their part were some standing about anigh the Man's-door, some sitting gravely within the hall, some watching the hurry of the thralls and women from the midmost of the open space amidst of the habitations, whereon there stood yet certain wains which were belated: for the most of the wains were now standing with the oxen already yoked to them down in the meadow past the acres, encircled by a confused throng of kine and horses and thrall-folk, for thither had all the beasts for the slaughter, and the horses for the warriors been brought; and there were the horses tethered or held by the thralls; some indeed were already saddled and bridled, and on others were the thralls doing the harness.

But as for the wains of the Markmen, they were stoutly framed of ash-tree with panels of aspen, and they were broad-wheeled so that they might go over rough and smooth.  They had high tilts over them well framed of willow-poles covered over with squares of black felt over-lapping like shingles; which felt they made of the rough of their fleeces, for they had many sheep.  And these wains were to them for houses upon the way if need were, and therein as now were stored their meal and their war-store and after fight they would flit their wounded men in them, such as were too sorely hurt to back a horse: nor must it be hidden that whiles they looked to bring back with them the treasure of the south.  Moreover the folk if they were worsted in any battle, instead of fleeing without more done, would often draw back fighting into a garth made by these wains, and guarded by some of their thralls; and there would abide the onset of those who had thrust them back in the field.  And this garth they called the Wain-burg.

So now stood three of these wains aforesaid belated amidst of the habitations of the House, their yoke-beasts standing or lying down unharnessed as yet to them: but in the very midst of that place was a wain unlike to them; smaller than they but higher; square of shape as to the floor of it; built lighter than they, yet far stronger; as the warrior is stronger than the big carle and trencher-licker that loiters about the hall; and from the midst of this wain arose a mast made of a tall straight fir-tree, and thereon hung the banner of the Wolfings, wherein was wrought the image of the Wolf, but red of hue as a token of war, and with his mouth open and gaping upon the foemen.  Also whereas the other wains were drawn by mere oxen, and those of divers colours, as chance would have it, the wain of the banner was drawn by ten black bulls of the mightiest of the herd, deep-dewlapped, high-crested and curly-browed; and their harness was decked with gold, and so was the wain itself, and the woodwork of it painted red with vermilion.  There then stood the Banner of the House of the Wolfings awaiting the departure of the warriors to the hosting.

So Thiodolf stood on the top of the bent beside that same mound wherefrom he had blown the War-horn yester-eve, and which was called the Hill of Speech, and he shaded his eyes with his hand and looked around him; and even therewith the carles fell to yoking the beasts to the belated wains, and the warriors gathered together from out of the mixed throngs, and came from the Roof and the Man's-door and all set their faces toward the Hill of Speech.

So Thiodolf knew that all was ready for departure, and it wanted but an hour of high-noon; so he turned about and went into the Hall, and there found his shield and his spear hanging in his sleeping place beside the hauberk he was wont to wear; then he looked, as one striving with thought, at his empty hauberk and his own body covered with the dwarf- wrought rings; nor did his face change as he took his shield and his spear and turned away.  Then he went to the dais and there sat his foster- daughter (as men deemed her) sitting amidst of it as yester-eve, and now arrayed in a garment of fine white wool, on the breast whereof were wrought in gold two beasts ramping up against a fire-altar whereon a flame flickered; and on the skirts and the hems were other devices, of wolves chasing deer, and men shooting with the bow; and that garment was an ancient treasure; but she had a broad girdle of gold and gems about her middle, and on her arms and neck she wore great gold rings wrought delicately.  By then there were few save the Hall-Sun under the Roof, and they but the oldest of the women, or a few very old men, and some who were ailing and might not go abroad.  But before her on the thwart table lay the Great War-horn awaiting the coming of Thiodolf to give signal of departure.

Then went Thiodolf to the Hall-Sun and kissed and embraced her fondly, and she gave the horn into his hands, and he went forth and up on to the Hill of Speech, and blew thence a short blast on the horn, and then came all the Warriors flocking to the Hill of Speech, each man stark in his harness, alert and joyous.

Then presently through the Man's-door came the Hall-Sun in that ancient garment, which fell straight and stiff down to her ancles as she stepped lightly and slowly along, her head crowned with a garland of eglantine. In her right hand also she held a great torch of wax lighted, whose flame amidst the bright sunlight looked like a wavering leaf of vermilion.

The warriors saw her, and made a lane for her, and she made her way through it up to the Hill of Speech, and she went up to the top of it and stood there holding the lighted candle in her hand, so that all might see it.  Then suddenly was there as great a silence as there may be on a forenoon of summer; for even the thralls down in the meadow had noted what was toward, and ceased their talking and shouting, for as far off as they were, since they could see that the Hall-Sun stood on the Hill of Speech, for the wood was dark behind her; so they knew the Farewell Flame was lighted, and that the maiden would speak; and to all men her speech was a boding of good or of ill.

So she began in a sweet voice yet clear and far-reaching:

   "O Warriors of the Wolfings by the token of the flame
    That here in my right hand flickers, come aback to the House of the Name!
    For there yet burneth the Hall-Sun beneath the Wolfing roof,
    And this flame is litten from it, nor as now shall it fare aloof
    Till again it seeth the mighty and the men to be gleaned from the fight.
    So wend ye as weird willeth and let your hearts be light;
    For through your days of battle all the deeds of our days shall be fair.
    To-morrow beginneth the haysel, as if every carle were here;
    And who knoweth ere your returning but the hook shall smite the corn?
    But the kine shall go down to the meadow as their wont is every morn,
    And each eve shall come back to the byre; and the mares and foals afield
    Shall ever be heeded duly; and all things shall their increase yield.
    And if it shall befal us that hither cometh a foe
    Here have we swains of the shepherds good players with the bow,
    And old men battle-crafty whose might is nowise spent,
    And women fell and fearless well wont to tread the bent
    Amid the sheep and the oxen; and their hands are hard with the spear
    And their arms are strong and stalwart the battle shield to bear;
    And store of weapons have we and the mighty walls of the stead;
    And the Roof shall abide you steadfast with the Hall-Sun overhead.
    Lo here I quench this candle that is lit from the Hall-Sun's flame
    Which unto the Wild-wood clearing with the kin of the Wolfings came
    And shall wend with their departure to the limits of the earth;
    Nor again shall the torch be lighted till in sorrow or in mirth,
    Overthrown or overthrowing, ye come aback once more,
    And bid me bear the candle before the Wolf of War."

As she spake the word she turned the candle downward, and thrust it against the grass and quenched it indeed; but the whole throng of warriors turned about, for the bulls of the banner-wain lowered their heads in the yokes and began to draw, lowing mightily; and the wain creaked and moved on, and all the men-at-arms followed after, and down they went through the lanes of the corn, and a many women and children and old men went down into the mead with them.

In their hearts they all wondered what the Hall-Sun's words might signify; for she had told them nought about the battles to be, saving that some should come back to the Mid-mark; whereas aforetime somewhat would she foretell to them concerning the fortune of the fight, and now had she said to them nothing but what their own hearts told them. Nevertheless they bore their crests high as they followed the Wolf down into the meadow, where all was now ready for departure.  There they arrayed themselves and went down to the lip of Mirkwood-water; and such was their array that the banner went first, save that a band of fully armed men went before it; and behind it and about were the others as well arrayed as they.  Then went the wains that bore their munition, with armed carles of the thrall-folk about them, who were ever the guard of the wains, and should never leave them night or day; and lastly went the great band of the warriors and the rest of the thralls with them.

As to their war-gear, all the freemen had helms of some kind, but not all of iron or steel; for some bore helms fashioned of horse-hide and bull- hide covered over with the similitude of a Wolf's muzzle; nor were these ill-defence against a sword-stroke.  Shields they all had, and all these had the image of the Wolf marked on them, but for many their thralls bore them on the journey.  As to their body-armour some carried long byrnies of ring-mail, some coats of leather covered with splinters of horn laid like the shingles of a roof, and some skin-coats only: whereof indeed there were some of which tales went that they were better than the smith's hammer-work, because they had had spells sung over them to keep out steel or iron.

But for their weapons, they bore spears with shafts not very long, some eight feet of our measure; and axes heavy and long-shafted; and bills with great and broad heads; and some few, but not many of the kindred were bowmen, and every freeman was girt with a sword; but of the swords some were long and two-edged, some short and heavy, cutting on one edge, and these were of the kind which they and our forefathers long after called 'sax.'  Thus were the freemen arrayed.

But for the thralls, there were many bows among them, especially among those who were of blood alien from the Goths; the others bore short spears, and feathered broad arrows, and clubs bound with iron, and knives and axes, but not every man of them had a sword.  Few iron helms they had and no ringed byrnies, but most had a buckler at their backs with no sign or symbol on it.

Thus then set forth the fighting men of the House of the Wolf toward the Thing-stead of the Upper-mark where the hosting was to be, and by then they were moving up along the side of Mirkwood-water it was somewhat past high-noon.

But the stay-at-home people who had come down with them to the meadow lingered long in that place; and much foreboding there was among them of evil to come; and of the old folk, some remembered tales of the past days of the Markmen, and how they had come from the ends of the earth, and the mountains where none dwell now but the Gods of their kindreds; and many of these tales told of their woes and their wars as they went from river to river and from wild-wood to wild-wood before they had established their Houses in the Mark, and fallen to dwelling there season by season and year by year whether the days were good or ill.  And it fell into their hearts that now at last mayhappen was their abiding wearing out to an end, and that the day should soon be when they should have to bear the Hall-Sun through the wild-wood, and seek a new dwelling-place afar from the troubling of these newly arisen Welsh foemen.

And so those of them who could not rid themselves of this foreboding were somewhat heavier of heart than their wont was when the House went to the War.  For long had they abided there in the Mark, and the life was sweet to them which they knew, and the life which they knew not was bitter to them: and Mirkwood-water was become as a God to them no less than to their fathers of old time; nor lesser was the mead where fed the horses that they loved and the kine that they had reared, and the sheep that they guarded from the Wolf of the Wild-wood: and they worshipped the kind acres which they themselves and their fathers had made fruitful, wedding them to the seasons of seed-time and harvest, that the birth that came from them might become a part of the kindred of the Wolf, and the joy and might of past springs and summers might run in the blood of the Wolfing children.  And a dear God indeed to them was the Roof of the Kindred, that their fathers had built and that they yet warded against the fire and the lightening and the wind and the snow, and the passing of the days that devour and the years that heap the dust over the work of men.  They thought of how it had stood, and seen so many generations of men come and go; how often it had welcomed the new-born babe, and given farewell to the old man: how many secrets of the past it knew; how many tales which men of the present had forgotten, but which yet mayhap men of times to come should learn of it; for to them yet living it had spoken time and again, and had told them what their fathers had not told them, and it held the memories of the generations and the very life of the Wolfings and their hopes for the days to be.

Thus these poor people thought of the Gods whom they worshipped, and the friends whom they loved, and could not choose but be heavy-hearted when they thought that the wild-wood was awaiting them to swallow all up, and take away from them their Gods and their friends and the mirth of their life, and burden them with hunger and thirst and weariness, that their children might begin once more to build the House and establish the dwelling, and call new places by old names, and worship new Gods with the ancient worship.

Such imaginations of trouble then were in the hearts of the stay-at-homes of the Wolfings; the tale tells not indeed that all had such forebodings, but chiefly the old folk who were nursing the end of their life-days amidst the cherishing Kindred of the House.

But now they were beginning to turn them back again to the habitations, and a thin stream was flowing through the acres, when they heard a confused sound drawing near blended of horns and the lowing of beasts and the shouting of men; and they looked and saw a throng of brightly clad men coming up stream alongside of Mirkwood-water; and they were not afraid, for they knew that it must be some other company of the Markmen journeying to the hosting of the Folk: and presently they saw that it was the House of the Beamings following their banner on the way to the Thing- stead.  But when the new-comers saw the throng out in the meads, some of their young men pricked on their horses and galloped on past the women and old men, to whom they threw a greeting, as they ran past to catch up with the bands of the Wolfings; for between the two houses was there affinity, and much good liking lay between them; and the stay-at-homes, many of them, lingered yet till the main body of the Beamings came with their banner: and their array was much like to that of the Wolfings, but gayer; for whereas it pleased the latter to darken all their war-gear to the colour of the grey Wolf, the Beamings polished all their gear as bright as might be, and their raiment also was mostly bright green of hue and much beflowered; and the sign on their banner was a green leafy tree, and the wain was drawn by great white bulls.

So when their company drew anear to the throng of the stay-at-homes they went to meet and greet each other, and tell tidings to each other; but their banner held steadily onward amidst their converse, and in a little while they followed it, for the way was long to the Thing-stead of the Upper-mark.

So passed away the fighting men by the side of Mirkwood-water, and the throng of the stay-at-homes melted slowly from the meadow and trickled along through the acres to the habitations of the Wolfings, and there they fell to doing whatso of work or play came to their hands.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f05]

CHAPTER V--CONCERNING THE HALL-SUN

When the warriors and the others had gone down to the mead, the Hall-Sun was left standing on the Hill of Speech, and she stood there till she saw the host in due array going on its ways dark and bright and beautiful; then she made as if to turn aback to the Great Roof; but all at once it seemed to her as if something held her back, as if her will to move had departed from her, and that she could not put one foot before the other. So she lingered on the Hill, and the quenched candle fell from her hand, and presently she sank adown on the grass and sat there with the face of one thinking intently.  Yet was it with her that a thousand thoughts were in her mind at once and no one of them uppermost, and images of what had been and what then was flickered about in her brain, and betwixt them were engendered images of things to be, but unstable and not to be trowed in.  So sat the Hall-Sun on the Hill of Speech lost in a dream of the day, whose stories were as little clear as those of a night-dream.

But as she sat musing thus, came to her a woman exceeding old to look on, whom she knew not as one of the kindred or a thrall; and this carline greeted her by the name of Hall-Sun and said:

   "Hail, Hall-Sun of the Markmen! how fares it now with thee
    When the whelps of the Woodbeast wander with the Leafage of the Tree
    All up the Mirkwood-water to seek what they shall find,
    The oak-boles of the battle and the war-wood stark and blind?"

Then answered the maiden:

   "It fares with me, O mother, that my soul would fain go forth
    To behold the ways of the battle, and the praise of the warriors' worth.
    But yet is it held entangled in a maze of many a thing,
    As the low-grown bramble holdeth the brake-shoots of the Spring.
    I think of the thing that hath been, but no shape is in my thought;
    I think of the day that passeth, and its story comes to nought.
    I think of the days that shall be, nor shape I any tale.
    I will hearken thee, O mother, if hearkening may avail."

The Carline gazed at her with dark eyes that shone brightly from amidst her brown wrinkled face: then she sat herself down beside her and spake:

   "From a far folk have I wandered and I come of an alien blood,
    But I know all tales of the Wolfings and their evil and their good;
    And when I heard of thy fairness, thereof I heard it said,
    That for thee should be never a bridal nor a place in the warrior's bed."

The maiden neither reddened nor paled, but looking with calm steady eyes into the Carline's face she answered:

   "Yea true it is, I am wedded to the mighty ones of old,
    And the fathers of the Wolfings ere the days of field and fold."

 

Then a smile came into the eyes of the old woman and she said.

   "How glad shall be thy mother of thy worship and thy worth,
    And the father that begat thee if yet they dwell on earth!"

 

But the Hall-Sun answered in the same steady manner as before:

   "None knoweth who is my mother, nor my very father's name;
    But when to the House of the Wolfings a wild-wood waif I came,
    They gave me a foster-mother an ancient dame and good,
    And a glorious foster-father the best of all the blood."

Spake the Carline.

   "Yea, I have heard the story, but scarce therein might I trow
    That thou with all thy beauty wert born 'neath the oaken bough,
    And hast crawled a naked baby o'er the rain-drenched autumn-grass;
    Wilt thou tell the wandering woman what wise it cometh to pass
    That thou art the Mid-mark's Hall-Sun, and the sign of the Wolfings' gain?
    Thou shalt pleasure me much by the telling, and there of shalt thou be fain."

Then answered the Hall-Sun.

   "Yea; thus much I remember for the first of my memories;
    That I lay on the grass in the morning and above were the boughs of the trees.
    But nought naked was I as the wood-whelp, but clad in linen white,
    And adown the glades of the oakwood the morning sun lay bright.
    Then a hind came out of the thicket and stood on the sunlit glade,
    And turned her head toward the oak tree and a step on toward me made.
    Then stopped, and bounded aback, and away as if in fear,
    That I saw her no more; then I wondered, though sitting close anear
    Was a she-wolf great and grisly.  But with her was I wont to play,
    And pull her ears, and belabour her rugged sides and grey,
    And hold her jaws together, while she whimpered, slobbering
    For the love of my love; and nowise I deemed her a fearsome thing.
    There she sat as though she were watching, and o'er head a blue-winged jay
    Shrieked out from the topmost oak-twigs, and a squirrel ran his way
    Two tree-trunks off.  But the she-wolf arose up suddenly
    And growled with her neck-fell bristling, as if danger drew anigh;
    And therewith I heard a footstep, for nice was my ear to catch
    All the noises of the wild-wood; so there did we sit at watch
    While the sound of feet grew nigher: then I clapped hand on hand
    And crowed for joy and gladness, for there out in the sun did stand
    A man, a glorious creature with a gleaming helm on his head,
    And gold rings on his arms, in raiment gold-broidered crimson-red.
    Straightway he strode up toward us nor heeded the wolf of the wood
    But sang as he went in the oak-glade, as a man whose thought is good,
    And nought she heeded the warrior, but tame as a sheep was grown,
    And trotted away through the wild-wood with her crest all laid adown.
    Then came the man and sat down by the oak-bole close unto me
    And took me up nought fearful and set me on his knee.
    And his face was kind and lovely, so my cheek to his cheek I laid
    And touched his cold bright war-helm and with his gold rings played,
    And hearkened his words, though I knew not what tale they had to tell,
    Yet fain was my heart of their music, and meseemed I loved him well.
    So we fared for a while and were fain, till he set down my feet on the grass,
    And kissed me and stood up himself, and away through the wood did he pass.
    And then came back the she-wolf and with her I played and was fain.
    Lo the first thing I remember: wilt thou have me babble again?"

Spake the Carline and her face was soft and kind:

   "Nay damsel, long would I hearken to thy voice this summer day.
    But how didst thou leave the wild-wood, what people brought thee away?"

Then said the Hall-Sun:

   "I awoke on a time in the even, and voices I heard as I woke;
    And there was I in the wild-wood by the bole of the ancient oak,
    And a ring of men was around me, and glad was I indeed
    As I looked upon their faces and the fashion of their weed.
    For I gazed on the red and the scarlet and the beaten silver and gold,
    And blithe were their noble faces and kindly to behold,
    And nought had I seen of such-like since that hour of the other day
    When that warrior came to the oak glade with the little child to play.
    And forth now he came, with the face that my hands had fondled before,
    And a battle shield wrought fairly upon his arm he bore,
    And thereon the wood-wolf's image in ruddy gold was done.
    Then I stretched out my little arms towards the glorious shining one
    And he took me up and set me on his shoulder for a while
    And turned about to his fellows with a blithe and joyous smile;
    And they shouted aloud about me and drew forth gleaming swords
    And clashed them on their bucklers; but nought I knew of the words
    Of their shouting and rejoicing.  So thereafter was I laid
    And borne forth on the warrior's warshield, and our way through the wood we made
    'Midst the mirth and great contentment of those fair-clad shielded men.

   "But no tale of the wolf and the wild-wood abides with me since then,
    And the next thing I remember is a huge and dusky hall,
    A world for my little body from ancient wall to wall;
    A world of many doings, and nought for me to do,
    A world of many noises, and known to me were few.

   "Time wore, and I spoke with the Wolfings and knew the speech of the kin,
    And was strange 'neath the roof no longer, as a lonely waif therein;
    And I wrought as a child with my playmates and every hour looked on
    Unto the next hour's joyance till the happy day was done.
    And going and coming amidst us was a woman tall and thin
    With hair like the hoary barley and silver streaks therein.
    And kind and sad of visage, as now I remember me,
    And she sat and told us stories when we were aweary with glee,
    And many of us she fondled, but me the most of all.
    And once from my sleep she waked me and bore me down the hall,
    In the hush of the very midnight, and I was feared thereat.
    But she brought me unto the dais, and there the warrior sat,
    Who took me up and kissed me, as erst within the wood;
    And meseems in his arms I slumbered: but I wakened again and stood
    Alone with the kindly woman, and gone was the goodly man,
    And athwart the hush of the Folk-hall the moon shone bright and wan,
    And the woman dealt with a lamp hung up by a chain aloft,
    And she trimmed it and fed it with oil, while she chanted sweet and soft
    A song whose words I knew not: then she ran it up again,
    And up in the darkness above us died the length of its wavering chain."

"Yea," said the carline, "this woman will have been the Hall-Sun that came before thee.  What next dost thou remember?"

Said the maiden:

   "Next I mind me of the hazels behind the People's Roof,
    And the children running thither and the magpie flitting aloof,
    And my hand in the hand of the Hall-Sun, as after the others we went,
    And she soberly hearkening my prattle and the words of my intent.
    And now would I call her 'Mother,' and indeed I loved her well.

   "So I waxed; and now of my memories the tale were long to tell;
    But as the days passed over, and I fared to field and wood,
    Alone or with my playmates, still the days were fair and good.
    But the sad and kindly Hall-Sun for my fosterer now I knew,
    And the great and glorious warrior that my heart clung sorely to
    Was but my foster-father; and I knew that I had no kin
    In the ancient House of the Wolfings, though love was warm therein."

 

Then smiled the carline and said: "Yea, he is thy foster-father, and yet a fond one."

"Sooth is that," said the Hall-Sun.  "But wise art thou by seeming.  Hast thou come to tell me of what kindred I am, and who is my father and who is my mother?"

Said the carline: "Art thou not also wise?  Is it not so that the Hall- Sun of the Wolfings seeth things that are to come?"

"Yea," she said, "yet have I seen waking or sleeping no other father save my foster-father; yet my very mother I have seen, as one who should meet her in the flesh one day."

"And good is that," said the carline; and as she spoke her face waxed kinder, and she said:

"Tell us more of thy days in the House of the Wolfings and how thou faredst there."

Said the Hall-Sun:

   "I waxed 'neath the Roof of the Wolfings, till now to look upon
    I was of sixteen winters, and the love of the Folk I won,
    And in lovely weed they clad me like the image of a God:
    And lonely now full often the wild-wood ways I trod,
    And I feared no wild-wood creature, and my presence scared them nought;
    And I fell to know of wisdom, and within me stirred my thought,
    So that oft anights would I wander through the mead and far away,
    And swim the Mirkwood-water, and amidst his eddies play
    When earth was dark in the dawn-tide; and over all the folk
    I knew of the beasts' desires, as though in words they spoke.

   "So I saw of things that should be, were they mighty things or small,
    And upon a day as it happened came the war-word to the hall,
    And the House must wend to the warfield, and as they sang, and played
    With the strings of the harp that even, and the mirth of the war-eve made,
    Came the sight of the field to my eyes, and the words waxed hot in me,
    And I needs must show the picture of the end of the fight to be.
    Then I showed them the Red Wolf bristling o'er the broken fleeing foe;
    And the war-gear of the fleers, and their banner did I show,
    To wit the Ling-worm's image with the maiden in his mouth;
    There I saw my foster-father 'mid the pale blades of the South,
    Till aloof swept all the handplay and the hurry of the chase,
    And he lay along by an ash-tree, no helm about his face,
    No byrny on his body; and an arrow in his thigh,
    And a broken spear in his shoulder.  Then I saw myself draw nigh
    To sing the song blood-staying.  Then saw I how we twain
    Went 'midst of the host triumphant in the Wolfings' banner-wain,
    The black bulls lowing before us athwart the warriors' song,
    As up from Mirkwood-water we went our ways along
    To the Great Roof of the Wolfings, whence streamed the women out
    And the sound of their rejoicing blent with the warriors' shout.

   "They heard me and saw the picture, and they wotted how wise I was grown,
    And they loved me, and glad were their hearts at the tale my lips had shown;
    And my body clad as an image of a God to the field they bore,
    And I held by the mast of the banner as I looked upon their war,
    And endured to see unblenching on the wind-swept sunny plain
    All the picture of my vision by the men-folk done again.
    And over my Foster-father I sang the staunching-song,
    Till the life-blood that was ebbing flowed back to his heart the strong,
    And we wended back in the war-wain 'midst the gleanings of the fight
    Unto the ancient dwelling and the Hall-Sun's glimmering light.

   "So from that day henceforward folk hung upon my words,
    For the battle of the autumn, and the harvest of the swords;
    And e'en more was I loved than aforetime.  So wore a year away,
    And heavy was the burden of the lore that on me lay.

   "But my fosterer the Hall-Sun took sick at the birth of the year,
    And changed her life as the year changed, as summer drew anear.
    But she knew that her life was waning, and lying in her bed
    She taught me the lore of the Hall-Sun, and every word to be said
    At the trimming in the midnight and the feeding in the morn,
    And she laid her hands upon me ere unto the howe she was borne
    With the kindred gathered about us; and they wotted her weird and her will,
    And hailed me for the Hall-Sun when at last she lay there still.
    And they did on me the garment, the holy cloth of old,
    And the neck-chain wrought for the goddess, and the rings of the hallowed gold.
    So here am I abiding, and of things to be I tell,
    Yet know not what shall befall me nor why with the Wolfings I dwell."

Then said the carline:

   "What seest thou, O daughter, of the journey of to-day?
    And why wendest thou not with the war-host on the battle-echoing way?"

Said the Hall-Sun.

   "O mother, here dwelleth the Hall-Sun while the kin hath a dwelling-place,
    Nor ever again shall I look on the onset or the chase,
    Till the day when the Roof of the Wolfings looketh down on the girdle of foes,
    And the arrow singeth over the grass of the kindred's close;
    Till the pillars shake with the shouting and quivers the roof-tree dear,
    When the Hall of the Wolfings garners the harvest of the spear."

Therewith she stood on her feet and turned her face to the Great Roof, and gazed long at it, not heeding the crone by her side; and she muttered words of whose signification the other knew not, though she listened intently, and gazed ever at her as closely as might be.

Then fell the Hall-Sun utterly silent, and the lids closed over her eyes, and her hands were clenched, and her feet pressed hard on the daisies: her bosom heaved with sore sighs, and great tear-drops oozed from under her eyelids and fell on to her raiment and her feet and on to the flowery summer grass; and at the last her mouth opened and she spake, but in a voice that was marvellously changed from that she spake in before:

   "Why went ye forth, O Wolfings, from the garth your fathers built,
    And the House where sorrow dieth, and all unloosed is guilt?
    Turn back, turn back, and behold it! lest your feet be over slow
    When your shields are heavy-burdened with the arrows of the foe;
    How ye totter, how ye stumble on the rough and corpse-strewn way!
    And lo, how the eve is eating the afternoon of day!
    O why are ye abiding till the sun is sunk in night
    And the forest trees are ruddy with the battle-kindled light?
    O rest not yet, ye Wolfings, lest void be your resting-place,
    And into lands that ye know not the Wolf must turn his face,
    And ye wander and ye wander till the land in the ocean cease,
    And your battle bring no safety and your labour no increase."

Then was she silent for a while, and her tears ceased to flow; but presently her eyes opened once more, and she lifted up her voice and cried aloud--

   "I see, I see!  O Godfolk behold it from aloof,
    How the little flames steal flickering along the ridge of the Roof!
    They are small and red 'gainst the heavens in the summer afternoon;
    But when the day is dusking, white, high shall they wave to the moon.
    Lo, the fire plays now on the windows like strips of scarlet cloth
    Wind-waved! but look in the night-tide on the onset of its wrath,
    How it wraps round the ancient timbers and hides the mighty roof
    But lighteth little crannies, so lost and far aloof,
    That no man yet of the kindred hath seen them ere to-night,
    Since first the builder builded in loving and delight!"

Then again she stayed her speech with weeping and sobbing, but after a while was still again, and then she spoke pointing toward the roof with her right hand.

   "I see the fire-raisers and iron-helmed they are,
    Brown-faced about the banners that their hands have borne afar.
    And who in the garth of the kindred shall bear adown their shield
    Since the onrush of the Wolfings they caught in the open field,
    As the might of the mountain lion falls dead in the hempen net?
    O Wolfings, long have ye tarried, but the hour abideth yet.
    What life for the life of the people shall be given once for all,
    What sorrow shall stay sorrow in the half-burnt Wolfing Hall?
    There is nought shall quench the fire save the tears of the Godfolk's kin,
    And the heart of the life-delighter, and the life-blood cast therein."

Then once again she fell silent, and her eyes closed again, and the slow tears gushed out from them, and she sank down sobbing on the grass, and little by little the storm of grief sank and her head fell back, and she was as one quietly asleep.  Then the carline hung over her and kissed her and embraced her; and then through her closed eyes and her slumber did the Hall-Sun see a marvel; for she who was kissing her was young in semblance and unwrinkled, and lovely to look on, with plenteous long hair of the hue of ripe barley, and clad in glistening raiment such as has been woven in no loom on earth.

And indeed it was the Wood-Sun in the semblance of a crone, who had come to gather wisdom of the coming time from the foreseeing of the Hall-Sun; since now at last she herself foresaw nothing of it, though she was of the kindred of the Gods and the Fathers of the Goths.  So when she had heard the Hall-Sun she deemed that she knew but too well what her words meant, and what for love, what for sorrow, she grew sick at heart as she heard them.

So at last she arose and turned to look at the Great Roof; and strong and straight, and cool and dark grey showed its ridge against the pale sky of the summer afternoon all quivering with the heat of many hours' sun: dark showed its windows as she gazed on it, and stark and stiff she knew were its pillars within.

Then she said aloud, but to herself: "What then if a merry and mighty life be given for it, and the sorrow of the people be redeemed; yet will not I give the life which is his; nay rather let him give the bliss which is mine.  But oh! how may it be that he shall die joyous and I shall live unhappy!"

Then she went slowly down from the Hill of Speech, and whoso saw her deemed her but a gangrel carline.  So she went her ways and let the wood cover her.

But in a little while the Hall-Sun awoke alone, and sat up with a sigh, and she remembered nothing concerning her sight of the flickering flame along the hall-roof, and the fire-tongues like strips of scarlet cloth blown by the wind, nor had she any memory of her words concerning the coming day.  But the rest of her talk with the carline she remembered, and also the vision of the beautiful woman who had kissed and embraced her; and she knew that it was her very mother.  Also she perceived that she had been weeping, therefore she knew that she had uttered words of wisdom.  For so it fared with her at whiles, that she knew not her own words of foretelling, but spoke them out as if in a dream.

So now she went down from the Hill of Speech soberly, and turned toward the Woman's door of the hall, and on her way she met the women and old men and youths coming back from the meadow with little mirth: and there were many of them who looked shyly at her as though they would gladly have asked her somewhat, and yet durst not.  But for her, her sadness passed away when she came among them, and she looked kindly on this and that one of them, and entered with them into the Woman's Chamber, and did what came to her hand to do.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f06]

CHAPTER VI--THEY TALK ON THE WAY TO THE FOLK-THING

 All day long one standing on the Speech-hill of the Wolfings might have seen men in their war-array streaming along the side of Mirkwood-water, on both sides thereof; and the last comers from the Nether-mark came hastening all they might; for they would not be late at the trysting-place.  But these were of a kindred called the Laxings, who bore a salmon on their banner; and they were somewhat few in number, for they had but of late years become a House of the Markmen.  Their banner-wain was drawn by white horses, fleet and strong, and they were no great band, for they had but few thralls with them, and all, free men and thralls, were a-horseback; so they rode by hastily with their banner-wain, their few munition-wains following as they might.

Now tells the tale of the men-at-arms of the Wolfings and the Beamings, that soon they fell in with the Elking host, which was journeying but leisurely, so that the Wolfings might catch up with them: they were a very great kindred, the most numerous of all Mid-mark, and at this time they had affinity with the Wolfings.  But old men of the House remembered how they had heard their grandsires and very old men tell that there had been a time when the Elking House had been established by men from out of the Wolfing kindred, and how they had wandered away from the Mark in the days when it had been first settled, and had abided aloof for many generations of men; and so at last had come back again to the Mark, and had taken up their habitation at a place in Mid-mark where was dwelling but a remnant of a House called the Thyrings, who had once been exceeding mighty, but had by that time almost utterly perished in a great sickness which befel in those days.  So then these two Houses, the wanderers come back and the remnant left by the sickness of the Gods, made one House together, and increased and throve after their coming together, and wedded with the Wolfings, and became a very great House.

Gallant and glorious was their array now, as they marched along with their banner of the Elk, which was drawn by the very beasts themselves tamed to draught to that end through many generations; they were fatter and sleeker than their wild-wood brethren, but not so mighty.

So were the men of the three kindreds somewhat mingled together on the way.  The Wolfings were the tallest and the biggest made; but of those dark-haired men aforesaid, were there fewest amongst the Beamings, and most among the Elkings, as though they had drawn to them more men of alien blood during their wanderings aforesaid.  So they talked together and made each other good cheer, as is the wont of companions in arms on the eve of battle; and the talk ran, as may be deemed, on that journey and what was likely to come of it: and spake an Elking warrior to a Wolfing by whom he rode:

"O Wolfkettle, hath the Hall-Sun had any foresight of the day of battle?"

"Nay," said the other, "when she lighted the farewell candle, she bade us come back again, and spoke of the day of our return; but that methinks, as thou and I would talk of it, thinking what would be likely to befal. Since we are a great host of valiant men, and these Welshmen [*2] most valiant, and as the rumour runneth bigger-bodied men than the Hun-folk, and so well ordered as never folk have been.  So then if we overthrow them we shall come back again; and if they overthrow us, the remnant of us shall fall back before them till we come to our habitations; for it is not to be looked for that they will fall in upon our rear and prevent us, since we have the thicket of the wild-wood on our flanks."

"Sooth is that," said the Elking; "and as to the mightiness of this folk and their customs, ye may gather somewhat from the songs which our House yet singeth, and which ye have heard wide about in the Mark; for this is the same folk of which a many of them tell, making up that story-lay which is called the South-Welsh Lay; which telleth how we have met this folk in times past when we were in fellowship with a folk of the Welsh of like customs to ourselves: for we of the Elkings were then but a feeble folk.  So we marched with this folk of the Kymry and met the men of the cities, and whiles we overthrew and whiles were overthrown, but at last in a great battle were overthrown with so great a slaughter, that the red blood rose over the wheels of the wains, and the city-folk fainted with the work of the slaughter, as men who mow a match in the meadows when the swathes are dry and heavy and the afternoon of midsummer is hot; and there they stood and stared on the field of the slain, and knew not whether they were in Home or Hell, so fierce the fight had been."

Therewith a man of the Beamings, who was riding on the other side of the Elking, reached out over his horse's neck and said:

"Yea friend, but is there not some telling of a tale concerning how ye and your fellowship took the great city of the Welshmen of the South, and dwelt there long."

"Yea," said the Elking, "Hearken how it is told in the South-Welsh Lay:

      "'Have ye not heard
       Of the ways of Weird?
       How the folk fared forth
       Far away from the North?
       And as light as one wendeth
       Whereas the wood endeth,
       When of nought is our need,
       And none telleth our deed,
    So Rodgeir unwearied and Reidfari wan
    The town where none tarried the shield-shaking man.
    All lonely the street there, and void was the way
    And nought hindered our feet but the dead men that lay
    Under shield in the lanes of the houses heavens-high,
    All the ring-bearing swains that abode there to die.'

"Tells the Lay, that none abode the Goths and their fellowship, but such as were mighty enough to fall before them, and the rest, both man and woman, fled away before our folk and before the folk of the Kymry, and left their town for us to dwell in; as saith the Lay:

      "'Glistening of gold
       Did men's eyen behold;
       Shook the pale sword
       O'er the unspoken word,
       No man drew nigh us
       With weapon to try us,
       For the Welsh-wrought shield
       Lay low on the field.
    By man's hand unbuilded all seemed there to be,
    The walls ruddy gilded, the pearls of the sea:
    Yea all things were dead there save pillar and wall,
    But _they_ lived and _they_ said us the song of the hall;
    The dear hall left to perish by men of the land,
    For the Goth-folk to cherish with gold gaining hand.'

"See ye how the Lay tells that the hall was bolder than the men, who fled from it, and left all for our fellowship to deal with in the days gone by?"

Said the Wolfing man:

"And as it was once, so shall it be again.  Maybe we shall go far on this journey, and see at least one of the garths of the Southlands, even those which they call cities.  For I have heard it said that they have more cities than one only, and that so great are their kindreds, that each liveth in a garth full of mighty houses, with a wall of stone and lime around it; and that in every one of these garths lieth wealth untold heaped up.  And wherefore should not all this fall to the Markmen and their valiancy?"

Said the Elking:

"As to their many cities and the wealth of them, that is sooth; but as to each city being the habitation of each kindred, it is otherwise: for rather it may be said of them that they have forgotten kindred, and have none, nor do they heed whom they wed, and great is the confusion amongst them.  And mighty men among them ordain where they shall dwell, and what shall be their meat, and how long they shall labour after they are weary, and in all wise what manner of life shall be amongst them; and though they be called free men who suffer this, yet may no house or kindred gainsay this rule and order.  In sooth they are a people mighty, but unhappy."

Said Wolfkettle:

"And hast thou learned all this from the ancient story lays, O Hiarandi? For some of them I know, though not all, and therein have I noted nothing of all this.  Is there some new minstrel arisen in thine House of a memory excelling all those that have gone before?  If that be so, I bid him to the Roof of the Wolfings as soon as may be; for we lack new tales."

"Nay," said Hiarandi, "This that I tell thee is not a tale of past days, but a tale of to-day.  For there came to us a man from out of the wild- wood, and prayed us peace, and we gave it him; and he told us that he was of a House of the Gael, and that his House had been in a great battle against these Welshmen, whom he calleth the Romans; and that he was taken in the battle, and sold as a thrall in one of their garths; and howbeit, it was not their master-garth, yet there he learned of their customs: and sore was the lesson!  Hard was his life amongst them, for their thralls be not so well entreated as their draught-beasts, so many do they take in battle; for they are a mighty folk; and these thralls and those aforesaid unhappy freemen do all tilling and herding and all deeds of craftsmanship: and above these are men whom they call masters and lords who do nought, nay not so much as smithy their own edge-weapons, but linger out their days in their dwellings and out of their dwellings, lying about in the sun or the hall-cinders, like cur-dogs who have fallen away from kind.

"So this man made a shift to flee away from out of that garth, since it was not far from the great river; and being a valiant man, and young and mighty of body, he escaped all perils and came to us through the Mirkwood.  But we saw that he was no liar, and had been very evilly handled, for upon his body was the mark of many a stripe, and of the shackles that had been soldered on to his limbs; also it was more than one of these accursed people whom he had slain when he fled.  So he became our guest and we loved him, and he dwelt among us and yet dwelleth, for we have taken him into our House.  But yesterday he was sick and might not ride with us; but may be he will follow on and catch up with us in a day or two.  And if he come not, then will I bring him over to the Wolfings when the battle is done."

Then laughed the Beaming man, and spake:

"How then if ye come not back, nor Wolfkettle, nor the Welsh Guest, nor I myself?  Meseemeth no one of these Southland Cities shall we behold, and no more of the Southlanders than their war-array."

"These are evil words," said Wolfkettle, "though such an outcome must be thought on.  But why deemest thou this?"

Said the Beaming: "There is no Hall-Sun sitting under our Roof at home to tell true tales concerning the Kindred every day.  Yet forsooth from time to time is a word said in our Folk-hall for good or for evil; and who can choose but hearken thereto?  And yestereve was a woeful word spoken, and that by a man-child of ten winters."

Said the Elking: "Now that thou hast told us thus much, thou must tell us more, yea, all the word which was spoken; else belike we shall deem of it as worse than it was."

Said the Beaming: "Thus it was; this little lad brake out weeping yestereve, when the Hall was full and feasting; and he wailed, and roared out, as children do, and would not be pacified, and when he was asked why he made that to do, he said: 'Well away!  Raven hath promised to make me a clay horse and to bake it in the kiln with the pots next week; and now he goeth to the war, and he shall never come back, and never shall my horse be made.'  Thereat we all laughed as ye may well deem.  But the lad made a sour countenance on us and said, 'why do ye laugh? look yonder, what see ye?'  'Nay,' said one, 'nought but the Feast-hall wall and the hangings of the High-tide thereon.'  Then said the lad sobbing: 'Ye see ill: further afield see I: I see a little plain, on a hill top, and fells beyond it far bigger than our speech-hill: and there on the plain lieth Raven as white as parchment; and none hath such hue save the dead.'  Then said Raven, (and he was a young man, and was standing thereby).  'And well is that, swain, to die in harness!  Yet hold up thine heart; here is Gunbert who shall come back and bake thine horse for thee.'  'Nay never more,' quoth the child, 'For I see his pale head lying at Raven's feet; but his body with the green gold-broidered kirtle I see not.'  Then was the laughter stilled, and man after man drew near to the child, and questioned him, and asked, 'dost thou see me?' 'dost thou see me?'  And he failed to see but few of those that asked him.  Therefore now meseemeth that not many of us shall see the cities of the South, and those few belike shall look on their own shackles therewithal."

"Nay," said Hiarandi, "What is all this? heard ye ever of a company of fighting men that fared afield, and found the foe, and came back home leaving none behind them?"

Said the Beaming: "Yet seldom have I heard a child foretell the death of warriors.  I tell thee that hadst thou been there, thou wouldst have thought of it as if the world were coming to an end."

"Well," said Wolfkettle, "let it be as it may!  Yet at least I will not be led away from the field by the foemen.  Oft may a man be hindered of victory, but never of death if he willeth it."

Therewith he handled a knife that hung about his neck, and went on to say: "But indeed, I do much marvel that no word came into the mouth of the Hall-Sun yestereven or this morning, but such as any woman of the kindred might say."

Therewith fell their talk awhile, and as they rode they came to where the wood drew nigher to the river, and thus the Mid-mark had an end; for there was no House had a dwelling in the Mid-mark higher up the water than the Elkings, save one only, not right great, who mostly fared to war along with the Elkings: and this was the Oselings, whose banner bore the image of the Wood-ousel, the black bird with the yellow neb; and they had just fallen into the company of the greater House.

So now Mid-mark was over and past, and the serried trees of the wood came down like a wall but a little way from the lip of the water; and scattered trees, mostly quicken-trees grew here and there on the very water side.  But Mirkwood-water ran deep swift and narrow between high clean-cloven banks, so that none could dream of fording, and not so many of swimming its dark green dangerous waters.  And the day wore on towards evening and the glory of the western sky was unseen because of the wall of high trees.  And still the host made on, and because of the narrowness of the space between river and wood it was strung out longer and looked a very great company of men.  And moreover the men of the eastern-lying part of Mid-mark, were now marching thick and close on the other side of the river but a little way from the Wolfings and their fellows; for nothing but the narrow river sundered them.

So night fell, and the stars shone, and the moon rose, and yet the Wolfings and their fellows stayed not, since they wotted that behind them followed a many of the men of the Mark, both the Mid and the Nether, and they would by no means hinder their march.

So wended the Markmen between wood and stream on either side of Mirkwood- water, till now at last the night grew deep and the moon set, and it was hard on midnight, and they had kindled many torches to light them on either side of the water.  So whereas they had come to a place where the trees gave back somewhat from the river, which was well-grassed for their horses and neat, and was called Baitmead, the companies on the western side made stay there till morning.  And they drew the wains right up to the thick of the wood, and all men turned aside into the mead from the beaten road, so that those who were following after might hold on their way if so they would.  There then they appointed watchers of the night, while the rest of them lay upon the sward by the side of the trees, and slept through the short summer night.

The tale tells not that any man dreamed of the fight to come in such wise that there was much to tell of his dream on the morrow; many dreamed of no fight or faring to war, but of matters little, and often laughable, mere mingled memories of bygone time that had no waking wits to marshal them.

But that man of the Beamings dreamed that he was at home watching a potter, a man of the thralls of the House working at his wheel, and fashioning bowls and ewers: and he had a mind to take of his clay and fashion a horse for the lad that had bemoaned the promise of his toy.  And he tried long and failed to fashion anything; for the clay fell to pieces in his hands; till at last it held together and grew suddenly, not into an image of a horse, but of the Great Yule Boar, the similitude of the Holy Beast of Frey.  So he laughed in his sleep and was glad, and leaped up and drew his sword with his clay-stained hands that he might wave it over the Earth Boar, and swear a great oath of a doughty deed.  And therewith he found himself standing on his feet indeed, just awakened in the cold dawn, and holding by his right hand to an ash-sapling that grew beside him.  So he laughed again, and laid him down, and leaned back and slept his sleep out till the sun and the voices of his fellows stirring awakened him.

Footnotes

^2 i.e. Foreigners: see note 1.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f07]

CHAPTER VII--THEY GATHER TO THE FOLK-MOTE

When it was the morning, all the host of the Markmen was astir on either side of the water, and when they had broken their fast, they got speedily into array, and were presently on the road again; and the host was now strung out longer yet, for the space between water and wood once more diminished till at last it was no wider than ten men might go abreast, and looking ahead it was as if the wild-wood swallowed up both river and road.

But the fighting-men hastened on merrily with their hearts raised high, since they knew that they would soon be falling in with more of their people, and the coming fight was growing a clearer picture to their eyes; so from side to side of the river they shouted out the cries of their Houses, or friend called to friend across the eddies of Mirkwood-water, and there was game and glee enough.

So they fared till the wood gave way before them, and lo, the beginning of another plain, somewhat like the Mid-mark.  There also the water widened out before them, and there were eyots in it with stony shores crowned with willow or with alder, and aspens rising from the midst of them.

But as for the plain, it was thus much different from Mid-mark, that the wood which begirt it rose on the south into low hills, and away beyond them were other hills blue in the distance, for the most bare of wood, and not right high, the pastures of the wild-bull and the bison, whereas now dwelt a folk somewhat scattered and feeble; hunters and herdsmen, with little tillage about their abodes, a folk akin to the Markmen and allied to them.  They had come into those parts later than the Markmen, as the old tales told; which said moreover that in days gone by a folk dwelt among those hills who were alien from the Goths, and great foes to the Markmen; and how that on a time they came down from their hills with a great host, together with new-comers of their own blood, and made their way through the wild-wood, and fell upon the Upper-mark; and how that there befel a fearful battle that endured for three days; and the first day the Aliens worsted the Markmen, who were but a few, since they were they of the Upper-mark only.  So the Aliens burned their houses and slew their old men, and drave off many of their women and children; and the remnant of the men of the Upper-mark with all that they had, which was now but little, took refuge in an island of Mirkwood-water, where they fenced themselves as well as they could for that night; for they expected the succour of their kindred of the Mid-mark and the Nether-mark, unto whom they had sped the war-arrow when they first had tidings of the onset of the Aliens.

So at the sun-rising they sacrificed to the Gods twenty chieftains of the Aliens whom they had taken, and therewithal a maiden of their own kindred, the daughter of their war-duke, that she might lead that mighty company to the House of the Gods; and thereto was she nothing loth, but went right willingly.

There then they awaited the onset.  But the men of Mid-mark came up in the morning, when the battle was but just joined, and fell on so fiercely that the aliens gave back, and then they of the Upper-mark stormed out of their eyot, and fell on over the ford, and fought till the water ran red with their blood, and the blood of the foemen.  So the Aliens gave back before the onset of the Markmen all over the meads; but when they came to the hillocks and the tofts of the half-burned habitations, and the wood was on their flank, they made a stand again, and once more the battle waxed hot, for they were very many, and had many bowmen: there fell the War-duke of the Markmen, whose daughter had been offered up for victory, and his name was Agni, so that the tofts where he fell have since been called Agni's Tofts.  So that day they fought all over the plain, and a great many died, both of the Aliens and the Markmen, and though these last were victorious, yet when the sun went down there still were the Aliens abiding in the Upper-mark, fenced by their wain-burg, beaten, and much diminished in number, but still a host of men: while of the Markmen many had fallen, and many more were hurt, because the Aliens were good bowmen.

But on the morrow again, as the old tale told, came up the men of the Nether-mark fresh and unwounded; and so the battle began again on the southern limit of the Upper-mark where the Aliens had made their wain- burg.  But not long did it endure; for the Markmen fell on so fiercely, that they stormed over the wain-burg, and slew all before them, and there was a very great slaughter of the Aliens; so great, tells the old tale, that never again durst they meet the Markmen in war.

Thus went forth the host of the Markmen, faring along both sides of the water into the Upper-mark; and on the west side, where went the Wolfings, the ground now rose by a long slope into a low hill, and when they came unto the brow thereof, they beheld before them the whole plain of the Upper-mark, and the dwellings of the kindred therein all girdled about by the wild-wood; and beyond, the blue hills of the herdsmen, and beyond them still, a long way aloof, lying like a white cloud on the verge of the heavens, the snowy tops of the great mountains.  And as they looked down on to the plain they saw it embroidered, as it were, round about the habitations which lay within ken by crowds of many people, and the banners of the kindreds and the arms of men; and many a place they saw named after the ancient battle and that great slaughter of the Aliens.

On their left hand lay the river, and as it now fairly entered with them into the Upper-mark, it spread out into wide rippling shallows beset with yet more sandy eyots, amongst which was one much greater, rising amidmost into a low hill, grassy and bare of tree or bush; and this was the island whereon the Markmen stood on the first day of the Great Battle, and it was now called the Island of the Gods.

Thereby was the ford, which was firm and good and changed little from year to year, so that all Markmen knew it well and it was called Battleford: thereover now crossed all the eastern companies, footmen and horsemen, freemen and thralls, wains and banners, with shouting and laughter, and the noise of horns and the lowing of neat, till all that plain's end was flooded with the host of the Markmen.

But when the eastern-abiders had crossed, they made no stay, but went duly ordered about their banners, winding on toward the first of the abodes on the western side of the water; because it was but a little way southwest of this that the Thing-stead of the Upper-mark lay; and the whole Folk was summoned thither when war threatened from the South, just as it was called to the Thing-stead of the Nether-mark, when the threat of war came from the North.  But the western companies stayed on the brow of that low hill till all the eastern men were over the river, and on their way to the Thing-stead, and then they moved on.

So came the Wolfings and their fellows up to the dwellings of the northernmost kindred, who were called the Daylings, and bore on their banner the image of the rising sun.  Thereabout was the Mark somewhat more hilly and broken than in the Mid-mark, so that the Great Roof of the Daylings, which was a very big house, stood on a hillock whose sides had been cleft down sheer on all sides save one (which was left as a bridge) by the labour of men, and it was a very defensible place.

Thereon were now gathered round about the Roof all the stay-at-homes of the kindred, who greeted with joyous cries the men-at-arms as they passed.  Albeit one very old man, who sat in a chair near to the edge of the sheer hill looking on the war array, when he saw the Wolfing banner draw near, stood up to gaze on it, and then shook his head sadly, and sank back again into his chair, and covered his face with his hands: and when the folk saw that, a silence bred of the coldness of fear fell on them, for that elder was deemed a foreseeing man.

But as those three fellows, of whose talk of yesterday the tale has told, drew near and beheld what the old carle did (for they were riding together this day also) the Beaming man laid his hand on Wolfkettle's rein and said:

"Lo you, neighbour, if thy Vala hath seen nought, yet hath this old man seen somewhat, and that somewhat even as the little lad saw it.  Many a mother's son shall fall before the Welshmen."

But Wolfkettle shook his rein free, and his face reddened as of one who is angry, yet he kept silence, while the Elking said:

"Let be, Toti! for he that lives shall tell the tale to the foreseers, and shall make them wiser than they are to-day."

Then laughed Toti, as one who would not be thought to be too heedful of the morrow.  But Wolfkettle brake out into speech and rhyme, and said:

   "O warriors, the Wolfing kindred shall live or it shall die;
    And alive it shall be as the oak-tree when the summer storm goes by;
    But dead it shall be as its bole, that they hew for the corner-post
    Of some fair and mighty folk-hall, and the roof of a war-fain host."

So therewith they rode their ways past the abode of the Daylings.

Straight to the wood went all the host, and so into it by a wide way cleft through the thicket, and in some thirty minutes they came thereby into a great wood-lawn cleared amidst of it by the work of men's hands. There already was much of the host gathered, sitting or standing in a great ring round about a space bare of men, where amidmost rose a great mound raised by men's hands and wrought into steps to be the sitting-places of the chosen elders and chief men of the kindred; and atop the mound was flat and smooth save for a turf bench or seat that went athwart it whereon ten men might sit.

All the wains save the banner-wains had been left behind at the Dayling abode, nor was any beast there save the holy beasts who drew the banner- wains and twenty white horses, that stood wreathed about with flowers within the ring of warriors, and these were for the burnt offering to be given to the Gods for a happy day of battle.  Even the war-horses of the host they must leave in the wood without the wood-lawn, and all men were afoot who were there.

For this was the Thing-stead of the Upper-mark, and the holiest place of the Markmen, and no beast, either neat, sheep, or horse might pasture there, but was straightway slain and burned if he wandered there; nor might any man eat therein save at the holy feasts when offerings were made to the Gods.

So the Wolfings took their place there in the ring of men with the Elkings on their right hand and the Beamings on their left.  And in the midst of the Wolfing array stood Thiodolf clad in the dwarf-wrought hauberk: but his head was bare; for he had sworn over the Cup of Renown that he would fight unhelmed throughout all that trouble, and would bear no shield in any battle thereof however fierce the onset might be.

Short, and curling close to his head was his black hair, a little grizzled, so that it looked like rings of hard dark iron: his forehead was high and smooth, his lips full and red, his eyes steady and wide-open, and all his face joyous with the thought of the fame of his deeds, and the coming battle with a foeman whom the Markmen knew not yet.

He was tall and wide-shouldered, but so exceeding well fashioned of all his limbs and body that he looked no huge man.  He was a man well beloved of women, and children would mostly run to him gladly and play with him. A most fell warrior was he, whose deeds no man of the Mark could equal, but blithe of speech even when he was sorrowful of mood, a man that knew not bitterness of heart: and for all his exceeding might and valiancy, he was proud and high to no man; so that the very thralls loved him.

He was not abounding in words in the field; nor did he use much the custom of those days in reviling and defying with words the foe that was to be smitten with swords.

There were those who had seen him in the field for the first time who deemed him slack at the work: for he would not always press on with the foremost, but would hold him a little aback, and while the battle was young he forbore to smite, and would do nothing but help a kinsman who was hard pressed, or succour the wounded.  So that if men were dealing with no very hard matter, and their hearts were high and overweening, he would come home at whiles with unbloodied blade.  But no man blamed him save those who knew him not: for his intent was that the younger men should win themselves fame, and so raise their courage, and become high- hearted and stout.

But when the stour was hard, and the battle was broken, and the hearts of men began to fail them, and doubt fell upon the Markmen, then was he another man to see: wise, but swift and dangerous, rushing on as if shot out by some mighty engine: heedful of all, on either side and in front; running hither and thither as the fight failed and the fire of battle faltered; his sword so swift and deadly that it was as if he wielded the very lightening of the heavens: for with the sword it was ever his wont to fight.

But it must be said that when the foemen turned their backs, and the chase began, then Thiodolf would nowise withhold his might as in the early battle, but ever led the chase, and smote on the right hand and on the left, sparing none, and crying out to the men of the kindred not to weary in their work, but to fulfil all the hours of their day.

For thuswise would he say and this was a word of his:
    "Let us rest to-morrow, fellows, since to-day we have fought amain!
    Let not these men we have smitten come aback on our hands again,
    And say 'Ye Wolfing warriors, ye have done your work but ill,
    Fall to now and do it again, like the craftsman who learneth his skill.'"

Such then was Thiodolf, and ever was he the chosen leader of the Wolfings and often the War-duke of the whole Folk.

By his side stood the other chosen leader, whose name was Heriulf; a man well stricken in years, but very mighty and valiant; wise in war and well renowned; of few words save in battle, and therein a singer of songs, a laugher, a joyous man, a merry companion.  He was a much bigger man than Thiodolf; and indeed so huge was his stature, that he seemed to be of the kindred of the Mountain Giants; and his bodily might went with his stature, so that no one man might deal with him body to body.  His face was big; his cheek-bones high; his nose like an eagle's neb, his mouth wide, his chin square and big; his eyes light-grey and fierce under shaggy eyebrows: his hair white and long.

Such were his raiment and weapons, that he wore a coat of fence of dark iron scales sewn on to horse-hide, and a dark iron helm fashioned above his brow into the similitude of the Wolf's head with gaping jaws; and this he had wrought for himself with his own hands, for he was a good smith.  A round buckler he bore and a huge twibill, which no man of the kindred could well wield save himself; and it was done both blade and shaft with knots and runes in gold; and he loved that twibill well, and called it the Wolf's Sister.

There then stood Heriulf, looking no less than one of the forefathers of the kindred come back again to the battle of the Wolfings.

He was well-beloved for his wondrous might, and he was no hard man, though so fell a warrior, and though of few words, as aforesaid, was a blithe companion to old and young.  In numberless battles had he fought, and men deemed it a wonder that Odin had not taken to him a man so much after his own heart; and they said it was neighbourly done of the Father of the Slain to forbear his company so long, and showed how well he loved the Wolfing House.

For a good while yet came other bands of Markmen into the Thing-stead; but at last there was an end of their coming.  Then the ring of men opened, and ten warriors of the Daylings made their way through it, and one of them, the oldest, bore in his hand the War-horn of the Daylings; for this kindred had charge of the Thing-stead, and of all appertaining to it.  So while his nine fellows stood round about the Speech-Hill, the old warrior clomb up to the topmost of it, and blew a blast on the horn. Thereon they who were sitting rose up, and they who were talking each to each held their peace, and the whole ring drew nigher to the hill, so that there was a clear space behind them 'twixt them and the wood, and a space before them between them and the hill, wherein were those nine warriors, and the horses for the burnt-offering, and the altar of the Gods; and now were all well within ear-shot of a man speaking amidst the silence in a clear voice.

But there were gathered of the Markmen to that place some four thousand men, all chosen warriors and doughty men; and of the thralls and aliens dwelling with them they were leading two thousand.  But not all of the freemen of the Upper-mark could be at the Thing; for needs must there be some guard to the passes of the wood toward the south and the hills of the herdsmen, whereas it was no wise impassable to a wisely led host: so five hundred men, what of freemen, what of thralls, abode there to guard the wild-wood; and these looked to have some helping from the hill-men.

Now came an ancient warrior into the space between the men and the wild- wood holding in his hand a kindled torch; and first he faced due south by the sun, then, turning, he slowly paced the whole circle going from east to west, and so on till he had reached the place he started from: then he dashed the torch to the ground and quenched the fire, and so went his ways to his own company again.

Then the old Dayling warrior on the mound-top drew his sword, and waved it flashing in the sun toward the four quarters of the heavens; and thereafter blew again a blast on the War-horn.  Then fell utter silence on the whole assembly, and the wood was still around them, save here and there the stamping of a war-horse or the sound of his tugging at the woodland grass; for there was little resort of birds to the depths of the thicket, and the summer morning was windless.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f08]

CHAPTER VIII--THE FOLK-MOTE OF THE MARKMEN

So the Dayling warrior lifted up his voice and said:

   "O kindreds of the Markmen, hearken the words I say;
    For no chancehap assembly is gathered here to-day.
    The fire hath gone around us in the hands of our very kin,
    And twice the horn hath sounded, and the Thing is hallowed in.
    Will ye hear or forbear to hearken the tale there is to tell?
    There are many mouths to tell it, and a many know it well.
    And the tale is this, that the foemen against our kindreds fare
    Who eat the meadows desert, and burn the desert bare."

Then sat he down on the turf seat; but there arose a murmur in the assembly as of men eager to hearken; and without more ado came a man out of a company of the Upper-mark, and clomb up to the top of the Speech- Hill, and spoke in a loud voice:

"I am Bork, a man of the Geirings of the Upper-mark: two days ago I and five others were in the wild-wood a-hunting, and we wended through the thicket, and came into the land of the hill-folk; and after we had gone a while we came to a long dale with a brook running through it, and yew- trees scattered about it and a hazel copse at one end; and by the copse was a band of men who had women and children with them, and a few neat, and fewer horses; but sheep were feeding up and down the dale; and they had made them booths of turf and boughs, and were making ready their cooking fires, for it was evening.  So when they saw us, they ran to their arms, but we cried out to them in the tongue of the Goths and bade them peace.  Then they came up the bent to us and spake to us in the Gothic tongue, albeit a little diversely from us; and when we had told them what and whence we were, they were glad of us, and bade us to them, and we went, and they entreated us kindly, and made us such cheer as they might, and gave us mutton to eat, and we gave them venison of the wild- wood which we had taken, and we abode with them there that night.

"But they told us that they were a house of the folk of the herdsmen, and that there was war in the land, and that the people thereof were fleeing before the cruelty of a host of warriors, men of a mighty folk, such as the earth hath not heard of, who dwell in great cities far to the south; and how that this host had crossed the mountains, and the Great Water that runneth from them, and had fallen upon their kindred, and overcome their fighting-men, and burned their dwellings, slain their elders, and driven their neat and their sheep, yea, and their women and children in no better wise than their neat and sheep.

"And they said that they had fled away thus far from their old habitations, which were a long way to the south, and were now at point to build them dwellings there in that Dale of the Hazels, and to trust to it that these Welshmen, whom they called Romans, would not follow so far, and that if they did, they might betake them to the wild-wood, and let the thicket cover them, they being so nigh to it.

"Thus they told us; wherefore we sent back one of our fellowship, Birsti of the Geirings, to tell the tale; and one of the herdsmen folk went with him, but we ourselves went onward to hear more of these Romans; for the folk when we asked them, said that they had been in battle against them, but had fled away for fear of their rumour only.  Therefore we went on, and a young man of this kindred, who named themselves the Hrutings of the Fell-folk, went along with us.  But the others were sore afeard, for all they had weapons.

"So as we went up the land we found they had told us the very sooth, and we met divers Houses, and bands, and broken men, who were fleeing from this trouble, and many of them poor and in misery, having lost their flocks and herds as well as their roofs; and this last be but little loss to them, as their dwellings are but poor, and for the most part they have no tillage.  Now of these men, we met not a few who had been in battle with the Roman host, and much they told us of their might not to be dealt with, and their mishandling of those whom they took, both men and women; and at the last we heard true tidings how they had raised them a garth, and made a stronghold in the midst of the land, as men who meant abiding there, so that neither might the winter drive them aback, and that they might be succoured by their people on the other side of the Great River; to which end they have made other garths, though not so great, on the road to that water, and all these well and wisely warded by tried men. For as to the Folks on the other side of the Water, all these lie under their hand already, what by fraud what by force, and their warriors go with them to the battle and help them; of whom we met bands now and again, and fought with them, and took men of them, who told us all this and much more, over long to tell of here."

He paused and turned about to look on the mighty assembly, and his ears drank in the long murmur that followed his speaking, and when it had died out he spake again, but in rhyme:

   "Lo thus much of my tidings!  But this too it behoveth to tell,
    That these masterful men of the cities of the Markmen know full well:
    And they wot of the well-grassed meadows, and the acres of the Mark,
    And our life amidst of the wild-wood like a candle in the dark;
    And they know of our young men's valour and our women's loveliness,
    And our tree would they spoil with destruction if its fruit they may never possess.
    For their lust is without a limit, and nought may satiate
    Their ravening maw; and their hunger if ye check it turneth to hate,
    And the blood-fever burns in their bosoms, and torment and anguish and woe
    O'er the wide field ploughed by the sword-blade for the coming years they sow;
    And ruth is a thing forgotten and all hopes they trample down;
    And whatso thing is steadfast, whatso of good renown,
    Whatso is fair and lovely, whatso is ancient sooth
    In the bloody marl shall they mingle as they laugh for lack of ruth.
    Lo the curse of the world cometh hither; for the men that we took in the land
    Said thus, that their host is gathering with many an ordered band
    To fall on the wild-wood passes and flood the lovely Mark,
    As the river over the meadows upriseth in the dark.
    Look to it, O ye kindred! availeth now no word
    But the voice of the clashing of iron, and the sword-blade on the sword."

Therewith he made an end, and deeper and longer was the murmur of the host of freemen, amidst which Bork gat him down from the Speech-Hill, his weapons clattering about him, and mingled with the men of his kindred.

Then came forth a man of the kin of the Shieldings of the Upper-mark, and clomb the mound; and he spake in rhyme from beginning to end; for he was a minstrel of renown:

   "Lo I am a man of the Shieldings and Geirmund is my name;
    A half-moon back from the wild-wood out into the hills I came,
    And I went alone in my war-gear; for we have affinity
    With the Hundings of the Fell-folk, and with them I fain would be;
    For I loved a maid of their kindred.  Now their dwelling was not far
    From the outermost bounds of the Fell-folk, and bold in the battle they are,
    And have met a many people, and held their own abode.
    Gay then was the heart within me, as over the hills I rode
    And thought of the mirth of to-morrow and the sweet-mouthed Hunding maid
    And their old men wise and merry and their young men unafraid,
    And the hall-glee of the Hundings and the healths o'er the guesting cup.
    But as I rode the valley, I saw a smoke go up
    O'er the crest of the last of the grass-hills 'twixt me and the Hunding roof,
    And that smoke was black and heavy: so a while I bided aloof,
    And drew my girths the tighter, and looked to the arms I bore
    And handled my spear for the casting; for my heart misgave me sore,
    For nought was that pillar of smoke like the guest-fain cooking-fire.
    I lingered in thought for a minute, then turned me to ride up higher,
    And as a man most wary up over the bent I rode,
    And nigh hid peered o'er the hill-crest adown on the Hunding abode;
    And forsooth 'twas the fire wavering all o'er the roof of old,
    And all in the garth and about it lay the bodies of the bold;
    And bound to a rope amidmost were the women fair and young,
    And youths and little children, like the fish on a withy strung
    As they lie on the grass for the angler before the beginning of night.
    Then the rush of the wrath within me for a while nigh blinded my sight;
    Yet about the cowering war-thralls, short dark-faced men I saw,
    Men clad in iron armour, this way and that way draw,
    As warriors after the battle are ever wont to do.
    Then I knew them for the foemen and their deeds to be I knew,
    And I gathered the reins together to ride down the hill amain,
    To die with a good stroke stricken and slay ere I was slain.
    When lo, on the bent before me rose the head of a brown-faced man,
    Well helmed and iron-shielded, who some Welsh speech began
    And a short sword brandished against me; then my sight cleared and I saw
    Five others armed in likewise up hill and toward me draw,
    And I shook the spear and sped it and clattering on his shield
    He fell and rolled o'er smitten toward the garth and the Fell-folk's field.

   "But my heart changed with his falling and the speeding of my stroke,
    And I turned my horse; for within me the love of life awoke,
    And I spurred, nor heeded the hill-side, but o'er rough and smooth I rode
    Till I heard no chase behind me; then I drew rein and abode.
    And down in a dell was I gotten with a thorn-brake in its throat,
    And heard but the plover's whistle and the blackbird's broken note
    'Mid the thorns; when lo! from a thorn-twig away the blackbird swept,
    And out from the brake and towards me a naked man there crept,
    And straight I rode up towards him, and knew his face for one
    I had seen in the hall of the Hundings ere its happy days were done.
    I asked him his tale, but he bade me forthright to bear him away;
    So I took him up behind me, and we rode till late in the day,
    Toward the cover of the wild-wood, and as swiftly as we might.
    But when yet aloof was the thicket and it now was moonless night,
    We stayed perforce for a little, and he told me all the tale:
    How the aliens came against them, and they fought without avail
    Till the Roof o'er their heads was burning and they burst forth on the foe,
    And were hewn down there together; nor yet was the slaughter slow.
    But some they saved for thralldom, yea, e'en of the fighting men,
    Or to quell them with pains; so they stripped them; and this man espying just then
    Some chance, I mind not whatwise, from the garth fled out and away.

   "Now many a thing noteworthy of these aliens did he say,
    But this I bid you hearken, lest I wear the time for nought,
    That still upon the Markmen and the Mark they set their thought;
    For they questioned this man and others through a go-between in words
    Of us, and our lands and our chattels, and the number of our swords;
    Of the way and the wild-wood passes and the winter and his ways.
    Now look to see them shortly; for worn are fifteen days
    Since in the garth of the Hundings I saw them dight for war,
    And a hardy folk and ready and a swift-foot host they are."

Therewith Geirmund went down clattering from the Hill and stood with his company.  But a man came forth from the other side of the ring, and clomb the Hill: he was a red-haired man, rather big, clad in a skin coat, and bearing a bow in his hand and a quiver of arrows at his back, and a little axe hung by his side.  He said:

"I dwell in the House of the Hrossings of the Mid-mark, and I am now made a man of the kindred: howbeit I was not born into it; for I am the son of a fair and mighty woman of a folk of the Kymry, who was taken in war while she went big with me; I am called Fox the Red.

"These Romans have I seen, and have not died: so hearken! for my tale shall be short for what there is in it.

"I am, as many know, a hunter of Mirkwood, and I know all its ways and the passes through the thicket somewhat better than most.

"A moon ago I fared afoot from Mid-mark through Upper-mark into the thicket of the south, and through it into the heath country; and I went over a neck and came in the early dawn into a little dale when somewhat of mist still hung over it.  At the dale's end I saw a man lying asleep on the grass under a quicken tree, and his shield and sword hanging over his head to a bough thereof, and his horse feeding hoppled higher up the dale.

"I crept up softly to him with a shaft nocked on the string, but when I drew near I saw him to be of the sons of the Goths.  So I doubted nothing, but laid down my bow, and stood upright, and went to him and roused him, and he leapt up, and was wroth.

"I said to him, 'Wilt thou be wroth with a brother of the kindred meeting him in unpeopled parts?'

"But he reached out for his weapons; but ere he could handle them I ran in on him so that he gat not his sword, and had scant time to smite at me with a knife which he drew from his waist.

"I gave way before him for he was a very big man, and he rushed past me, and I dealt him a blow on the side of the head with my little axe which is called the War-babe, and gave him a great wound: and he fell on the grass, and as it happened that was his bane.

"I was sorry that I had slain him, since he was a man of the Goths: albeit otherwise he had slain me, for he was very wroth and dazed with slumber.

"He died not for a while; and he bade me fetch him water; and there was a well hard by on the other side of the tree; so I fetched it him in a great shell that I carry, and he drank.  I would have sung the blood-staunching song over him, for I know it well.  But he said, 'It availeth nought: I have enough: what man art thou?'

"I said, 'I am a fosterling of the Hrossings, and my mother was taken in war: my name is Fox.'

"Said he; 'O Fox, I have my due at thy hands, for I am a Markman of the Elkings, but a guest of the Burgundians beyond the Great River; and the Romans are their masters and they do their bidding: even so did I who was but their guest: and I a Markman to fight against the Markmen, and all for fear and for gold!  And thou an alien-born hast slain their traitor and their dastard!  This is my due.  Give me to drink again.'

"So did I; and he said; 'Wilt thou do an errand for me to thine own house?'  'Yea,' said I.

"Said he, 'I am a messenger to the garth of the Romans, that I may tell the road to the Mark, and lead them through the thicket; and other guides are coming after me: but not yet for three days or four.  So till they come there will be no man in the Roman garth to know thee that thou art not even I myself.  If thou art doughty, strip me when I am dead and do my raiment on thee, and take this ring from my neck, for that is my token, and when they ask thee for a word say, "_No limit_"; for that is the token-word.  Go south-east over the dales keeping Broadshield-fell square with thy right hand, and let thy wisdom, O Fox, lead thee to the Garth of the Romans, and so back to thy kindred with all tidings thou hast gathered--for indeed they come--a many of them.  Give me to drink.'

"So he drank again, and said, 'The bearer of this token is called Hrosstyr of the River Goths.  He hath that name among dastards.  Thou shalt lay a turf upon my head.  Let my death pay for my life.'

"Therewith he fell back and died.  So I did as he bade me and took his gear, worth six kine, and did it on me; I laid turf upon him in that dale, and hid my bow and my gear in a blackthorn brake hard by, and then took his horse and rode away.

"Day and night I rode till I came to the garth of the Romans; there I gave myself up to their watchers, and they brought me to their Duke, a grim man and hard.  He said in a terrible voice, 'Thy name?'  I said, 'Hrosstyr of the River Goths.'  He said, 'What limit?'  I answered, '_No limit_.'  'The token!' said he, and held out his hand.  I gave him the ring.  'Thou art the man,' said he.

"I thought in my heart, 'thou liest, lord,' and my heart danced for joy.

"Then he fell to asking me questions a many, and I answered every one glibly enough, and told him what I would, but no word of truth save for his hurt, and my soul laughed within me at my lies; thought I, the others, the traitors, shall come, and they shall tell him the truth, and he will not trow it, or at the worst he will doubt them.  But me he doubted nothing, else had he called in the tormentors to have the truth of me by pains; as I well saw afterwards, when they questioned with torments a man and a woman of the hill-folk whom they had brought in captive.

"I went from him and went all about that garth espying everything, fearing nothing; albeit there were divers woful captives of the Goths, who cursed me for a dastard, when they saw by my attire that I was of their blood.

"I abode there three days, and learned all that I might of the garth and the host of them, and the fourth day in the morning I went out as if to hunt, and none hindered me, for they doubted me not.

"So I came my ways home to the Upper-mark, and was guested with the Geirings.  Will ye that I tell you somewhat of the ways of these Romans of the garth?  The time presses, and my tale runneth longer than I would. What will ye?"

Then there arose a murmur, "Tell all, tell all."  "Nay," said the Fox, "All I may not tell; so much did I behold there during the three days' stay; but this much it behoveth you to know: that these men have no other thought save to win the Mark and waste it, and slay the fighting men and the old carles, and enthrall such as they will, that is, all that be fair and young, and they long sorely for our women either to have or to sell.

"As for their garth, it is strongly walled about with a dyke newly dug; on the top thereof are they building a wall made of clay, and burned like pots into ashlar stones hard and red, and these are laid in lime.

"It is now the toil of the thralls of our blood whom they have taken, both men and women, to dig that clay and to work it, and bear it to kilns, and to have for reward scant meat and many stripes.  For it is a grim folk, that laugheth to see others weep.

"Their men-at-arms are well dight and for the most part in one way: they are helmed with iron, and have iron on their breasts and reins, and bear long shields that cover them to the knees.  They are girt with a sax and have a heavy casting-spear.  They are dark-skinned and ugly of aspect, surly and of few words: they drink little, and eat not much.

"They have captains of tens and of hundreds over them, and that war-duke over all; he goeth to and fro with gold on his head and his breast, and commonly hath a cloak cast over him of the colour of the crane's-bill blossom.

"They have an altar in the midst of their burg, and thereon they sacrifice to their God, who is none other than their banner of war, which is an image of the ravening eagle with outspread wings; but yet another God they have, and look you! it is a wolf, as if they were of the kin of our brethren; a she-wolf and two man-children at her dugs; wonderful is this.

"I tell you that they are grim; and know it by this token: those captains of tens, and of hundreds, spare not to smite the warriors with staves even before all men, when all goeth not as they would; and yet, though they be free men, and mighty warriors, they endure it and smite not in turn.  They are a most evil folk.

"As to their numbers, they of the burg are hard on three thousand footmen of the best; and of horsemen five hundred, nowise good; and of bowmen and slingers six hundred or more: their bows weak; their slingers cunning beyond measure.  And the talk is that when they come upon us they shall have with them some five hundred warriors of the Over River Goths, and others of their own folk."

Then he said:

   "O men of the Mark, will ye meet them in the meadows and the field,
    Or will ye flee before them and have the wood for a shield?
    Or will ye wend to their war-burg with weapons cast away,
    With your women and your children, a peace of them to pray?
    So doing, not all shall perish; but most shall long to die
    Ere in the garths of the Southland two moons have loitered by."

Then rose the rumour loud and angry mingled with the rattle of swords and the clash of spears on shields; but Fox said:

"Needs must ye follow one of these three ways.  Nay, what say I? there are but two ways and not three; for if ye flee they shall follow you to the confines of the earth.  Either these Welsh shall take all, and our lives to boot, or we shall hold to all that is ours, and live merrily. The sword doometh; and in three days it may be the courts shall be hallowed: small is the space between us."

Therewith he also got him down from the Hill, and joined his own house: and men said that he had spoken well and wisely.  But there arose a noise of men talking together on these tidings; and amidst it an old warrior of the Nether-mark strode forth and up to the Hill-top.  Gaunt and stark he was to look on; and all men knew him and he was well-beloved, so all held their peace as he said:

"I am Otter of the Laxings: now needeth but few words till the War-duke is chosen, and we get ready to wend our ways in arms.  Here have ye heard three good men and true tell of our foes, and this last, Fox the Red, hath seen them and hath more to tell when we are on the way; nor is the way hard to find.  It were scarce well to fall upon these men in their garth and war-burg; for hard is a wall to slay.  Better it were to meet them in the Wild-wood, which may well be a friend to us and a wall, but to them a net.  O Agni of the Daylings, thou warder of the Thing-stead, bid men choose a War-duke if none gainsay it."

And without more words he clattered down the Hill, and went and stood with the Laxing band.  But the old Dayling arose and blew the horn, and there was at once a great silence, amidst which he said:

"Children of Slains-father, doth the Folk go to the war?"

There was no voice but shouted "yea," and the white swords sprang aloft, and the westering sun swept along a half of them as they tossed to and fro, and the others showed dead-white and fireless against the dark wood.

Then again spake Agni:

"Will ye choose the War-duke now and once, or shall it be in a while, after others have spoken?"

And the voice of the Folk went up, "Choose!  Choose!"

Said Agni: "Sayeth any aught against it?"  But no voice of a gainsayer was heard, and Agni said:

"Children of Tyr, what man will ye have for a leader and a duke of war?"

Then a great shout sprang up from amidst the swords: "We will have Thiodolf; Thiodolf the Wolfing!"

Said Agni: "I hear no other name; are ye of one mind? hath any aught to say against it?  If that be so, let him speak now, and not forbear to follow in the wheatfield of the spears.  Speak, ye that will not follow Thiodolf!"

No voice gainsaid him: then said the Dayling: "Come forth thou War-duke of the Markmen! take up the gold ring from the horns of the altar, set it on thine arm and come up hither!"

Then came forth Thiodolf into the sun, and took up the gold ring from where it lay, and did it on his arm.  And this was the ring of the leader of the folk whenso one should be chosen: it was ancient and daintily wrought, but not very heavy: so ancient it was that men said it had been wrought by the dwarfs.

So Thiodolf went up on to the hill, and all men cried out on him for joy, for they knew his wisdom in war.  Many wondered to see him unhelmed, but they had a deeming that he must have made oath to the Gods thereof and their hearts were glad of it.  They took note of the dwarf-wrought hauberk, and even from a good way off they could see what a treasure of smith's work it was, and they deemed it like enough that spells had been sung over it to make it sure against point and edge: for they knew that Thiodolf was well beloved of the Gods.

But when Thiodolf was on the Hill of Speech, he said:

"Men of the kindreds, I am your War-duke to-day; but it is oftenest the custom when ye go to war to choose you two dukes, and I would it were so now.  No child's play is the work that lies before us; and if one leader chance to fall let there be another to take his place without stop or stay.  Thou Agni of the Daylings, bid the Folk choose them another duke if so they will."

Said Agni: "Good is this which our War-duke hath spoken; say then, men of the Mark, who shall stand with Thiodolf to lead you against the aliens?"

Then was there a noise and a crying of names, and more than two names seemed to be cried out; but by far the greater part named either Otter of the Laxings, or Heriulf of the Wolfings.  True it is that Otter was a very wise warrior, and well known to all the men of the Mark; yet so dear was Heriulf to them, that none would have named Otter had it not been mostly their custom not to choose both War-dukes from one House.

Now spake Agni: "Children of Tyr, I hear you name more than one name: now let each man cry out clearly the name he nameth."

So the Folk cried the names once more, but this time it was clear that none was named save Otter and Heriulf; so the Dayling was at point to speak again, but or ever a word left his lips, Heriulf the mighty, the ancient of days, stood forth: and when men saw that he would take up the word there was a great silence.  So he spake:

"Hearken, children!  I am old and war-wise; but my wisdom is the wisdom of the sword of the mighty warrior, that knoweth which way it should wend, and hath no thought of turning back till it lieth broken in the field.  Such wisdom is good against Folks that we have met heretofore; as when we have fought with the Huns, who would sweep us away from the face of the earth, or with the Franks or the Burgundians, who would quell us into being something worser than they be.  But here is a new foe, and new wisdom, and that right shifty, do we need to meet them.  One wise duke have ye gotten, Thiodolf to wit; and he is young beside me and beside Otter of the Laxings.  And now if ye must needs have an older man to stand beside him, (and that is not ill) take ye Otter; for old though his body be, the thought within him is keen and supple like the best of Welsh- wrought blades, and it liveth in the days that now are: whereas for me, meseemeth, my thoughts are in the days bygone.  Yet look to it, that I shall not fail to lead as the sword of the valiant leadeth, or the shaft shot by the cunning archer.  Choose ye Otter; I have spoken over long."

Then spoke Agni the Dayling, and laughed withal: "One man of the Folk hath spoken for Otter and against Heriulf--now let others speak if they will!"

So the cry came forth, "Otter let it be, we will have Otter!"

"Speaketh any against Otter?" said Agni.  But there was no voice raised against him.

Then Agni said: "Come forth, Otter of the Laxings, and hold the ring with Thiodolf."

Then Otter went up on to the hill and stood by Thiodolf, and they held the ring together; and then each thrust his hand and arm through the ring and clasped hands together, and stood thus awhile, and all the Folk shouted together.

Then spake Agni: "Now shall we hew the horses and give the gifts to the Gods."

Therewith he and the two War-dukes came down from the hill; and stood before the altar; and the nine warriors of the Daylings stood forth with axes to hew the horses and with copper bowls wherein to catch the blood of them, and each hewed down his horse to the Gods, but the two War-dukes slew the tenth and fairest: and the blood was caught in the bowls, and Agni took a sprinkler and went round about the ring of men, and cast the blood of the Gods'-gifts over the Folk, as was the custom of those days.

Then they cut up the carcases and burned on the altar the share of the Gods, and Agni and the War-dukes tasted thereof, and the rest they bore off to the Daylings' abode for the feast to be holden that night.

Then Otter and Thiodolf spake apart together for awhile, and presently went up again on to the Speech-Hill, and Thiodolf said:

   "O kindreds of the Markmen; to-morrow with the day
    We shall wend up Mirkwood-water to bar our foes the way;
    And there shall we make our wain-burg on the edges of the wood,
    Where in the days past over at last the aliens stood,
    The Slaughter Tofts ye call it.  There tidings shall we get
    If the curse of the world is awakened, and the serpent crawleth yet
    Amidst the Mirkwood thicket; and when the sooth we know,
    Then bearing battle with us through the thicket shall we go,
    The ancient Wood-wolf's children, and the People of the Shield,
    And the Spear-kin and the Horse-kin, while the others keep the field
    About the warded wain-burg; for not many need we there
    Where amidst of the thickets' tangle and the woodland net they fare,
    And the hearts of the aliens falter and they curse the fight ne'er done,
    And wonder who is fighting and which way is the sun."

Thus he spoke; then Agni took up the war-horn again, and blew a blast, and then he cried out:
    "Now sunder we the Folk-mote! and the feast is for to-night,
    And to-morrow the Wayfaring; But unnamed is the day of the fight;
    O warriors, look ye to it that not long we need abide
    'Twixt the hour of the word we have spoken, and our fair-fame's blooming tide!
    For then 'midst the toil and the turmoil shall we sow the seeds of peace,
    And the Kindreds' long endurance, and the Goth-folk's great increase."

Then arose the last great shout, and soberly and in due order, kindred by kindred, they turned and departed from the Thing-stead and went their way through the wood to the abode of the Daylings.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f09]

CHAPTER IX--THE ANCIENT MAN OF THE DAYLINGS

There still hung the more part of the stay-at-homes round about the Roof. But on the plain beneath the tofts were all the wains of the host drawn up round about a square like the streets about a market-place; all these now had their tilts rigged over them, some white, some black, some red, some tawny of hue; and some, which were of the Beamings, green like the leafy tree.

The warriors of the host went down into this wain-town, which they had not fenced in any way, since they in no wise looked for any onset there; and there were their thralls dighting the feast for them, and a many of the Dayling kindred, both men and women, went with them; but some men did the Daylings bring into their Roof, for there was room for a good many besides their own folk.  So they went over the Bridge of turf into the garth and into the Great Roof of the Daylings; and amongst these were the two War-dukes.

So when they came to the dais it was as fair all round about there as might well be; and there sat elders and ancient warriors to welcome the guests; and among them was the old carle who had sat on the edge of the burg to watch the faring of the host, and had shuddered back at the sight of the Wolfing Banner.

And when the old carle saw the guests, he fixed his eyes on Thiodolf, and presently came up and stood before him; and Thiodolf looked on the old man, and greeted him kindly and smiled on him; but the carle spake not till he had looked on him a while; and at last he fell a-trembling, and reached his hands out to Thiodolf's bare head, and handled his curls and caressed them, as a mother does with her son, even if he be a grizzled- haired man, when there is none by: and at last he said:

   "How dear is the head of the mighty, and the apple of the tree
    That blooms with the life of the people which is and yet shall be!
    It is helmed with ancient wisdom, and the long remembered thought,
    That liveth when dead is the iron, and its very rust but nought.
    Ah! were I but young as aforetime, I would fare to the battle-stead
    And stand amidst of the spear-hail for the praise of the hand and the head!"

Then his hands left Thiodolf's head, and strayed down to his shoulders and his breast, and he felt the cold rings of the hauberk, and let his hands fall down to his side again; and the tears gushed out of his old eyes and again he spake:

   "O house of the heart of the mighty, O breast of the battle-lord
    Why art thou coldly hidden from the flickering flame of the sword?
    I know thee not, nor see thee; thou art as the fells afar
    Where the Fathers have their dwelling, and the halls of Godhome are:
    The wind blows wild betwixt us, and the cloud-rack flies along,
    And high aloft enfoldeth the dwelling of the strong;
    They are, as of old they have been, but their hearths flame not for me;
    And the kindness of their feast-halls mine eyes shall never see."

Thiodolf's lips still smiled on the old man, but a shadow had come over his eyes and his brow; and the chief of the Daylings and their mighty guests stood by listening intently with the knit brows of anxious men; nor did any speak till the ancient man again betook him to words:

   "I came to the house of the foeman when hunger made me a fool;
    And the foeman said, 'Thou art weary, lo, set thy foot on the stool;'
    And I stretched out my feet,--and was shackled: and he spake with a dastard's smile,
    'O guest, thine hands are heavy; now rest them for a while!'
    So I stretched out my hands, and the hand-gyves lay cold on either wrist:
    And the wood of the wolf had been better than that feast-hall, had I wist
    That this was the ancient pit-fall, and the long expected trap,
    And that now for my heart's desire I had sold the world's goodhap."

Therewith the ancient man turned slowly away from Thiodolf, and departed sadly to his own place.  Thiodolf changed countenance but little, albeit those about him looked strangely on him, as though if they durst they would ask him what these words might be, and if he from his hidden knowledge might fit a meaning to them.  For to many there was a word of warning in them, and to some an evil omen of the days soon to be; and scarce anyone heard those words but he had a misgiving in his heart, for the ancient man was known to be foreseeing, and wild and strange his words seemed to them.

But Agni would make light of it, and he said: "Asmund the Old is of good will, and wise he is; but he hath great longings for the deeds of men, when he hath tidings of battle; for a great warrior and a red-hand hewer he hath been in times past; he loves the Kindred, and deems it ill if he may not fare afield with them; for the thought of dying in the straw is hateful to him."

"Yea," said another, "and moreover he hath seen sons whom he loved slain in battle; and when he seeth a warrior in his prime he becometh dear to him, and he feareth for him."

"Yet," said a third, "Asmund is foreseeing; and may be, Thiodolf, thou wilt wot of the drift of these words, and tell us thereof."

But Thiodolf spake nought of the matter, though in his heart he pondered it.

So the guests were led to table, and the feast began, within the hall and without it, and wide about the plain; and the Dayling maidens went in bands trimly decked out throughout all the host and served the warriors with meat and drink, and sang the overword to their lays, and smote the harp, and drew the bow over the fiddle till it laughed and wailed and chuckled, and were blithe and merry with all, and great was the glee on the eve of battle.  And if Thiodolf's heart were overcast, his face showed it not, but he passed from hall to wain-burg and from wain-burg to hall again blithe and joyous with all men.  And thereby he raised the hearts of men, and they deemed it good that they had gotten such a War- duke, meet to uphold all hearts of men both at the feast and in the fray.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f10]

CHAPTER X--THAT CARLINE COMETH TO THE ROOF OF THE WOLFINGS

 Now it was three days after this that the women were gathering to the Women's-Chamber of the Roof of the Wolfings a little before the afternoon changes into evening.  The hearts of most were somewhat heavy, for the doubt wherewith they had watched the departure of the fighting-men still hung about them; nor had they any tidings from the host (nor was it like that they should have).  And as they were somewhat down-hearted, so it seemed by the aspect of all things that afternoon.  It was not yet the evening, as is aforesaid, but the day was worn and worsened, and all things looked weary.  The sky was a little clouded, but not much; yet was it murky down in the south-east, and there was a threat of storm in it, and in the air close round each man's head, and in the very waving of the leafy boughs.  There was by this time little doing in field and fold (for the kine were milked), and the women were coming up from the acres and the meadow and over the open ground anigh the Roof; there was the grass worn and dusty, and the women that trod it, their feet were tanned and worn, and dusty also; skin-dry and weary they looked, with the sweat dried upon them; their girt-up gowns grey and lightless, their half-unbound hair blowing about them in the dry wind, which had in it no morning freshness, and no evening coolness.

It was a time when toil was well-nigh done, but had left its aching behind it; a time for folk to sleep and forget for a little while, till the low sun should make it evening, and make all things fair with his level rays; no time for anxious thoughts concerning deeds doing, wherein the anxious ones could do nought to help.  Yet such thoughts those stay- at-homes needs must have in the hour of their toil scarce over, their rest and mirth not begun.

Slowly one by one the women went in by the Women's-door, and the Hall-Sun sat on a stone hard by, and watched them as they passed; and she looked keenly at all persons and all things.  She had been working in the acres, and her hand was yet on the hoe she had been using, and but for her face her body was as of one resting after toil: her dark blue gown was ungirded, her dark hair loose and floating, the flowers that had wreathed it, now faded, lying strewn upon the grass before her: her feet bare for coolness' sake, her left hand lying loose and open upon her knee.

Yet though her body otherwise looked thus listless, in her face was no listlessness, nor rest: her eyes were alert and clear, shining like two stars in the heavens of dawn-tide; her lips were set close, her brow knit, as of one striving to shape thoughts hard to understand into words that all might understand.

So she sat noting all things, as woman by woman went past her into the hall, till at last she slowly rose to her feet; for there came two young women leading between them that same old carline with whom she had talked on the Hill-of-Speech.  She looked on the carline steadfastly, but gave no token of knowing her; but the ancient woman spoke when she came near to the Hall-Sun, and old as her semblance was, yet did her speech sound sweet to the Hall-Sun, and indeed to all those that heard it and she said:

"May we be here to-night, O Hall-Sun, thou lovely Seeress of the mighty Wolfings? may a wandering woman sit amongst you and eat the meat of the Wolfings?"

Then spake the Hall-Sun in a sweet measured voice: "Surely mother: all men who bring peace with them are welcome guests to the Wolfings: nor will any ask thine errand, but we will let thy tidings flow from thee as thou wilt.  This is the custom of the kindred, and no word of mine own; I speak to thee because thou hast spoken to me, but I have no authority here, being myself but an alien.  Albeit I serve the House of the Wolfings, and I love it as the hound loveth his master who feedeth him, and his master's children who play with him.  Enter, mother, and be glad of heart, and put away care from thee."

Then the old woman drew nigher to her and sat down in the dust at her feet, for she was now sitting down again, and took her hand and kissed it and fondled it, and seemed loth to leave handling the beauty of the Hall- Sun; but she looked kindly on the carline, and smiled on her, and leaned down to her, and kissed her mouth, and said:

"Damsels, take care of this poor woman, and make her good cheer; for she is wise of wit, and a friend of the Wolfings; and I have seen her before, and spoken with her; and she loveth us.  But as for me I must needs be alone in the meads for a while; and it may be that when I come to you again, I shall have a word to tell you."

Now indeed it was in a manner true that the Hall-Sun had no authority in the Wolfing House; yet was she so well beloved for her wisdom and beauty and her sweet speech, that all hastened to do her will in small matters and in great, and now as they looked at her after the old woman had caressed her, it seemed to them that her fairness grew under their eyes, and that they had never seen her so fair; and the sight of her seemed so good to them, that the outworn day and its weariness changed to them, and it grew as pleasant as the first hours of the sunlight, when men arise happy from their rest, and look on the day that lieth hopeful before them with all its deeds to be.

So they grew merry, and they led the carline into the Hall with them, and set her down in the Women's-Chamber, and washed her feet, and gave her meat and drink, and bade her rest and think of nothing troublous, and in all wise made her good cheer; and she was merry with them, and praised their fairness and their deftness, and asked them many questions about their weaving and spinning and carding; (howbeit the looms were idle as then because it was midsummer, and the men gone to the war).  And this they deemed strange, as it seemed to them that all women should know of such things; but they thought it was a token that she came from far away.

But afterwards she sat among them, and told them pleasant tales of past times and far countries, and was blithe to them and they to her and the time wore on toward nightfall in the Women's-Chamber.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f11]

CHAPTER XI--THE HALL-SUN SPEAKETH

But for the Hall-Sun; she sat long on that stone by the Women's-door; but when the evening was now come, she arose and went down through the cornfields and into the meadow, and wandered away as her feet took her.

Night was falling by then she reached that pool of Mirkwood-water, whose eddies she knew so well.  There she let the water cover her in the deep stream, and she floated down and sported with the ripples where the river left that deep to race over the shallows; and the moon was casting shadows by then she came up the bank again by the shallow end bearing in her arms a bundle of the blue-flowering mouse-ear.  Then she clad herself at once, and went straight as one with a set purpose toward the Great Roof, and entered by the Man's-door; and there were few men within and they but old and heavy with the burden of years and the coming of night- tide; but they wondered and looked to each other and nodded their heads as she passed them by, as men who would say, There is something toward.

So she went to her sleeping-place, and did on fresh raiment, and came forth presently clad in white and shod with gold and having her hair wreathed about with the herb of wonder, the blue-flowering mouse-ear of Mirkwood-water.  Thus she passed through the Hall, and those elders were stirred in their hearts when they beheld her beauty.  But she opened the door of the Women's-Chamber, and stood on the threshold; and lo, there sat the carline amidst a ring of the Wolfing women, and she telling them tales of old time such as they had not yet heard; and her eyes were glittering, and the sweet words were flowing from her mouth; but she sat straight up like a young woman; and at whiles it seemed to those who hearkened, that she was no old and outworn woman, but fair and strong, and of much avail.  But when she heard the Hall-Sun she turned and saw her on the threshold, and her speech fell suddenly, and all that might and briskness faded from her, and she fixed her eyes on the Hall-Sun and looked wistfully and anxiously on her.

Then spake the Hall-Sun standing in the doorway:

   "Hear ye a matter, maidens, and ye Wolfing women all,
    And thou alien guest of the Wolfings!  But come ye up the hall,
    That the ancient men may hearken: for methinks I have a word
    Of the battle of the Kindreds, and the harvest of the sword."

Then all arose up with great joy, for they knew that the tidings were good, when they looked on the face of the Hall-Sun and beheld the pride of her beauty unmarred by doubt or pain.

She led them forth to the dais, and there were the sick and the elders gathered and some ancient men of the thralls: so she stepped lightly up to her place, and stood under her namesake, the wondrous lamp of ancient days.  And thus she spake:

   "On my soul there lies no burden, and no tangle of the fight
    In plain or dale or wild-wood enmeshes now my sight.
    I see the Markmen's wain-burg, and I see their warriors go
    As men who wait for battle and the coming of the foe.
    And they pass 'twixt the wood and the wain-burg within earshot of the horn,
    But over the windy meadows no sound thereof is borne,
    And all is well amongst them.  To the burg I draw anigh
    And I see all battle-banners in the breeze of morning fly,
    But no Wolfings round their banner and no warrior of the Shield,
    No Geiring and no Hrossing in the burg or on the field."

She held her peace for a little while, and no one dared to speak; then she lifted up her head and spake:

   "Now I go by the lip of the wild-wood and a sound withal I hear,
    As of men in the paths of the thicket, and a many drawing anear.
    Then, muffled yet by the tree-boles, I hear the Shielding song,
    And warriors blithe and merry with the battle of the strong.
    Give back a little, Markmen, make way for men to pass
    To your ordered battle-dwelling o'er the trodden meadow-grass,
    For alive with men is the wild-wood and shineth with the steel,
    And hath a voice most merry to tell of the Kindreds' weal,
    'Twixt each tree a warrior standeth come back from the spear-strewn way,
    And forth they come from the wild-wood and a little band are they."

Then again was she silent; but her head sank not, as of one thinking, as before it did, but she looked straight forward with bright eyes and smiling, as she said:

   "Lo, now the guests they are bringing that ye have not seen before;
    Yet guests but ill-entreated; for they lack their shields of war,
    No spear in the hand they carry and with no sax are girt.
    Lo, these are the dreaded foemen, these once so strong to hurt;
    The men that all folk fled from, the swift to drive the spoil,
    The men that fashioned nothing but the trap to make men toil.
    They drew the sword in the cities, they came and struck the stroke
    And smote the shield of the Markmen, and point and edge they broke.
    They drew the sword in the war-garth, they swore to bring aback
    God's gifts from the Markmen houses where the tables never lack.
    O Markmen, take the God-gifts that came on their own feet
    O'er the hills through the Mirkwood thicket the Stone of Tyr to meet!"

Again she stayed her song, which had been loud and joyous, and they who heard her knew that the Kindreds had gained the day, and whilst the Hall- Sun was silent they fell to talking of this fair day of battle and the taking of captives.  But presently she spread out her hands again and they held their peace, and she said:

   "I see, O Wolfing women, and many a thing I see,
    But not all things, O elders, this eve shall ye learn of me,
    For another mouth there cometh: the thicket I behold
    And the Sons of Tyr amidst it, and I see the oak-trees old,
    And the war-shout ringing round them; and I see the battle-lord
    Unhelmed amidst of the mighty; and I see his leaping sword;
    Strokes struck and warriors falling, and the streaks of spears I see,
    But hereof shall the other tell you who speaketh after me.
    For none other than the Shieldings from out the wood have come,
    And they shift the turn with the Daylings to drive the folk-spear home,
    And to follow with the Wolfings and thrust the war-beast forth.
    And so good men deem the tidings that they bid them journey north
    On the feet of a Shielding runner, that Gisli hath to name;
    And west of the water he wendeth by the way that the Wolfings came;
    Now for sleep he tarries never, and no meat is in his mouth
    Till the first of the Houses hearkeneth the tidings of the south;
    Lo, he speaks, and the mead-sea sippeth, and the bread by the way doth eat,
    And over the Geiring threshold and outward pass his feet;
    And he breasts the Burg of the Daylings and saith his happy word,
    And stayeth to drink for a minute of the waves of Battleford.
    Lone then by the stream he runneth, and wendeth the wild-wood road,
    And dasheth through the hazels of the Oselings' fair abode,
    And the Elking women know it, and their hearts are glad once more,
    And ye--yea, hearken, Wolfings, for his feet are at the door."

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f12]

CHAPTER XII--TIDINGS OF THE BATTLE IN MIRKWOOD

As the Hall-Sun made an end they heard in good sooth the feet of the runner on the hard ground without the hall, and presently the door opened and he came leaping over the threshold, and up to the table, and stood leaning on it with one hand, his breast heaving with his last swift run. Then he spake presently:

"I am Gisli of the Shieldings: Otter sendeth me to the Hall-Sun; but on the way I was to tell tidings to the Houses west of the Water: so have I done.  Now is my journey ended; for Otter saith: 'Let the Hall-Sun note the tidings and send word of them by four of the lightest limbed of the women, or by lads a-horseback, both west and east of the Water; let her send the word as it seemeth to her, whether she hath seen it or not.  I will drink a short draught since my running is over."

Then a damsel brought him a horn of mead and let it come into his hand, and he drank sighing with pleasure, while the damsel for pleasure of him and his tidings laid her hand on his shoulder.  Then he set down the horn and spake:

"We, the Shieldings, with the Geirings, the Hrossings, and the Wolfings, three hundred warriors and more, were led into the Wood by Thiodolf the War-duke, beside whom went Fox, who hath seen the Romans.  We were all afoot; for there is no wide way through the Wood, nor would we have it otherwise, lest the foe find the thicket easy.  But many of us know the thicket and its ways; so we made not the easy hard.  I was near the War- duke, for I know the thicket and am light-foot: I am a bowman.  I saw Thiodolf that he was unhelmed and bore no shield, nor had he any coat of fence; nought but a deer-skin frock."

As he said that word, the carline, who had drawn very near to him and was looking hard at his face, turned and looked on the Hall-Sun and stared at her till she reddened under those keen eyes: for in her heart began to gather some knowledge of the tale of her mother and what her will was.

But Gisli went on: "Yet by his side was his mighty sword, and we all knew it for Throng-plough, and were glad of it and of him and the unfenced breast of the dauntless.  Six hours we went spreading wide through the thicket, not always seeing one another, but knowing one another to be nigh; those that knew the thicket best led, the others followed on.  So we went till it was high noon on the plain and glimmering dusk in the thicket, and we saw nought, save here and there a roe, and here and there a sounder of swine, and coneys where it was opener, and the sun shone and the grass grew for a little space.  So came we unto where the thicket ended suddenly, and there was a long glade of the wild-wood, all set about with great oak-trees and grass thereunder, which I knew well; and thereof the tale tells that it was a holy place of the folk who abided in these parts before the Sons of the Goths.  Now will I drink."

So he drank of the horn and said: "It seemeth that Fox had a deeming of the way the Romans should come; so now we abided in the thicket without that glade and lay quiet and hidden, spreading ourselves as much about that lawn of the oak-trees as we might, the while Fox and three others crept through the wood to espy what might be toward: not long had they been gone ere we heard a war-horn blow, and it was none of our horns: it was a long way off, but we looked to our weapons: for men are eager for the foe and the death that cometh, when they lie hidden in the thicket.  A while passed, and again we heard the horn, and it was nigher and had a marvellous voice; then in a while was a little noise of men, not their voices, but footsteps going warily through the brake to the south, and twelve men came slowly and warily into that oak-lawn, and lo, one of them was Fox; but he was clad in the raiment of the dastard of the Goths whom he had slain.  I tell you my heart beat, for I saw that the others were Roman men, and one of them seemed to be a man of authority, and he held Fox by the shoulder, and pointed to the thicket where we lay, and something he said to him, as we saw by his gesture and face, but his voice we heard not, for he spake soft.

"Then of those ten men of his he sent back two, and Fox going between them, as though he should be slain if he misled them; and he and the eight abided there wisely and warily, standing silently some six feet from each other, moving scarce at all, but looking like images fashioned of brown copper and iron; holding their casting-spears (which be marvellous heavy weapons) and girt with the sax.

"As they stood there, not out of earshot of a man speaking in his wonted voice, our War-duke made a sign to those about him, and we spread very quietly to the right hand and the left of him once more, and we drew as close as might be to the thicket's edge, and those who had bows the nighest thereto.  Thus then we abided a while again; and again came the horn's voice; for belike they had no mind to come their ways covertly because of their pride.

"Soon therewithal comes Fox creeping back to us, and I saw him whisper into the ear of the War-duke, but heard not the word he said.  I saw that he had hanging to him two Roman saxes, so I deemed he had slain those two, and so escaped the Romans.  Maidens, it were well that ye gave me to drink again, for I am weary and my journey is done."

So again they brought him the horn, and made much of him; and he drank, and then spake on.

"Now heard we the horn's voice again quite close, and it was sharp and shrill, and nothing like to the roar of our battle-horns: still was the wood and no wind abroad, not even down the oak-lawn; and we heard now the tramp of many men as they thrashed through the small wood and bracken of the thicket-way; and those eight men and their leader came forward, moving like one, close up to the thicket where I lay, just where the path passed into the thicket beset by the Sons of the Goths: so near they were that I could see the dints upon their armour, and the strands of the wire on their sax-handles.  Down then bowed the tall bracken on the further side of the wood-lawn, the thicket crashed before the march of men, and on they strode into the lawn, a goodly band, wary, alert, and silent of cries.

"But when they came into the lawn they spread out somewhat to their left hands, that is to say on the west side, for that way was the clear glade; but on the east the thicket came close up to them and edged them away. Therein lay the Goths.

"There they stayed awhile, and spread out but a little, as men marching, not as men fighting.  A while we let them be; and we saw their captain, no big man, but dight with very fair armour and weapons; and there drew up to him certain Goths armed, the dastards of the folk, and another unarmed, an old man bound and bleeding.  With these Goths had the captain some converse, and presently he cried out two or three words of Welsh in a loud voice, and the nine men who were ahead shifted them somewhat away from us to lead down the glade westward.

"The prey had come into the net, but they had turned their faces toward the mouth of it.

"Then turned Thiodolf swiftly to the man behind him who carried the war- horn, and every man handled his weapons: but that man understood, and set the little end to his mouth, and loud roared the horn of the Markmen, and neither friend nor foe misdoubted the tale thereof.  Then leaped every man to his feet, all bow-strings twanged and the cast-spears flew; no man forebore to shout; each as he might leapt out of the thicket and fell on with sword and axe and spear, for it was from the bowmen but one shaft and no more.

"Then might you have seen Thiodolf as he bounded forward like the wild- cat on the hare, how he had no eyes for any save the Roman captain. Foemen enough he had round about him after the two first bounds from the thicket; for the Romans were doing their best to spread, that they might handle those heavy cast-spears, though they might scarce do it, just come out of the thicket as they were, and thrust together by that onslaught of the kindreds falling on from two sides and even somewhat from behind.  To right and left flashed Throng-plough, while Thiodolf himself scarce seemed to guide it: men fell before him at once, and close at his heels poured the Wolfing kindred into the gap, and in a minute of time was he amidst of the throng and face to face with the gold-dight captain.

"What with the sweep of Throng-plough and the Wolfing onrush, there was space about him for a great stroke; he gave a side-long stroke to his right and hewed down a tall Burgundian, and then up sprang the white blade, but ere its edge fell he turned his wrist, and drove the point through that Captain's throat just above the ending of his hauberk, so that he fell dead amidst of his folk.

"All the four kindreds were on them now, and amidst them, and needs must they give way: but stoutly they fought; for surely no other warriors might have withstood that onslaught of the Markmen for the twinkling of an eye: but had the Romans had but the space to have spread themselves out there, so as to handle their shot-weapons, many a woman's son of us had fallen; for no man shielded himself in his eagerness, but let the swiftness of the Onset of point-and-edge shield him; which, sooth to say, is often a good shield, as here was found.

"So those that were unslain and unhurt fled west along the glade, but not as dastards, and had not Thiodolf followed hard in the chase according to his wont, they might even yet have made a fresh stand and spread from oak- tree to oak-tree across the glade: but as it befel, they might not get a fair offing so as to disentangle themselves and array themselves in good order side by side; and whereas the Markmen were fleet of foot, and in the woods they knew, there were a many aliens slain in the chase or taken alive unhurt or little hurt: but the rest fled this way and that way into the thicket, with whom were some of the Burgundians; so there they abide now as outcasts and men unholy, to be slain as wild-beasts one by one as we meet them.

"Such then was the battle in Mirkwood.  Give me the mead-horn that I may drink to the living and the dead, and the memory of the dead, and the deeds of the living that are to be."

So they brought him the horn, and he waved it over his head and drank again and spake:

"Sixty and three dead men of the Romans we counted there up and down that oak-glade; and we cast earth over them; and three dead dastards of the Goths, and we left them for the wolves to deal with.  And twenty-five men of the Romans we took alive to be for hostages if need should be, and these did we Shielding men, who are not very many, bring aback to the wain-burg; and the Daylings, who are a great company, were appointed to enter the wood and be with Thiodolf; and me did Otter bid to bear the tidings, even as I have told you.  And I have not loitered by the way."

Great then was the joy in the Hall; and they took Gisli, and made much of him, and led him to the bath, and clad him in fine raiment taken from the coffer which was but seldom opened, because the cloths it held were precious; and they set a garland of green wheat-ears on his head.  Then they fell to and spread the feast in the hall; and they ate and drank and were merry.

But as for speeding the tidings, the Hall-Sun sent two women and two lads, all a-horseback, to bear the words: the women to remember the words which she taught them carefully, the lads to be handy with the horses, or in the ford, or the swimming of the deeps, or in the thicket.  So they went their ways, down the water: one pair went on the western side, and the other crossed Mirkwood-water at the shallows (for being Midsummer the water was but small), and went along the east side, so that all the kindred might know of the tidings and rejoice.

Great was the glee in the Hall, though the warriors of the House were away, and many a song and lay they sang: but amidst the first of the singing they bethought them of the old woman, and would have bidden her tell them some tale of times past, since she was so wise in the ancient lore.  But when they sought for her on all sides she was not to be found, nor could anyone remember seeing her depart from the Hall.  But this had they no call to heed, and the feast ended, as it began, in great glee.

Albeit the Hall-Sun was troubled about the carline, both that she had come, and that she had gone: and she determined that the next time she met her she would strive to have of her a true tale of what she was, and of all that was toward.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f13]

CHAPTER XIII--THE HALL-SUN SAITH ANOTHER WORD

It was no later than the next night, and a many of what thralls were not with the host were about in the feast-hall with the elders and lads and weaklings of the House; for last night's tidings had drawn them thither. Gisli had gone back to his kindred and the wain-burg in the Upper-mark, and the women were sitting, most of them, in the Women's-Chamber, some of them doing what little summer work needed doing about the looms, but more resting from their work in field and acre.

Then came the Hall-Sun forth from her room clad in glittering raiment, and summoned no one, but went straight to her place on the dais under her namesake the Lamp, and stood there a little without speaking.  Her face was pale now, her lips a little open, her eyes set and staring as if they saw nothing of all that was round about her.

Now went the word through the Hall and the Women's-Chamber that the Hall- Sun would speak again, and that great tidings were toward; so all folk came flock-meal to the dais, both thralls and free; and scarce were all gathered there, ere the Hall-Sun began speaking, and said:

   "The days of the world thrust onward, and men are born therein
    A many and a many, and divers deeds they win
    In the fashioning of stories for the kindreds of the earth,
    A garland interwoven of sorrow and of mirth.
    To the world a warrior cometh; from the world he passeth away,
    And no man then may sunder his good from his evil day.
    By the Gods hath he been tormented, and been smitten by the foe:
    He hath seen his maiden perish, he hath seen his speech-friend go:
    His heart hath conceived a joyance and hath brought it unto birth:
    But he hath not carried with him his sorrow or his mirth.
    He hath lived, and his life hath fashioned the outcome of the deed,
    For the blossom of the people, and the coming kindreds' seed.

   "Thus-wise the world is fashioned, and the new sun of the morn
    Where earth last night was desert beholds a kindred born,
    That to-morrow and to-morrow blossoms all gloriously
    With many a man and maiden for the kindreds yet to be,
    And fair the Goth-folk groweth.  And yet the story saith
    That the deeds that make the summer make too the winter's death,
    That summer-tides unceasing from out the grave may grow
    And the spring rise up unblemished from the bosom of the snow.

   "Thus as to every kindred the day comes once for all
    When yesterday it was not, and to-day it builds the hall,
    So every kindred bideth the night-tide of the day,
    Whereof it knoweth nothing, e'en when noon is past away.
    E'en thus the House of the Wolfings 'twixt dusk and dark doth stand,
    And narrow is the pathway with the deep on either hand.
    On the left are the days forgotten, on the right the days to come,
    And another folk and their story in the stead of the Wolfing home.
    Do the shadows darken about it, is the even here at last?
    Or is this but a storm of the noon-tide that the wind is driving past?

   "Unscathed as yet it standeth; it bears the stormy drift,
    Nor bows to the lightening flashing adown from the cloudy lift.
    I see the hail of battle and the onslaught of the strong,
    And they go adown to the folk-mote that shall bide there over long.
    I see the slain-heaps rising and the alien folk prevail,
    And the Goths give back before them on the ridge o'er the treeless vale.
    I see the ancient fallen, and the young man smitten dead,
    And yet I see the War-duke shake Throng-plough o'er his head,
    And stand unhelmed, unbyrnied before the alien host,
    And the hurt men rise around him to win back battle lost;
    And the wood yield up her warriors, and the whole host rushing on,
    And the swaying lines of battle until the lost is won.
    Then forth goes the cry of triumph, as they ring the captives round
    And cheat the crow of her portion and heap the warriors' mound.
    There are faces gone from our feast-hall not the least beloved nor worst,
    But the wane of the House of the Wolfings not yet the world hath cursed.
    The sun shall rise to-morrow on our cold and dewy roof,
    For they that longed for slaughter were slaughtered far aloof."

She ceased for a little, but her countenance, which had not changed during her song, changed not at all now: so they all kept silence although they were rejoicing in this new tale of victory; for they deemed that she was not yet at the end of her speaking.  And in good sooth she spake again presently, and said:

   "I wot not what hath befallen nor where my soul may be,
    For confusion is within me and but dimly do I see,
    As if the thing that I look on had happed a while ago.
    They stand by the tofts of a war-garth, a captain of the foe,
    And a man that is of the Goth-folk, and as friend and friend they speak,
    But I hear no word they are saying, though for every word I seek.
    And now the mist flows round me and blind I come aback
    To the House-roof of the Wolfings and the hearth that hath no lack."

Her voice grew weaker as she spake the last words, and she sank backward on to her chair: her clenched hands opened, the lids fell down over her bright eyes, her breast heaved no more as it had done, and presently she fell asleep.

The folk were doubtful and somewhat heavy-hearted because of those last words of hers; but they would not ask her more, or rouse her from her sleep, lest they should grieve her; so they departed to their beds and slept for what was yet left of the night.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f14]

CHAPTER XIV--THE HALL-SUN IS CAREFUL CONCERNING THE PASSES OF THE WOOD

In the morning early folk arose; and the lads and women who were not of the night-shift got them ready to go to the mead and the acres; for the sunshine had been plenty these last days and the wheat was done blossoming, and all must be got ready for harvest.  So they broke their fast, and got their tools into their hands: but they were somewhat heavy- hearted because of those last words of the Hall-Sun, and the doubt of last night still hung about them, and they were scarcely as merry as men are wont to be in the morning.

As for the Hall-Sun, she was afoot with the earliest, and was no less, but mayhap more merry than her wont was, and was blithe with all, both old and young.

But as they were at the point of going she called to them, and said:

"Tarry a little, come ye all to the dais and hearken to me."

So they all gathered thereto, and she stood in her place and spake.

"Women and elders of the Wolfings, is it so that I spake somewhat of tidings last night?"

"Yea," said they all.

She said, "And was it a word of victory?"

They answered "yea" again.

"Good is that," she said; "doubt ye not! there is nought to unsay.  But hearken!  I am nothing wise in war like Thiodolf or Otter of the Laxings, or as Heriulf the Ancient was, though he was nought so wise as they be. Nevertheless ye shall do well to take me for your captain, while this House is bare of warriors."

"Yea, yea," they said, "so will we."

And an old warrior, hight Sorli, who sat in his chair, no longer quite way-worthy, said:

"Hall-Sun, this we looked for of thee; since thy wisdom is not wholly the wisdom of a spae-wife, but rather is of the children of warriors: and we know thine heart to be high and proud, and that thy death seemeth to thee a small matter beside the life of the Wolfing House."

Then she smiled and said, "Will ye all do my bidding?"

And they all cried out heartily, "Yea, Hall-Sun, that will we."

She said: "Hearken then; ye all know that east of Mirkwood-water, when ye come to the tofts of the Bearings, and their Great Roof, the thicket behind them is close, but that there is a wide way cut through it; and often have I gone there: if ye go by that way, in a while ye come to the thicket's end and to bare places where the rocks crop up through the gravel and the woodland loam.  There breed the coneys without number; and wild-cats haunt the place for that sake, and foxes; and the wood-wolf walketh there in summer-tide, and hard by the she-wolf hath her litter of whelps, and all these have enough; and the bald-head erne hangeth over it and the kite, and also the kestril, for shrews and mice abound there.  Of these things there is none that feareth me, and none that maketh me afraid.  Beyond this place for a long way the wood is nowise thick, for first grow ash-trees about the clefts of the rock and also quicken-trees, but not many of either; and here and there a hazel brake easy to thrust through; then comes a space of oak-trees scattered about the lovely wood- lawn, and then at last the beech-wood close above but clear beneath.  This I know well, because I myself have gone so far and further; and by this easy way have I gone so far to the south, that I have come out into the fell country, and seen afar off the snowy mountains beyond the Great Water.

"Now fear ye not, but pluck up a heart!  For either I have seen it or dreamed it, or thought it, that by this road easy to wend the Romans should come into the Mark.  For shall not those dastards and traitors that wear the raiment and bodies of the Goths over the hearts and the lives of foemen, tell them hereof?  And will they not have heard of our Thiodolf, and this my holy namesake?

"Will they not therefore be saying to themselves, 'Go to now, why should we wrench the hinges off the door with plenteous labour, when another door to the same chamber standeth open before us?  This House of the Wolfings is the door to the treasure chamber of the Markmen; let us fall on that at once rather than have many battles for other lesser matters, and then at last have to fight for this also: for having this we have all, and they shall be our thralls, and we may slaughter what we will, and torment what we will and deflower what we will, and make our souls glad with their grief and anguish, and take aback with us to the cities what we will of the thralls, that their anguish and our joy may endure the longer.'  Thus will they say: therefore is it my rede that the strongest and hardiest of you women take horse, a ten of you and one to lead besides, and ride the shallows to the Bearing House, and tell them of our rede; which is to watch diligently the ways of the wood; the outgate to the Mark, and the places where the wood is thin and easy to travel on: and ye shall bid them give you of their folk as many as they deem fittest thereto to join your company, so that ye may have a chain of watchers stretching far into the wilds; but two shall lie without the wood, their horses ready for them to leap on and ride on the spur to the wain-burg in the Upper-mark if any tidings befal.

"Now of these eleven I ordain Hrosshild to be the leader and captain, and to choose for her fellows the stoutest-limbed and heaviest-handed of all the maidens here: art thou content Hrosshild?"

Then stood Hrosshild forth and said nought, but nodded yea; and soon was her choice made amid jests and laughter, for this seemed no hard matter to them.

So the ten got together, and the others fell off from them, and there stood the ten maidens with Hrosshild, well nigh as strong as men, clean- limbed and tall, tanned with sun and wind; for all these were unwearied afield, and oft would lie out a-nights, since they loved the lark's song better than the mouse's squeak; but as their kirtles shifted at neck and wrist, you might see their skins as white as privet-flower where they were wont to be covered.

Then said the Hall-Sun: "Ye have heard the word, see ye to it, Hrosshild, and take this other word also: Bid the Bearing stay-at-homes bide not the sword and the torch at home if the Romans come, but hie them over hither, to hold the Hall or live in the wild-wood with us, as need may be; for might bides with many.

"But ye maidens, take this counsel for yourselves; do ye each bear with you a little keen knife, and if ye be taken, and it seem to you that ye may not bear the smart of the Roman torments (for they be wise in tormenting), but will speak and bewray us under them, then thrust this little edge tool into the place of your bodies where the life lieth closest, and so go to the Gods with a good tale in your mouths: so may the Almighty God of Earth speed you, and the fathers of the kindred!"

So she spoke; and they made no delay but each one took what axe or spear or sword she liked best, and two had their bows and quivers of arrows; and so all folk went forth from the Hall.

Soon were the horses saddled and bridled, and the maidens bestrode them joyously and set forth on their way, going down the lanes of the wheat, and rode down speedily toward the shallows of the water, and all cried good speed after them.  But the others would turn to their day's work, and would go about their divers errands.  But even as they were at point to sunder, they saw a swift runner passing by those maidens just where the acres joined the meadow, and he waved his hand aloft and shouted to them, but stayed not his running for them, but came up the lanes of the wheat at his swiftest: so they knew at once that this was again a messenger from the host, and they stood together and awaited his coming; and as he drew near they knew him for Egil, the swiftest-footed of the Wolfings; and he gave a great shout as he came among them; and he was dusty and way-worn, but eager; and they received him with all love, and would have brought him to the Hall to wash him and give him meat and drink, and cherish him in all ways.

But he cried out, "To the Speech-Hill first, to the Speech-Hill first! But even before that, one word to thee, Hall-Sun!  Saith Thiodolf, Send ye watchers to look to the entrance into Mid-mark, which is by the Bearing dwelling; and if aught untoward befalleth let one ride on the spur with the tidings to the Wain-burg.  For by that way also may peril come."

Then smiled some of the bystanders, and the Hall-Sun said: "Good is it when the thought of a friend stirreth betimes in one's own breast.  The thing is done, Egil; or sawest thou not those ten women, and Hrosshild the eleventh, as thou camest up into the acres?"

Said Egil; "Fair fall thine hand, Hall-Sun! thou art the Wolfings' Ransom.  Wend we now to the Speech-Hill."

So did they, and every thrall that was about the dwellings, man, woman, and child fared with them, and stood about the Speech-Hill: and the dogs went round about the edge of that assembly, wandering in and out, and sometimes looking hard on some one whom they knew best, if he cried out aloud.

But the men-folk gave all their ears to hearkening, and stood as close as they might.

Then Egil clomb the Speech-Hill, and said.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f15]

CHAPTER XV--THEY HEAR TELL OF THE BATTLE ON THE RIDGE

"Ye have heard how the Daylings were appointed to go to help Thiodolf in driving the folk-spear home to the heart of the Roman host.  So they went; but six hours thereafter comes one to Otter bidding him send a great part of the kindreds to him; for that he had had tidings that a great host of Romans were drawing near the wood-edge, but were not entered therein, and that fain would he meet them in the open field.

"So the kindreds drew lots, and the lot fell first to the Elkings, who are a great company, as ye know; and then to the Hartings, the Beamings, the Alftings, the Vallings (also a great company), the Galtings, (and they no lesser) each in their turn; and last of all to the Laxings; and the Oselings prayed to go with the Elkings, and this Otter deemed good, whereas a many of them be bowmen.

"All these then to the number of a thousand or more entered the wood; and I was with them, for in sooth I was the messenger.

"No delay made we in the wood, nor went we over warily, trusting to the warding of the wood by Thiodolf; and there were men with us who knew the paths well, whereof I was one; so we speedily came through into the open country.

"Shortly we came upon our folk and the War-duke lying at the foot of a little hill that went up as a buttress to a long ridge high above us, whereon we set a watch; and a little brook came down the dale for our drink.

"Night fell as we came thither; so we slept for a while, but abode not the morning, and we were afoot (for we had no horses with us) before the moon grew white.  We took the road in good order, albeit our folk-banners we had left behind in the burg; so each kindred raised aloft a shield of its token to be for a banner.  So we went forth, and some swift footmen, with Fox, who hath seen the Roman war-garth, had been sent on before to spy out the ways of the foemen.

"Two hours after sunrise cometh one of these, and telleth how he hath seen the Romans, and how that they are but a short mile hence breaking their fast, not looking for any onslaught; 'but,' saith he, 'they are on a high ridge whence they can see wide about, and be in no danger of ambush, because the place is bare for the most part, nor is there any cover except here and there down in the dales a few hazels and blackthorn bushes, and the rushes of the becks in the marshy bottoms, wherein a snipe may hide, or a hare, but scarce a man; and note that there is no way up to that ridge but by a spur thereof as bare as my hand; so ye will be well seen as ye wend up thereto.'

"So spake he in my hearing.  But Thiodolf bade him lead on to that spur, and old Heriulf, who was standing nigh, laughed merrily and said: 'Yea, lead on, and speedily, lest the day wane and nothing done save the hunting of snipes.'

"So on we went, and coming to the hither side of that spur beheld those others and Fox with them; and he held in his hand an arrow of the aliens, and his face was all astir with half-hidden laughter, and he breathed hard, and pointed to the ridge, and somewhat low down on it we saw a steel cap and three spear-heads showing white from out a little hollow in its side, but the men hidden by the hollow: so we knew that Fox had been chased, and that the Romans were warned and wary.

"No delay made the War-duke, but led us up that spur, which was somewhat steep; and as we rose higher we saw a band of men on the ridge, a little way down it, not a many; archers and slingers mostly, who abode us till we were within shot, and then sent a few shots at us, and so fled.  But two men were hurt with the sling-plummets, and one, and he not grievously, with an arrow, and not one slain.

"Thus we came up on to the ridge, so that there was nothing between us and the bare heavens; thence we looked south-east and saw the Romans wisely posted on the ridge not far from where it fell down steeply to the north; but on the south, that is to say on their left hands, and all along the ridge past where we were stayed, the ground sloped gently to the south-west for a good way, before it fell, somewhat steeply, into another long dale.  Looking north we saw the outer edge of Mirkwood but a little way from us, and we were glad thereof; because ere we left our sleeping-place that morn Thiodolf had sent to Otter another messenger bidding him send yet more men on to us in case we should be hard-pressed in the battle; for he had had a late rumour that the Romans were many. And now when he had looked on the Roman array and noted how wise it was, he sent three swift-foot ones to take stand on a high knoll which we had passed on the way, that they might take heed where our folk came out from the wood and give signal to them by the horn, and lead them to where the battle should be.

"So we stood awhile and breathed us, and handled our weapons some half a furlong from the alien host.  They had no earth rampart around them, for that ridge is waterless, and they could not abide there long, but they had pitched sharp pales in front of them and they stood in very good order, as if abiding an onslaught, and moved not when they saw us; for that band of shooters had joined themselves to them already.  Taken one with another we deemed them to be more than we were; but their hauberked footmen with the heavy cast-spears not so many as we by a good deal.

"Now we were of mind to fall on them ere they should fall on us; so all such of us as had shot-weapons spread out from our company and went forth a little; and of the others Heriulf stood foremost along with the leaders of the Beamings and the Elkings; but as yet Thiodolf held aback and led the midmost company, as his wont was, and the more part of the Wolfings were with him.

"Thus we ordered ourselves, and awaited a little while yet what the aliens should do; and presently a war-horn blew amongst them, and from each flank of their mailed footmen came forth a many bowmen and slingers and a band of horsemen; and drew within bowshot, the shooters in open array yet wisely, and so fell to on us, and the horsemen hung aback a little as yet.

"Their arrow-shot was of little avail, their bowmen fell fast before ours; but deadly was their sling-shot, and hurt and slew many and some even in our main battle; for they slung round leaden balls and not stones, and they aimed true and shot quick; and the men withal were so light and lithe, never still, but crouching and creeping and bounding here and there, that they were no easier to hit than coneys amidst of the fern, unless they were very nigh.

"Howbeit when this storm had endured a while, and we moved but little, and not an inch aback, and gave them shot for shot, then was another horn winded from amongst the aliens; and thereat the bowmen cast down their bows, and the slingers wound their slings about their heads, and they all came on with swords and short spears and feathered darts, running and leaping lustily, making for our flanks, and the horsemen set spurs to their horses and fell on in the very front of our folk like good and valiant men-at-arms.

"That saw Heriulf and his men, and they set up the war-whoop, and ran forth to meet them, axe and sword aloft, terribly yet maybe somewhat unwarily.  The archers and slingers never came within sword-stroke of them, but fell away before them on all sides; but the slingers fled not far, but began again with their shot, and slew a many.  Then was a horn winded, as if to call back the horsemen, who, if they heard, heeded not, but rode hard on our kindred like valiant warriors who feared not death. Sooth to say, neither were the horses big or good, nor the men fit for the work, saving for their hardihood; and their spears were short withal and their bucklers unhandy to wield.

"Now could it be seen how the Goths gave way before them to let them into the trap, and then closed around again, and the axes and edge weapons went awork hewing as in a wood; and Heriulf towered over all the press, and the Wolf's-sister flashed over his head in the summer morning.

"Soon was that storm over, and we saw the Goths tossing up their spears over the slain, and horses running loose and masterless adown over the westward-lying slopes, and a few with their riders still clinging to them.  Yet some, sore hurt by seeming, galloping toward the main battle of the Romans.

"Unwarily then fared the children of Tyr that were with Heriulf; for by this time they were well nigh within shot of the spears of those mighty footmen of the Romans: and on their flanks were the slingers, and the bowmen, who had now gotten their bows again; and our bowmen, though they shot well and strong, were too few to quell them; and indeed some of them had cast by their bows to join in Heriulf's storm.  Also the lie of the ground was against us, for it sloped up toward the Roman array at first very gently, but afterwards steeply enough to breathe a short-winded man. Also behind them were we of the other kindreds, whom Thiodolf had ordered into the wedge-array; and we were all ready to move forward, so that had they abided somewhat, all had been well and better.

"So did they not, but straightway set up the Victory-whoop and ran forward on the Roman host.  And these were so ordered that, as aforesaid, they had before them sharp piles stuck into the earth and pointed against us, as we found afterwards to our cost; and within these piles stood the men some way apart from each other, so as to handle their casting spears, and in three ranks were they ordered and many spears could be cast at once, and if any in the front were slain, his fellow behind him took his place.

"So now the storm of war fell at once upon our folk, and swift and fierce as was their onslaught yet were a many slain and hurt or ever they came to the piles aforesaid.  Then saw they death before them and heeded it nought, but tore up the piles and dashed through them, and fell in on those valiant footmen.  Short is the tale to tell: wheresoever a sword or spear of the Goths was upraised there were three upon him, and saith Toti of the Beamings, who was hurt and crawled away and yet lives, that on Heriulf there were six at first and then more; and he took no thought of shielding himself, but raised up the Wolf's-sister and hewed as the woodman in the thicket, when night cometh and hunger is on him.  There fell Heriulf the Ancient and many a man of the Beamings and the Elkings with him, and many a Roman.

"But amidst the slain and the hurt our wedge-array moved forward slowly now, warily shielded against the plummets and shafts on either side; and when the Romans saw our unbroken array, and Thiodolf the first with Throng-plough naked in his hand, they chased not such men of ours unhurt or little hurt, as drew aback from before them: so these we took amongst us, and when we had gotten all we might, and held a grim face to the foe, we drew aback little by little, still facing them till we were out of shot of their spears, though the shot of the arrows and the sling-plummets ceased not wholly from us.  Thus ended Heriulf's Storm."

Then he rested from his speaking for a while, and none said aught, but they gazed on him as if he bore with him a picture of the battle, and many of the women wept silently for Heriulf, and yet more of the younger ones were wounded to the heart when they thought of the young men of the Elkings, and the Beamings, since with both those houses they had affinity; and they lamented the loves that they had lost, and would have asked concerning their own speech-friends had they durst.  But they held their peace till the tale was told out to an end.

Then Egil spake again:

"No long while had worn by in Heriulf's Storm, and though men's hearts were nothing daunted, but rather angered by what had befallen, yet would Thiodolf wear away the time somewhat more, since he hoped for succour from the Wain-burg and the Wood; and he would not that any of these Romans should escape us, but would give them all to Tyr, and to be a following to Heriulf the Old and the Great.

"So there we abided a while moving nought, and Thiodolf stood with Throng- plough on his shoulder, unhelmed, unbyrnied, as though he trusted to the kindred for all defence.  Nor for their part did the Romans dare to leave their vantage-ground, when they beheld what grim countenance we made them.

"Albeit, when we had thrice made as if we would fall on, and yet they moved not, whereas it trieth a man sorely to stand long before the foeman, and do nought but endure, and whereas many of our bowmen were slain or hurt, and the rest too few to make head against the shot-weapons of the aliens, then at last we began to draw nearer and a little nearer, not breaking the wedge-array; and at last, just before we were within shot of the cast-spears of their main battle, loud roared our war-horn: then indeed we broke the wedge-array, but orderly as we knew how, spreading out from right and left of the War-duke till we were facing them in a long line: one minute we abode thus, and then ran forth through the spear-storm: and even therewith we heard, as it were, the echo of our own horn, and whoso had time to think betwixt the first of the storm and the handstrokes of the Romans deemed that now would be coming fresh kindreds for our helping.

"Not long endured the spear-rain, so swift we were, neither were we in one throng as betid in Heriulf's Storm, but spread abroad, each trusting in the other that none thought of the backward way.

"Though we had the ground against us we dashed like fresh men at their pales, and were under the weapons at once.  Then was the battle grim; they could not thrust us back, nor did we break their array with our first storm; man hewed at man as if there were no foes in the world but they two: sword met sword, and sax met sax; it was thrusting and hewing with point and edge, and no long-shafted weapons were of any avail; there we fought hand to hand and no man knew by eyesight how the battle went two yards from where he fought, and each one put all his heart in the stroke he was then striking, and thought of nothing else.

"Yet at the last we felt that they were faltering and that our work was easier and our hope higher; then we cried our cries and pressed on harder, and in that very nick of time there arose close behind us the roar of the Markmen's horn and the cries of the kindreds answering ours. Then such of the Romans as were not in the very act of smiting, or thrusting, or clinging or shielding, turned and fled, and the whoop of victory rang around us, and the earth shook, and past the place of the slaughter rushed the riders of the Goths; for they had sent horsemen to us, and the paths were grown easier for our much treading of them.  Then I beheld Thiodolf, that he had just slain a foe, and clear was the space around him, and he rushed sideways and caught hold of the stirrup of Angantyr of the Bearings, and ran ten strides beside him, and then bounded on afoot swifter than the red horses of the Bearings, urging on the chase, as his wont was.

"But we who were wearier, when we had done our work, stood still between the living and the dead, between the freemen of the Mark and their war- thralls.  And in no long while there came back to us Thiodolf and the chasers, and we made a great ring on the field of the slain, and sang the Song of Triumph; and it was the Wolfing Song that we sang.

"Thus then ended Thiodolf's Storm."

When he held his peace there was but little noise among the stay-at-homes, for still were they thinking about the deaths of their kindred and their lovers.  But Egil spoke again.

"Yet within that ring lay the sorrow of our hearts; for Odin had called a many home, and there lay their bodies; and the mightiest was Heriulf; and the Romans had taken him up from where he fell, and cast him down out of the way, but they had not stripped him, and his hand still gripped the Wolf's-sister.  His shield was full of shafts of arrows and spears; his byrny was rent in many places, his helm battered out of form.  He had been grievously hurt in the side and in the thigh by cast-spears or ever he came to hand-blows with the Romans, but moreover he had three great wounds from the point of the sax, in the throat, in the side, in the belly, each enough for his bane.  His face was yet fair to look on, and we deemed that he had died smiling.

"At his feet lay a young man of the Beamings in a gay green coat, and beside him was the head of another of his House, but his green-clad body lay some yards aloof.  There lay of the Elkings a many.  Well may ye weep, maidens, for them that loved you.  Now fare they to the Gods a goodly company, but a goodly company is with them.

"Seventy and seven of the Sons of the Goths lay dead within the Roman battle, and fifty-four on the slope before it; and to boot there were twenty-four of us slain by the arrows and plummets of the shooters, and a many hurt withal.

"But there were no hurt men inside the Roman array or before it.  All were slain outright, for the hurt men either dragged themselves back to our folk, or onward to the Roman ranks, that they might die with one more stroke smitten.

"Now of the aliens the dead lay in heaps in that place, for grim was the slaughter when the riders of the Bearings and the Wormings fell on the aliens; and a many of the foemen scorned to flee, but died where they stood, craving no peace; and to few of them was peace given.  There fell of the Roman footmen five hundred and eighty and five, and the remnant that fled was but little: but of the slingers and bowmen but eighty and six were slain, for they were there to shoot and not to stand; and they were nimble and fleet of foot, men round of limb, very dark-skinned, but not foul of favour."

Then he said:

   "There are men through the dusk a-faring, our speech-fiends and our kin,
    No more shall they crave our helping, nor ask what work to win;
    They have done their deeds and departed when they had holpen the House,
    So high their heads are holden, and their hurts are glorious
    With the story of strokes stricken, and new weapons to be met,
    And new scowling of foes' faces, and new curses unknown yet.
    Lo, they dight the feast in Godhome, and fair are the tables spread,
    Late come, but well-beloved is every war-worn head,
    And the God-folk and the Fathers, as these cross the tinkling bridge,
    Crowd round and crave for stories of the Battle on the Ridge."

Therewith he came down from the Speech-Hill and the women-folk came round about him, and they brought him to the Hall, and washed him, and gave him meat and drink; and then would he sleep, for he was weary.

Howbeit some of the women could not refrain themselves, but must needs ask after their speech-friends who had been in the battle; and he answered as he could, and some he made glad, and some sorry; and as to some, he could not tell them whether their friends were alive or dead.  So he went to his place and fell asleep and slept long, while the women went down to acre and meadow, or saw to the baking of bread or the sewing of garments, or went far afield to tend the neat and the sheep.

Howbeit the Hall-Sun went not with them; but she talked with that old warrior, Sorli, who was now halt and grown unmeet for the road, but was a wise man; and she and he together with some old carlines and a few young lads fell to work, and saw to many matters about the Hall and the garth that day; and they got together what weapons there were both for shot and for the handplay, and laid them where they were handy to come at, and they saw to the meal in the hall that there was provision for many days; and they carried up to a loft above the Women's-Chamber many great vessels of water, lest the fire should take the Hall; and they looked everywhere to the entrances and windows and had fastenings and bolts and bars fashioned and fitted to them; and saw that all things were trim and stout.  And so they abided the issue.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f16]

CHAPTER XVI--HOW THE DWARF-WROUGHT HAUBERK WAS BROUGHT AWAY FROM THE HALL OF THE DAYLINGS

Now it must be told that early in the morning, after the night when Gisli had brought to the Wolfing Stead the tidings of the Battle in the Wood, a man came riding from the south to the Dayling abode.  It was just before sunrise, and but few folk were stirring about the dwellings.  He rode up to the Hall and got off his black horse, and tied it to a ring in the wall by the Man's-door, and went in clashing, for he was in his battle- gear, and had a great wide-rimmed helm on his head.

Folk were but just astir in the Hall, and there came an old woman to him, and looked on him and saw by his attire that he was a man of the Goths and of the Wolfing kindred; so she greeted him kindly: but he said:

"Mother, I am come hither on an errand, and time presses."

Said she: "Yea, my son, or what tidings bearest thou from the south? for by seeming thou art new-come from the host."

Said he: "The tidings are as yesterday, save that Thiodolf will lead the host through the wild-wood to look for the Romans beyond it: therefore will there soon be battle again.  See ye, Mother, hast thou here one that knoweth this ring of Thiodolf's, if perchance men doubt me when I say that I am sent on my errand by him?"

"Yea," she said, "Agni will know it; since he knoweth all the chief men of the Mark; but what is thine errand, and what is thy name?"

"It is soon told," said he, "I am a Wolfing hight Thorkettle, and I come to have away for Thiodolf the treasure of the world, the Dwarf-wrought Hauberk, which he left with you when we fared hence to the south three days ago.  Now let Agni come, that I may have it, for time presses sorely."

There were three or four gathered about them now, and a maiden of them said: "Shall I bring Agni hither, mother?"

"What needeth it?" said the carline, "he sleepeth, and shall be hard to awaken; and he is old, so let him sleep.  I shall go fetch the hauberk, for I know where it is, and my hand may come on it as easily as on mine own girdle."

So she went her ways to the treasury where were the precious things of the kindred; the woven cloths were put away in fair coffers to keep them clean from the whirl of the Hall-dust and the reek; and the vessels of gold and some of silver were standing on the shelves of a cupboard before which hung a veil of needlework: but the weapons and war-gear hung upon pins along the wall, and many of them had much fair work on them, and were dight with gold and gems: but amidst them all was the wondrous hauberk clear to see, dark grey and thin, for it was so wondrously wrought that it hung in small compass.  So the carline took it down from the pin, and handled it, and marvelled at it, and said:

"Strange are the hands that have passed over thee, sword-rampart, and in strange places of the earth have they dwelt!  For no smith of the kindreds hath fashioned thee, unless he had for his friend either a God or a foe of the Gods.  Well shalt thou wot of the tale of sword and spear ere thou comest back hither!  For Thiodolf shall bring thee where the work is wild."

Then she went with the hauberk to the new-come warrior, and made no delay, but gave it to him, and said:

"When Agni awaketh, I shall tell him that Thorkettle of the Wolfings hath borne aback to Thiodolf the Treasure of the World, the Dwarf-wrought Hauberk."

Then Thorkettle took it and turned to go; but even therewith came old Asmund from out of his sleeping-place, and gazed around the Hall, and his eyes fell on the shape of the Wolfing as he was going out of the door, and he asked the carline.

"What doeth he here?  What tidings is there from the host?  For my soul was nought unquiet last night."

"It is a little matter," she said; "the War-duke hath sent for the wondrous Byrny that he left in our treasury when he departed to meet the Romans.  Belike there shall be a perilous battle, and few hearts need a stout sword-wall more than Thiodolf's."

As she spoke, Thorkettle had passed the door, and got into his saddle, and sat his black horse like a mighty man as he slowly rode down the turf bridge that led into the plain.  And Asmund went to the door and stood watching him till he set spurs to his horse, and departed a great gallop to the south.  Then said Asmund:

   "What then are the Gods devising, what wonders do they will?
    What mighty need is on them to work the kindreds ill,
    That the seed of the Ancient Fathers and a woman of their kin
    With her all unfading beauty must blend herself therein?
    Are they fearing lest the kindreds should grow too fair and great,
    And climb the stairs of God-home, and fashion all their fate,
    And make all earth so merry that it never wax the worse,
    Nor need a gift from any, nor prayers to quench the curse?
    Fear they that the Folk-wolf, growing as the fire from out the spark
    Into a very folk-god, shall lead the weaponed Mark
    From wood to field and mountain, to stand between the earth
    And the wrights that forge its thraldom and the sword to slay its mirth?
    Fear they that the sons of the wild-wood the Loathly Folk shall quell,
    And grow into Gods thereafter, and aloof in God-home dwell?"

Therewith he turned back into the Hall, and was heavy-hearted and dreary of aspect; for he was somewhat foreseeing; and it may not be hidden that this seeming Thorkettle was no warrior of the Wolfings, but the Wood-Sun in his likeness; for she had the power and craft of shape-changing.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f17]

CHAPTER XVII--THE WOOD-SUN SPEAKETH WITH THIODOLF

Now the Markmen laid Heriulf in howe on the ridge-crest where he had fallen, and heaped a mighty howe over him that could be seen from far, and round about him they laid the other warriors of the kindreds.  For they deemed it was fittest that they should lie on the place whose story they had fashioned.  But they cast earth on the foemen lower down on the westward-lying bents.

The sun set amidst their work, and night came on; and Thiodolf was weary and would fain rest him and sleep: but he had many thoughts, and pondered whitherward he should lead the folk, so as to smite the Romans once again, and he had a mind to go apart and be alone for rest and slumber; so he spoke to a man of the kindred named Solvi in whom he put all trust, and then he went down from the ridge, and into a little dale on the southwest side thereof, a furlong from the place of the battle.  A beck ran down that dale, and the further end of it was closed by a little wood of yew trees, low, but growing thick together, and great grey stones were scattered up and down on the short grass of the dale.  Thiodolf went down to the brook-side, and to a place where it trickled into a pool, whence it ran again in a thin thread down the dale, turning aside before it reached the yew-wood to run its ways under low ledges of rock into a wider dale.  He looked at the pool and smiled to himself as if he had thought of something that pleased him; then he drew a broad knife from his side, and fell to cutting up turfs till he had what he wanted; and then he brought stones to the place, and built a dam across the mouth of the pool, and sat by on a great stone to watch it filling.

As he sat he strove to think about the Roman host and how he should deal with it; but despite himself his thoughts wandered, and made for him pictures of his life that should be when this time of battle was over; so that he saw nothing of the troubles that were upon his hands that night, but rather he saw himself partaking in the deeds of the life of man. There he was between the plough-stilts in the acres of the kindred when the west wind was blowing over the promise of early spring; or smiting down the ripe wheat in the hot afternoon amidst the laughter and merry talk of man and maid; or far away over Mirkwood-water watching the edges of the wood against the prowling wolf and lynx, the stars just beginning to shine over his head, as now they were; or wending the windless woods in the first frosts before the snow came, the hunter's bow or javelin in hand: or coming back from the wood with the quarry on the sledge across the snow, when winter was deep, through the biting icy wind and the whirl of the drifting snow, to the lights and music of the Great Roof, and the merry talk therein and the smiling of the faces glad to see the hunting- carles come back; and the full draughts of mead, and the sweet rest a night-tide when the north wind was moaning round the ancient home.

All seemed good and fair to him, and whiles he looked around him, and saw the long dale lying on his left hand and the dark yews in its jaws pressing up against the rock-ledges of the brook, and on his right its windings as the ground rose up to the buttresses of the great ridge.  The moon was rising over it, and he heard the voice of the brook as it tinkled over the stones above him; and the whistle of the plover and the laugh of the whimbrel came down the dale sharp and clear in the calm evening; and sounding far away, because the great hill muffled them, were the voices of his fellows on the ridge, and the songs of the warriors and the high-pitched cries of the watch.  And this also was a part of the sweet life which was, and was to be; and he smiled and was happy and loved the days that were coming, and longed for them, as the young man longs for the feet of his maiden at the trysting-place.

So as he sat there, the dreams wrapping him up from troublous thoughts, at last slumber overtook him, and the great warrior of the Wolfings sat nodding like an old carle in the chimney ingle, and he fell asleep, his dreams going with him, but all changed and turned to folly and emptiness.

He woke with a start in no long time; the night was deep, the wind had fallen utterly, and all sounds were stilled save the voice of the brook, and now and again the cry of the watchers of the Goths.  The moon was high and bright, and the little pool beside him glittered with it in all its ripples; for it was full now and trickling over the lip of his dam. So he arose from the stone and did off his war-gear, casting Throng-plough down into the grass beside him, for he had been minded to bathe him, but the slumber was still on him, and he stood musing while the stream grew stronger and pushed off first one of his turfs and then another, and rolled two or three of the stones over, and then softly thrust all away and ran with a gush down the dale, filling all the little bights by the way for a minute or two; he laughed softly thereat, and stayed the undoing of his kirtle, and so laid himself down on the grass beside the stone looking down the dale, and fell at once into a dreamless sleep.

When he awoke again, it was yet night, but the moon was getting lower and the first beginnings of dawn were showing in the sky over the ridge; he lay still a moment gathering his thoughts and striving to remember where he was, as is the wont of men waking from deep sleep; then he leapt to his feet, and lo, he was face to face with a woman, and she who but the Wood-Sun? and he wondered not, but reached out his hand to touch her, though he had not yet wholly cast off the heaviness of slumber or remembered the tidings of yesterday.

She drew aback a little from him, and his eyes cleared of the slumber, and he saw her that she was scantily clad in black raiment, barefoot, with no gold ring on her arms or necklace on her neck, or crown about her head.  But she looked so fair and lovely even in that end of the night- tide, that he remembered all her beauty of the day and the sunshine, and he laughed aloud for joy of the sight of her, and said:

"What aileth thee, O Wood-Sun, and is this a new custom of thy kindred and the folk of God-home that their brides array themselves like thralls new-taken, and as women who have lost their kindred and are outcast?  Who then hath won the Burg of the Anses, and clomb the rampart of God-home?"

But she spoke from where she stood in a voice so sweet, that it thrilled to the very marrow of his bones.

   "I have dwelt a while with sorrow since we met, we twain, in the wood:
    I have mourned, while thou hast been merry, who deemest the war-play good.
    For I know the heart of the wilful and how thou wouldst cast away
    The rampart of thy life-days, and the wall of my happy day.
    Yea I am the thrall of Sorrow; she hath stripped my raiment off
    And laid sore stripes upon me with many a bitter scoff.
    Still bidding me remember that I come of the God-folk's kin,
    And yet for all my godhead no love of thee may win."

Then she looked longingly at him a while and at last could no longer refrain her, but drew nigh him and took his hands in hers, and kissed his mouth, and said as she caressed him:

   "O where are thy wounds, beloved? how turned the spear from thy breast,
    When the storm of war blew strongest, and the best men met the best?
    Lo, this is the tale of to-day: but what shall to-morrow tell?
    That Thiodolf the Mighty in the fight's beginning fell;
    That there came a stroke ill-stricken, there came an aimless thrust,
    And the life of the people's helper lay quenched in the summer dust."

He answered nothing, but smiled as though the sound of her voice and the touch of her hand were pleasant to him, for so much love there was in her, that her very grief was scarcely grievous.  But she said again:

   "Thou sayest it: I am outcast; for a God that lacketh mirth
    Hath no more place in God-home and never a place on earth.
    A man grieves, and he gladdens, or he dies and his grief is gone;
    But what of the grief of the Gods, and the sorrow never undone?
    Yea verily I am the outcast.  When first in thine arms I lay
    On the blossoms of the woodland my godhead passed away;
    Thenceforth unto thee was I looking for the light and the glory of life
    And the Gods' doors shut behind me till the day of the uttermost strife.
    And now thou hast taken my soul, thou wilt cast it into the night,
    And cover thine head with the darkness, and turn thine eyes from the light.
    Thou wouldst go to the empty country where never a seed is sown
    And never a deed is fashioned, and the place where each is alone;
    But I thy thrall shall follow, I shall come where thou seemest to lie,
    I shall sit on the howe that hides thee, and thou so dear and nigh!
    A few bones white in their war-gear that have no help or thought,
    Shall be Thiodolf the Mighty, so nigh, so dear--and nought."

His hands strayed over her shoulders and arms, caressing them, and he said softly and lovingly:

   "I am Thiodolf the Mighty: but as wise as I may be
    No story of that grave-night mine eyes can ever see,
    But rather the tale of the Wolfings through the coming days of earth,
    And the young men in their triumph and the maidens in their mirth;
    And morn's promise every evening, and each day the promised morn,
    And I amidst it ever reborn and yet reborn.
    This tale I know, who have seen it, who have felt the joy and pain,
    Each fleeing, each pursuing, like the links of the draw-well's chain:
    But that deedless tide of the grave-mound, and the dayless nightless day,
    E'en as I strive to see it, its image wanes away.
    What say'st thou of the grave-mound? shall I be there at all
    When they lift the Horn of Remembrance, and the shout goes down the hall,
    And they drink the Mighty War-duke and Thiodolf the old?
    Nay rather; there where the youngling that longeth to be bold
    Sits gazing through the hall-reek and sees across the board
    A vision of the reaping of the harvest of the sword,
    There shall Thiodolf be sitting; e'en there shall the youngling be
    That once in the ring of the hazels gave up his life to thee."

She laughed as he ended, and her voice was sweet, but bitter was her laugh.  Then she said:

   "Nay thou shalt be dead, O warrior, thou shalt not see the Hall
    Nor the children of thy people 'twixt the dais and the wall.
    And I, and I shall be living; still on thee shall waste my thought:
    I shall long and lack thy longing; I shall pine for what is nought."

But he smiled again, and said:

   "Not on earth shall I learn this wisdom; and how shall I learn it then
    When I lie alone in the grave-mound, and have no speech with men?
    But for thee,--O doubt it nothing that my life shall live in thee,
    And so shall we twain be loving in the days that yet shall be."

It was as if she heard him not; and she fell aback from him a little and stood silently for a while as one in deep thought; and then turned and went a few paces from him, and stooped down and came back again with something in her arms (and it was the hauberk once more), and said suddenly:

   "O Thiodolf, now tell me for what cause thou wouldst not bear
    This grey wall of the hammer in the tempest of the spear?
    Didst thou doubt my faith, O Folk-wolf, or the counsel of the Gods,
    That thou needs must cast thee naked midst the flashing battle-rods,
    Or is thy pride so mighty that it seemed to thee indeed
    That death was a better guerdon than the love of the Godhead's seed?"

But Thiodolf said: "O Wood-Sun, this thou hast a right to ask of me, why I have not worn in the battle thy gift, the Treasure of the World, the Dwarf-wrought Hauberk!  And what is this that thou sayest?  I doubt not thy faith towards me and thine abundant love: and as for the rede of the Gods, I know it not, nor may I know it, nor turn it this way nor that: and as for thy love and that I would choose death sooner, I know not what thou meanest; I will not say that I love thy love better than life itself; for these two, my life and my love, are blended together and may not be sundered.

"Hearken therefore as to the Hauberk: I wot well that it is for no light matter that thou wouldst have me bear thy gift, the wondrous hauberk, into battle; I deem that some doom is wrapped up in it; maybe that I shall fall before the foe if I wear it not; and that if I wear it, somewhat may betide me which is unmeet to betide a warrior of the Wolfings.  Therefore will I tell thee why I have fought in two battles with the Romans with unmailed body, and why I left the hauberk, (which I see that thou bearest in thine arms) in the Roof of the Daylings.  For when I entered therein, clad in the hauberk, there came to meet me an ancient man, one of the very valiant of days past, and he looked on me with the eyes of love, as though he had been the very father of our folk, and I the man that was to come after him to carry on the life thereof. But when he saw the hauberk and touched it, then was his love smitten cold with sadness and he spoke words of evil omen; so that putting this together with thy words about the gift, and that thou didst in a manner compel me to wear it, I could not but deem that this mail is for the ransom of a man and the ruin of a folk.

"Wilt thou say that it is not so? then will I wear the hauberk, and live and die happy.  But if thou sayest that I have deemed aright, and that a curse goeth with the hauberk, then either for the sake of the folk I will not wear the gift and the curse, and I shall die in great glory, and because of me the House shall live; or else for thy sake I shall bear it and live, and the House shall live or die as may be, but I not helping, nay I no longer of the House nor in it.  How sayest thou?"

Then she said:

   "Hail be thy mouth, beloved, for that last word of thine,
    And the hope that thine heart conceiveth and the hope that is born in mine.
    Yea, for a man's delivrance was the hauberk born indeed
    That once more the mighty warrior might help the folk at need.
    And where is the curse's dwelling if thy life be saved to dwell
    Amidst the Wolfing warriors and the folk that loves thee well
    And the house where the high Gods left thee to be cherished well therein?

   "Yea more: I have told thee, beloved, that thou art not of the kin;
    The blood in thy body is blended of the wandering Elking race,
    And one that I may not tell of, who in God-home hath his place,
    And who changed his shape to beget thee in the wild-wood's leafy roof.
    How then shall the doom of the Wolfings be woven in the woof
    Which the Norns for thee have shuttled? or shall one man of war
    Cast down the tree of the Wolfings on the roots that spread so far?
    O friend, thou art wise and mighty, but other men have lived
    Beneath the Wolfing roof-tree whereby the folk has thrived."

 

He reddened at her word; but his eyes looked eagerly on her.  She cast down the hauberk, and drew one step nigher to him.  She knitted her brows, her face waxed terrible, and her stature seemed to grow greater, as she lifted up her gleaming right arm, and cried out in a great voice.

   "Thou Thiodolf the Mighty!  Hadst thou will to cast the net
    And tangle the House in thy trouble, it is I would slay thee yet;
    For 'tis I and I that love them, and my sorrow would I give,
    And thy life, thou God of battle, that the Wolfing House might live."

Therewith she rushed forward, and cast herself upon him, and threw her arms about him, and strained him to her bosom, and kissed his face, and he her in likewise, for there was none to behold them, and nought but the naked heaven was the roof above their heads.

And now it was as if the touch of her face and her body, and the murmuring of her voice changed and soft close to his ear, as she murmured mere words of love to him, drew him away from the life of deeds and doubts and made a new world for him, wherein he beheld all those fair pictures of the happy days that had been in his musings when first he left the field of the dead.

So they sat down on the grey stone together hand in hand, her head laid upon his shoulder, no otherwise than if they had been two lovers, young and without renown in days of deep peace.

So as they sat, her foot smote on the cold hilts of the sword, which Thiodolf had laid down in the grass; and she stooped and took it up, and laid it across her knees and his as they sat there; and she looked on Throng-plough as he lay still in the sheath, and smiled on him, and saw that the peace-strings were not yet wound about his hilts.  So she drew him forth and raised him up in her hand, and he gleamed white and fearful in the growing dawn, for all things had now gotten their colours again, whereas amidst their talking had the night worn, and the moon low down was grown white and pale.

But she leaned aside, and laid her cheek against Thiodolf's, and he took the sword out of her hand and set it on his knees again, and laid his right hand on it, and said:

   "Two things by these blue edges in the face of the dawning I swear;
    And first this warrior's ransom in the coming fight to bear,
    And evermore to love thee who hast given me second birth.
    And by the sword I swear it, and by the Holy Earth,
    To live for the House of the Wolfings, and at last to die for their need.
    For though I trow thy saying that I am not one of their seed,
    Nor yet by the hand have been taken and unto the Father shown
    As a very son of the Fathers, yet mid them hath my body grown;
    And I am the guest of their Folk-Hall, and each one there is my friend.
    So with them is my joy and sorrow, and my life, and my death in the end.
    Now whatso doom hereafter my coming days shall bide,
    Thou speech-friend, thou deliverer, thine is this dawning-tide."

She spoke no word to him; but they rose up and went hand in hand down the dale, he still bearing his naked sword over his shoulder, and thus they went together into the yew-copse at the dale's end.  There they abode till after the rising of the sun, and each to each spake many loving words at their departure; and the Wood-Sun went her ways at her will.

But Thiodolf went up the dale again, and set Throng-plough in his sheath, and wound the peace-strings round him.  Then he took up the hauberk from the grass whereas the Wood-Sun had cast it, and did it on him, as it were of the attire he was wont to carry daily.  So he girt Throng-plough to him, and went soberly up to the ridge-top to the folk, who were just stirring in the early morning.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f18]

CHAPTER XVIII--TIDINGS BROUGHT TO THE WAIN-BURG

Now it must be told of Otter and they of the Wain-burg how they had the tidings of the overthrow of the Romans on the Ridge, and that Egil had left them on his way to Wolf-stead.  They were joyful of the tale, as was like to be, but eager also to strike their stroke at the foemen, and in that mood they abode fresh tidings.

It has been told how Otter had sent the Bearings and the Wormings to the aid of Thiodolf and his folk, and these two were great kindreds, and they being gone, there abode with Otter, one man with another, thralls and freemen, scant three thousand men: of these many were bowmen good to fight from behind a wall or fence, or some such cover, but scarce meet to withstand a shock in the open field.  However it was deemed at this time in the Wain-burg that Thiodolf and his men would soon return to them; and in any case, they said, he lay between the Romans and the Mark, so that they had but little doubt; or rather they feared that the Romans might draw aback from the Mark before they could be met in battle again, for as aforesaid they were eager for the fray.

Now it was in the cool of the evening two days after the Battle on the Ridge, that the men, both freemen and thralls, had been disporting themselves in the plain ground without the Burg in casting the spear and putting the stone, and running races a-foot and a-horseback, and now close on sunset three young men, two of the Laxings and one of the Shieldings, and a grey old thrall of that same House, were shooting a match with the bow, driving their shafts at a rushen roundel hung on a pole which the old thrall had dight.  Men were peaceful and happy, for the time was fair and calm, and, as aforesaid, they dreaded not the Roman Host any more than if they were Gods dwelling in God-home.  The shooters were deft men, and they of the Burg were curious to note their deftness, and many were breathed with the games wherein they had striven, and thought it good to rest, and look on the new sport: so they sat and stood on the grass about the shooters on three sides, and the mead-horn went briskly from man to man; for there was no lack of meat and drink in the Burg, whereas the kindreds that lay nighest to it had brought in abundant provision, and women of the kindreds had come to them, and not a few were there scattered up and down among the carles.

Now the Shielding man, Geirbald by name, had just loosed at the mark, and had shot straight and smitten the roundel in the midst, and a shout went up from the onlookers thereat; but that shout was, as it were, lined with another, and a cry that a messenger was riding toward the Burg: thereat most men looked round toward the wood, because their minds were set on fresh tidings from Thiodolf's company, but as it happened it was from the north and the side toward Mid-mark that they on the outside of the throng had seen the rider coming; and presently the word went from man to man that so it was, and that the new comer was a young man on a grey horse, and would speedily be amongst them; so they wondered what the tidings might be, but yet they did not break up the throng, but abode in their places that they might receive the messenger more orderly; and as the rider drew near, those who were nighest to him perceived that it was a woman.

So men made way before the grey horse, and its rider, and the horse was much spent and travel-worn.  So the woman rode right into the ring of warriors, and drew rein there, and lighted down slowly and painfully, and when she was on the ground could scarce stand for stiffness; and two or three of the swains drew near her to help her, and knew her at once for Hrosshild of the Wolfings, for she was well-known as a doughty woman.

Then she said: "Bring me to Otter the War-duke; or bring him hither to me, which were best, since so many men are gathered together; and meanwhile give me to drink; for I am thirsty and weary."

So while one went for Otter, another reached to her the mead-horn, and she had scarce done her draught, ere Otter was there, for they had found him at the gate of the Burg.  He had many a time been in the Wolfing Hall, so he knew her at once and said:

"Hail, Hrosshild! how farest thou?"

She said: "I fare as the bearer of evil tidings.  Bid thy folk do on their war-gear and saddle their horses, and make no delay; for now presently shall the Roman host be in Mid-mark!"

Then cried Otter: "Blow up the war-horn! get ye all to your weapons and be ready to leap on your horses, and come ye to the Thing in good order kindred by kindred: later on ye shall hear Hrosshild's story as she shall tell it to me!"

Therewith he led her to a grassy knoll that was hard by, and set her down thereon and himself beside her, and said:

"Speak now, damsel, and fear not!  For now shall one fate go over us all, either to live together or die together as the free children of Tyr, and friends of the Almighty God of the Earth.  How camest thou to meet the Romans and know of their ways and to live thereafter?"

She said: "Thus it was: the Hall-Sun bethought her how that the eastern ways into Mid-mark that bring a man to the thicket behind the Roof of the Bearings are nowise hard, even for an host; so she sent ten women, and me the eleventh to the Bearing dwelling and the road through the thicket aforesaid; and we were to take of the Bearing stay-at-homes whomso we would that were handy, and then all we to watch the ways for fear of the Romans.  And methinks she has had some vision of their ways, though mayhap not altogether clear.

"Anyhow we came to the Bearing dwellings, and they gave us of their folk eight doughty women and two light-foot lads, and so we were twenty and one in all.

"So then we did as the Hall-Sun bade us, and ordained a chain of watchers far up into the waste; and these were to sound a point of war upon their horns each to each till the sound thereof should come to us who lay with our horses hoppled ready beside us in the fair plain of the Mark outside the thicket.

"To be short, the horns waked us up in the midst of yesternight, and of the watches also came to us the last, which had heard the sound amidst the thicket, and said that it was certainly the sound of the Goths' horn, and the note agreed on.  Therefore I sent a messenger at once to the Wolfing Roof to say what was toward; but to thee I would not ride until I had made surer of the tidings; so I waited awhile, and then rode into the wild-wood; and a long tale I might make both of the waiting and the riding, had I time thereto; but this is the end of it; that going warily a little past where the thicket thinneth and the road endeth, I came on three of those watches or links in the chain we had made, and half of another watch or link; that is to say six women, who were come together after having blown their horns and fled (though they should rather have abided in some lurking-place to espy whatever might come that way) and one other woman, who had been one of the watch much further off, and had spoken with the furthest of all, which one had seen the faring of the Roman Host, and that it was very great, and no mere band of pillagers or of scouts.  And, said this fleer (who was indeed half wild with fear), that while they were talking together, came the Romans upon them, and saw them; and a band of Romans beat the wood for them when they fled, and she, the fleer, was at point to be taken, and saw two taken indeed, and haled off by the Roman scourers of the wood.  But she escaped and so came to the others on the skirts of the thicket, having left of her skin and blood on many a thornbush and rock by the way.

"Now when I heard this, I bade this fleer get her home to the Bearings as swiftly as she might, and tell her tale; and she went away trembling, and scarce knowing whether her feet were on earth or on water or on fire; but belike failed not to come there, as no Romans were before her.

"But for the others, I sent one to go straight to Wolf-stead on the heels of the first messenger, to tell the Hall-Sun what had befallen, and other five I set to lurk in the thicket, whereas none could lightly lay hands on them, and when they had new tidings, to flee to Wolf-stead as occasion might serve them; and for myself I tarried not, but rode on the spur to tell thee hereof.

"But my last word to thee, Otter, is that by the Hall-sun's bidding the Bearings will not abide fire and steel at their own stead, but when they hear true tidings of the Romans being hard at hand, will take with them all that is not too hot or too heavy to carry, and go their ways unto Wolf-stead: and the tidings will go up and down the Mark on both sides of the water, so that whatever is of avail for defence will gather there at our dwelling, and if we fall, goodly shall be the howe heaped over us, even if ye come not in time.

"Now have I told thee what I needs must and there is no need to question me more, for thou hast it all--do thou what thou hast to do!"

With that word she cast herself down on the grass by the mound-side, and was presently asleep, for she was very weary.

But all the time she had been telling her tale had the horn been sounding, and there were now a many warriors gathered and more coming in every moment: so Otter stood up on the mound after he had bidden a man of his House to bring him his horse and war-gear, and abided a little, till, as might be said, the whole host was gathered: then he bade cry silence, and spake:

"Sons of Tyr, now hath an Host of the Romans gotten into the Mark; a mighty host, but not so mighty that it may not be met.  Few words are best: let the Steerings, who are not many, but are men well-tried in war and wisdom abide in the Burg along with the fighting thralls: but let the Burg be broken up and moved from the place, and let its warders wend towards Mid-mark, but warily and without haste, and each night let them make the wain-garth and keep good watch.

"But know ye that the Romans shall fall with all their power on the Wolfing dwellings, deeming that when they have that, they shall have all that is ours with ourselves also.  For there is the Hall-Sun under the Great Roof, and there hath Thiodolf, our War-duke, his dwelling-place; therefore shall all of us, save those that abide with the wains, take horse, and ride without delay, and cross the water at Battleford, so that we may fall upon the foe before they come west of the water; for as ye know there is but one ford whereby a man wending straight from the Bearings may cross Mirkwood-water, and it is like that the foe will tarry at the Bearing stead long enough to burn and pillage it.

"So do ye order yourselves according to your kindreds, and let the Shieldings lead.  Make no more delay!  But for me I will now send a messenger to Thiodolf to tell him of the tidings, and then speedily shall he be with us.  Geirbald, I see thee; come hither!"

Now Geirbald stood amidst the Shieldings, and when Otter had spoken, he came forth bestriding a white horse, and with his bow slung at his back. Said Otter: "Geirbald, thou shalt ride at once through the wood, and find Thiodolf; and tell him the tidings, and that in nowise he follow the Roman fleers away from the Mark, nor to heed anything but the trail of the foemen through the south-eastern heaths of Mirkwood, whether other Romans follow him or not: whatever happens let him lead the Goths by that road, which for him is the shortest, towards the defence of the Wolfing dwellings.  Lo thou, my ring for a token!  Take it and depart in haste. Yet first take thy fellow Viglund the Woodman with thee, lest if perchance one fall, the other may bear the message.  Tarry not, nor rest till thy word be said!"

Then turned Geirbald to find Viglund who was anigh to him, and he took the ring, and the twain went their ways without more ado, and rode into the wild-wood.

But about the wain-burg was there plenteous stir of men till all was ordered for the departure of the host, which was no long while, for there was nothing to do but on with the war-gear and up on to the horse.

Forth then they went duly ordered in their kindreds towards the head of the Upper-mark, riding as swiftly as they might without breaking their array.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f19]

CHAPTER XIX--THOSE MESSENGERS COME TO THIODOLF

Of Geirbald and Viglund the tale tells that they rode the woodland paths as speedily as they might.  They had not gone far, and were winding through a path amidst of a thicket mingled of the hornbeam and holly, betwixt the openings of which the bracken grew exceeding tall, when Viglund, who was very fine-eared, deemed that he heard a horse coming to meet them: so they lay as close as they might, and drew back their horses behind a great holly-bush lest it should be some one or more of the foes who had fled into the wood when the Romans were scattered in that first fight.  But as the sound drew nearer, and it was clearly the footsteps of a great horse, they deemed it would be some messenger from Thiodolf, as indeed it turned out: for as the new-comer fared on, somewhat unwarily, they saw a bright helm after the fashion of the Goths amidst of the trees, and then presently they knew by his attire that he was of the Bearings, and so at last they knew him to be Asbiorn of the said House, a doughty man; so they came forth to meet him and he drew rein when he saw armed men, but presently beholding their faces he knew them and laughed on them, and said:

"Hail fellows! what tidings are toward?"

"These," said Viglund, "that thou art well met, since now shalt thou turn back and bring us to Thiodolf as speedily as may be."

But Asbiorn laughed and said: "Nay rather turn about with me; or why are ye so grim of countenance?"

"Our errand is no light one," said Geirbald, "but thou, why art thou so merry?"

"I have seen the Romans fall," said he, "and belike shall soon see more of that game: for I am on an errand to Otter from Thiodolf: the War-duke, when he had questioned some of those whom we took on the Day of the Ridge, began to have a deeming that the Romans had beguiled us, and will fall on the Mark by the way of the south-east heaths: so now is he hastening to fetch a compass and follow that road either to overtake them or prevent them; and he biddeth Otter tarry not, but ride hard along the water to meet them if he may, or ever they have set their hands to the dwellings of my House.  And belike when I have done mine errand to Otter I shall ride with him to look on these burners and slayers once more; therefore am I merry.  Now for your tidings, fellows."

Said Geirbald: "Our tidings are that both our errands are prevented, and come to nought: for Otter hath not tarried, but hath ridden with all his folk toward the stead of thine House.  So shalt thou indeed see these burners and slayers if thou ridest hard; since we have tidings that the Romans will by now be in Mid-mark.  And as for our errand, it is to bid Thiodolf do even as he hath done.  Hereby may we see how good a pair of War-dukes we have gotten, since each thinketh of the same wisdom.  Now take we counsel together as to what we shall do; whether we shall go back to Otter with thee, or thou go back to Thiodolf with us; or else each go the road ordained for us."

Said Asbiorn: "To Otter will I ride as I was bidden, that I may look on the burning of our roof, and avenge me of the Romans afterwards; and I bid you, fellows, ride with me, since fewer men there are with Otter, and he must be the first to bide the brunt of battle."

"Nay," said Geirbald, "as for me ye must even lose a man's aid; for to Thiodolf was I sent, and to Thiodolf will I go: and bethink thee if this be not best, since Thiodolf hath but a deeming of the ways of the Romans and we wot surely of them.  Our coming shall make him the speedier, and the less like to turn back if any alien band shall follow after him.  What sayest thou, Viglund?"

Said Viglund: "Even as thou, Geirbald: but for myself I deem I may well turn back with Asbiorn.  For I would serve the House in battle as soon as may be; and maybe we shall slaughter these kites of the cities, so that Thiodolf shall have no work to do when he cometh."

Said Asbiorn; "Geirbald, knowest thou right well the ways through the wood and on the other side thereof, to the place where Thiodolf abideth? for ye see that night is at hand."

"Nay, not over well," said Geirbald.

Said Asbiorn: "Then I rede thee take Viglund with thee; for he knoweth them yard by yard, and where they be hard and where they be soft. Moreover it were best indeed that ye meet Thiodolf betimes; for I deem not but that he wendeth leisurely, though always warily, because he deemeth not that Otter will ride before to-morrow morning.  Hearken, Viglund!  Thiodolf will rest to-night on the other side of the water, nigh to where the hills break off into the sheer cliffs that are called the Kites' Nest, and the water runneth under them, coming from the east: and before him lieth the easy ground of the eastern heaths where he is minded to wend to-morrow betimes in the morning: and if ye do your best ye shall be there before he is upon the road, and sure it is that your tidings shall hasten him."

"Thou sayest sooth," saith Geirbald, "tarry we no longer; here sunder our ways; farewell!"

"Farewell," said he, "and thou, Viglund, take this word in parting, that belike thou shalt yet see the Romans, and strike a stroke, and maybe be smitten.  For indeed they be most mighty warriors."

Then made they no delay but rode their ways either side.  And Geirbald and Viglund rode over rough and smooth all night, and were out of the thick wood by day-dawn: and whereas they rode hard, and Viglund knew the ways well, they came to Mirkwood-water before the day was old, and saw that the host was stirring, but not yet on the way.  And or ever they came to the water's edge, they were met by Wolfkettle of the Wolfings, and Hiarandi of the Elkings, and three others who were but just come from the place where the hurt men lay down in a dale near the Great Ridge; there had Wolfkettle and Hiarandi been tending Toti of the Beamings, their fellow-in-arms, who had been sorely hurt in the battle, but was doing well, and was like to live.  So when they saw the messengers, they came up to them and hailed them, and asked them if the tidings were good or evil.

"That is as it may be," said Geirbald, "but they are short to tell; the Romans are in Mid-mark, and Otter rideth on the spur to meet them, and sendeth us to bid Thiodolf wend the heaths to fall in on them also.  Nor may we tarry one minute ere we have seen Thiodolf."

Said Wolfkettle, "We will lead you to him; he is on the east side of the water, with all his host, and they are hard on departing."

So they went down the ford, which was not very deep; and Wolfkettle rode the ford behind Geirbald, and another man behind Viglund; but Hiarandi went afoot with the others beside the horses, for he was a very tall man.

But as they rode amidst the clear water Wolfkettle lifted up his voice and sang:

   "White horse, with what are ye laden as ye wade the shallows warm,
    But with tidings of the battle, and the fear of the fateful storm?
    What loureth now behind us, what pileth clouds before,
    On either hand what gathereth save the stormy tide of war?
    Now grows midsummer mirky, and fallow falls the morn,
    And dusketh the Moon's Sister, and the trees look overworn;
    God's Ash tree shakes and shivers, and the sheer cliff standeth white
    As the bones of the giants' father when the Gods first fared to fight."

And indeed the morning had grown mirky and grey and threatening, and from far away the thunder growled, and the face of the Kite's Nest showed pale and awful against a dark steely cloud; and a few drops of rain pattered into the smooth water before them from a rag of the cloud-flock right over head.  They were in mid stream now, for the water was wide there; on the eastern bank were the warriors gathering, for they had beheld the faring of those men, and the voice of Wolfkettle came to them across the water, so they deemed that great tidings were toward, and would fain know on what errand those were come.

Then the waters of the ford deepened till Hiarandi was wading more than waist-deep, and the water flowed over Geirbald's saddle; then Wolfkettle laughed, and turning as he sat, dragged out his sword, and waved it from east to west and sang:

   "O sun, pale up in heaven, shrink from us if thou wilt,
    And turn thy face from beholding the shock of guilt with guilt!
    Stand still, O blood of summer! and let the harvest fade,
    Till there be nought but fallow where once was bloom and blade!
    O day, give out but a glimmer of all thy flood of light,
    If it be but enough for our eyen to see the road of fight!
    Forget all else and slumber, if still ye let us wake,
    And our mouths shall make the thunder, and our swords shall the lightening make,
    And we shall be the storm-wind and drive the ruddy rain,
    Till the joy of our hearts in battle bring back the day again."

As he spake that word they came up through the shallow water dripping on to the bank, and they and the men who abode them on the bank shouted together for joy of fellowship, and all tossed aloft their weapons.  The man who had ridden behind Viglund slipped off on to the ground; but Wolfkettle abode in his place behind Geirbald.

So the messengers passed on, and the others closed up round about them, and all the throng went up to where Thiodolf was sitting on a rock beneath a sole ash-tree, the face of the Kite's Nest rising behind him on the other side of a bight of the river.  There he sat unhelmed with the dwarf-wrought hauberk about him, holding Throng-plough in its sheath across his knees, while he gave word to this and that man concerning the order of the host.

So when they were come thither, the throng opened that the messengers might come forward; for by this time had many more drawn near to hearken what was toward.  There they sat on their horses, the white and the grey, and Wolfkettle stood by Geirbald's bridle rein, for he had now lighted down; and a little behind him, his head towering over the others, stood Hiarandi great and gaunt.  The ragged cloud had drifted down south-east now and the rain fell no more, but the sun was still pale and clouded.

Then Thiodolf looked gravely on them, and spake:

   "What do ye sons of the War-shield? what tale is there to tell?
    Is the kindred fallen tangled in the grasp of the fallow Hell?
    Crows the red cock over the homesteads, have we met the foe too late?
    For meseems your brows are heavy with the shadowing o'er of fate."

But Geirbald answered:

   "Still cold with dew in the morning the Shielding Roof-ridge stands,
    Nor yet hath grey Hell bounden the Shielding warriors' hands;
    But lo, the swords, O War-duke, how thick in the wind they shake,
    Because we bear the message that the battle-road ye take,
    Nor tarry for the thunder or the coming on of rain,
    Or the windy cloudy night-tide, lest your battle be but vain.
    And this is the word that Otter yestre'en hath set in my mouth;
    Seek thou the trail of the Aliens of the Cities of the South,
    And thou shalt find it leading o'er the heaths to the beechen-wood,
    And thence to the stony places where the foxes find their food;
    And thence to the tangled thicket where the folkway cleaves it through,
    To the eastern edge of Mid-mark where the Bearings deal and do."

Then said Thiodolf in a cold voice, "What then hath befallen Otter?"

Said Geirbald:

   "When last I looked upon Otter, all armed he rode the plain,
    With his whole host clattering round him like the rush of the summer rain;
    To the right or the left they looked not but they rode through the dusk and the dark
    Beholding nought before them but the dream of the foes in the Mark.
    So he went; but his word fled from him and on my horse it rode,
    And again it saith, O War-duke seek thou the Bear's abode,
    And tarry never a moment for ought that seems of worth,
    For there shall ye find the sword-edge and the flame of the foes of the earth.

"Tarry not, Thiodolf, nor turn aback though a new foe followeth on thine heels.  No need to question me more; I have no more to tell, save that a woman brought these tidings to us, whom the Hall-Sun had sent with others to watch the ways: and some of them had seen the Romans, who are a great host and no band stealing forth to lift the herds."

Now all those round about him heard his words, for he spake with a loud voice; and they knew what the bidding of the War-duke would be; so they loitered not, but each man went about his business of looking to his war- gear and gathering to the appointed place of his kindred.  And even while Geirbald had been speaking, had Hiarandi brought up the man who bore the great horn, who when Thiodolf leapt to his feet to find him, was close at hand.  So he bade him blow the war-blast, and all men knew the meaning of that voice of the horn, and every man armed him in haste, and they who had horses (and these were but the Bearings and the Warnings), saddled them, and mounted, and from mouth to mouth went the word that the Romans were gotten into Mid-mark, and were burning the Bearing abodes.  So speedily was the whole host ready for the way, the Wolfings at the head of all.  Then came forth Thiodolf from the midst of his kindred, and they raised him upon a great war-shield upheld by many men, and he stood thereon and spake:

   "O sons of Tyr, ye have vanquished, and sore hath been your pain;
    But he that smiteth in battle must ever smite again;
    And thus with you it fareth, and the day abideth yet
    When ye shall hold the Aliens as the fishes in the net.
    On the Ridge ye slew a many; but there came a many more
    From their strongholds by the water to their new-built garth of war,
    And all these have been led by dastards o'er the way our feet must tread
    Through the eastern heaths and the beech-wood to the door of the Bearing stead,
    Now e'en yesterday I deemed it, but I durst not haste away
    Ere the word was borne to Otter and 'tis he bids haste to-day;
    So now by day and by night-tide it behoveth us to wend
    And wind the reel of battle and weave its web to end.
    Had ye deemed my eyes foreseeing, I would tell you of my sight,
    How I see the folk delivered and the Aliens turned to flight,
    While my own feet wend them onwards to the ancient Father's Home.
    But belike these are but the visions that to many a man shall come
    When he goeth adown to the battle, and before him riseth high
    The wall of valiant foemen to hide all things anigh.
    But indeed I know full surely that no work that we may win
    To-morrow or the next day shall quench the Markmen's kin.
    On many a day hereafter shall their warriors carry shield;
    On many a day their maidens shall drive the kine afield,
    On many a day their reapers bear sickle in the wheat
    When the golden wind-wrought ripple stirs round the feast-hall's feet.
    Lo, now is the day's work easy--to live and overcome,
    Or to die and yet to conquer on the threshold of the Home."

And therewith he gat him down and went a-foot to the head of the Wolfing band, a great shout going with him, which was mingled with the voice of the war-horn that bade away.

So fell the whole host into due array, and they were somewhat over three thousand warriors, all good and tried men and meet to face the uttermost of battle in the open field; so they went their ways with all the speed that footmen may, and in fair order; and the sky cleared above their heads, but the distant thunder still growled about the world.  Geirbald and Viglund joined themselves to the Wolfings and went a-foot along with Wolfkettle; but Hiarandi went with his kindred who were second in the array.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f20]

CHAPTER XX--OTTER AND HIS FOLK COME INTO MID-MARK

Otter and his folk rode their ways along Mirkwood-water, and made no stay, except now and again to breathe their horses, till they came to Battleford in the early morning; there they baited their horses, for the grass was good in the meadow, and the water easy to come at.

So after they had rested there a short hour, and had eaten what was easy for them to get, they crossed the ford, and wended along Mirkwood-water between the wood and the river, but went slower than before lest they should weary their horses; so that it was high-noon before they had come out of the woodland way into Mid-mark; and at once as soon as the whole plain of the Mark opened out before them, they saw what most of them looked to see (since none doubted Hrosshild's tale), and that was a column of smoke rising high and straight up into the air, for the afternoon was hot and windless.  Great wrath rose in their hearts thereat, and many a strong man trembled for anger, though none for fear, as Otter raised his right hand and stretched it out towards that token of wrack and ruin; yet they made no stay, nor did they quicken their pace much; because they knew that they should come to Bearham before night- fall, and they would not meet the Romans way-worn and haggard; but they rode on steadily, a terrible company of wrathful men.

They passed by the dwellings of the kindreds, though save for the Galtings the houses on the east side of the water between the Bearings and the wild-wood road were but small; for the thicket came somewhat near to the water and pinched the meadows.  But the Galtings were great hunters and trackers of the wild-wood, and they of the Geddings, the Erings and the Withings, which were smaller Houses, lived somewhat on the take of fish from Mirkwood-water (as did the Laxings also of the Nether- mark), for thereabout were there goodly pools and eddies, and sun-warmed shallows therewithal for the spawning of the trouts; as there were eyots in the water, most of which tailed off into a gravelly shallow at their lower ends.

Now as the riders of the Goths came over against the dwellings of the Withings, they saw people, mostly women, driving up the beasts from the meadow towards the garth; but upon the tofts about their dwellings were gathered many folk, who had their eyes turned toward the token of ravage that hung in the sky above the fair plain; but when these beheld the riding of the host, they tossed up their arms to them and whatever they bore in them, and the sound of their shrill cry (for they were all women and young lads) came down the wind to the ears of the riders.  But down by the river on a swell of the ground were some swains and a few thralls, and among them some men armed and a-horseback; and these, when they perceived the host coming on turned and rode to meet them; and as they drew near they shouted as men overjoyed to meet their kindred; and indeed the fighting-men of their own House were riding in the host.  And the armed men were three old men, and one very old with marvellous long white hair, and four long lads of some fifteen winters, and four stout carles of the thralls bearing bows and bucklers, and these rode behind the swains; so they found their own kindred and rode amongst them.

But when they were all jingling and clashing on together, the dust arising from the sun-dried turf, the earth shaking with the thunder of the horse-hoofs, then the heart of the long-hoary one stirred within him as he bethought him of the days of his youth, and to his old nostrils came the smell of the horses and the savour of the sweat of warriors riding close together knee to knee adown the meadow.  So he lifted up his voice and sang:

      "Rideth lovely along
       The strong by the strong;
       Soft under his breath
       Singeth sword in the sheath,
       And shield babbleth oft
       Unto helm-crest aloft;
    How soon shall their words rise mid wrath of the battle
    Into wrangle unheeded of clanging and rattle,
    And no man shall note then the gold on the sword
    When the runes have no meaning, the mouth-cry no word,
    When all mingled together, the war-sea of men
    Shall toss up the steel-spray round fourscore and ten.

      "Now as maids burn the weed
       Betwixt acre and mead,
       So the Bearings' Roof
       Burneth little aloof,
       And red gloweth the hall
       Betwixt wall and fair wall,
    Where often the mead-sea we sipped in old days,
    When our feet were a-weary with wending the ways;
    When the love of the lovely at even was born,
    And our hands felt fair hands as they fell on the horn.
    There round about standeth the ring of the foe
    Tossing babes on their spears like the weeds o'er the low.

      "Ride, ride then! nor spare
       The red steeds as ye fare!
       Yet if daylight shall fail,
       By the fire-light of bale
       Shall we see the bleared eyes
       Of the war-learned, the wise.
    In the acre of battle the work is to win,
    Let us live by the labour, sheaf-smiting therein;
    And as oft o'er the sickle we sang in time past
    When the crake that long mocked us fled light at the last,
    So sing o'er the sword, and the sword-hardened hand
    Bearing down to the reaping the wrath of the land."

So he sang; and a great shout went up from his kindred and those around him, and it was taken up all along the host, though many knew not why they shouted, and the whole host quickened its pace, and went a great trot over the smooth meadow.

So in no long while were they come over against the stead of the Erings, and thereabouts were no beasts afield, and no women, for all the neat were driven into the garth of the House; but all they who were not war- fit were standing without doors looking down the Mark towards the reek of the Bearing dwellings, and these also sent a cry of welcome toward the host of their kindred.  But along the river-bank came to meet the host an armed band of two old men, two youths who were their sons, and twelve thralls who were armed with long spears; and all these were a-horseback: so they fell in with their kindred and the host made no stay for them, but pressed on over-running the meadow.  And still went up that column of smoke, and thicker and blacker it grew a-top, and ruddier amidmost.

So came they by the abode of the Geddings, and there also the neat and sheep were close in the home-garth: but armed men were lying or standing about the river bank, talking or singing merrily none otherwise than though deep peace were on the land; and when they saw the faring of the host they sprang to their feet with a shout and gat to their horses at once: they were more than the other bands had been, for the Geddings were a greater House; they were seven old men, and ten swains, and ten thralls bearing long spears like to those of the Erings; and no sooner had they fallen in with their kindred, than the men of the host espied a greater company yet coming to meet them: and these were of the folk of the Galtings; and amongst them were ten warriors in their prime, because they had but of late come back from the hunting in the wood and had been belated from the muster of the kindreds; and with them were eight old men and fifteen lads, and eighteen thralls; and the swains and thralls all bore bows besides the swords that they were girt withal, and not all of them had horses, but they who had none rode behind the others: so they joined themselves to the host, shouting aloud; and they had with them a great horn that they blew on till they had taken their place in the array; and whereas their kindred was with Thiodolf, they followed along with the hinder men of the Shieldings.

So now all the host went on together, and when they had passed the Galting abodes, there was nothing between them and Bearham, nor need they look for any further help of men; there were no beasts afield nor any to herd them, and the stay-at-homes were within doors dighting them for departure into the wild-wood if need should be: but a little while after they had passed these dwellings came into the host two swains of about twenty winters, and a doughty maid, their sister, and they bare no weapons save short spears and knives; they were wet and dripping with the water, for they had just swum Mirkwood-water.  They were of the Wolfing House, and had been shepherding a few sheep on the west side of the water, when they saw the host faring to battle, and might not refrain them, but swam their horses across the swift deeps to join their kindred to live and die with them.  The tale tells that they three fought in the battles that followed after, and were not slain there, though they entered them unarmed, but lived long years afterwards: of them need no more be said.

Now, when the host was but a little past the Galting dwellings men began to see the flames mingled with the smoke of the burning, and the smoke itself growing thinner, as though the fire had over-mastered everything and was consuming itself with its own violence; and somewhat afterwards, the ground rising, they could see the Bearing meadow and the foemen thereon: yet a little further, and from the height of another swelling of the earth they could see the burning houses themselves and the array of the Romans; so there they stayed and breathed their horses a while.  And they beheld how of the Romans a great company was gathered together in close array betwixt the ford and the Bearing Hall, but nigher unto the ford, and these were a short mile from them; but others they saw streaming out from the burning dwellings, as if their work were done there, and they could not see that they had any captives with them.  Other Romans there were, and amongst them men in the attire of the Goths, busied about the river banks, as though they were going to try the ford.

But a little while abode Otter in that place, and then waved his arm and rode on and all the host followed; and as they drew nigher, Otter, who was wise in war, beheld the Romans and deemed them a great host, and the very kernel and main body of them many more than all his company; and moreover they were duly and well arrayed as men waiting a foe; so he knew that he must be wary or he would lose himself and all his men.

So he stayed his company when they were about two furlongs from them, and the main body of the foe stirred not, but horsemen and slingers came forth from its sides and made on toward the Goths, and in three or four minutes were within bowshot of them.  Then the bowmen of the Goths slipped down from their horses and bent their bows and nocked their arrows and let fly, and slew and hurt many of the horsemen, who endured their shot but for a minute or two and then turned rein and rode back slowly to their folk, and the slingers came not on very eagerly whereas they were dealing with men a-horseback, and the bowmen of the Goths also held them still.

Now turned Otter to his folk and made them a sign, which they knew well, that they should get down from their horses; and when they were afoot the leaders of tens and hundreds arrayed them, into the wedge-array, with the bowmen on either flank: and Otter smiled as he beheld this adoing and that the Romans meddled not with them, belike because they looked to have them good cheap, since they were but a few wild men.

But when they were all arrayed he sat still on his horse and spake to them short and sharply, saying:

"Men of the Goths, will ye mount your horses again and ride into the wood and let it cover you, or will ye fight these Romans?"  They answered him with a great shout and the clashing of their weapons on their shields. "That is well," quoth Otter, "since we have come so far; for I perceive that the foe will come to meet us, so that we must either abide their shock or turn our backs.  Yet must we fight wisely or we are undone, and Thiodolf in risk of undoing; this have we to do if we may, to thrust in between them and the ford, and if we may do that, there let us fight it out, till we fall one over another.  But if we may not do it, then will we not throw our lives away but do the foemen what hurt we may without mingling ourselves amongst them, and so abide the coming of Thiodolf; for if we get not betwixt them and the ford we may in no case hinder them from crossing.  And all this I tell you that ye may follow me wisely, and refrain your wrath that ye may live yet to give it the rein when the time comes."

So he spake and got down from his horse and drew his sword and went to the head of the wedge-array and began slowly to lead forth; but the thralls and swains had heed of the horses, and they drew aback with them towards the wood which was but a little way from them.

But for Otter he led his men down towards the ford, and when the Romans saw that, their main body began to move forward, faring slant-wise, as a crab, down toward the ford; then Otter hastened somewhat, as he well might, since his men were well learned in war and did not break their array; but now by this time were those burners of the Romans come up with the main battle, and the Roman captain sent them at once against the Goths, and they advanced boldly enough, a great cloud of men in loose array who fell to with arrows and slings on the wedge-array and slew and hurt many: yet did not Otter stay his folk; but it was ill going for them, for their unshielded sides were turned to the Romans, nor durst Otter scatter his bowmen out from the wedge-array, lest the Romans, who were more than they, should enter in amongst them.  Ever he gazed earnestly on the main battle of the Romans, and what they were doing, and presently it became clear to him that they would outgo him and come to the ford, and then he wotted well that they would set on him just when their light-armed were on his flank and his rearward, and then it would go hard but they would break their array and all would be lost: therefore he slacked his pace and went very slowly and the Romans went none the slower for that; but their light-armed grew bolder and drew more together as they came nigher to the Goths, as though they would give them an onset; but just at that nick of time Otter passed the word down the ranks, and, waving his sword, turned sharply to the right and fell with all the wedge-array on the clustering throng of the light-armed, and his bowmen spread out now from the right flank of the wedge-array, and shot sharp and swift and the bowmen on the left flank ran forward swiftly till they had cleared the wedge-array and were on the flank of the light-armed Romans; and they, what between the onset of the swordsmen and spearmen of the Goths, and their sharp arrows, knew not which way to turn, and a great slaughter befell amongst them, and they of them were the happiest who might save themselves by their feet.

Now after this storm, and after these men had been thrust away, Otter stayed not, but swept round about the field toward the horses; and indeed he looked to it that the main-battle of the Romans should follow him, but they did not, but stayed still to receive the fleers of their light-armed.  And this indeed was the goodhap of the Goths; for they were somewhat disordered by their chase of the light-armed, and they smote and spared not, their hearts being full of bitter wrath, as might well be; for even as they turned on the Romans, they beheld the great roof of the Bearings fall in over the burned hall, and a great shower of sparks burst up from its fall, and there were the ragged gables left standing, licked by little tongues of flame which could not take hold of them because of the clay which filled the spaces between the great timbers and was daubed over them.  And they saw that all the other houses were either alight or smouldering, down to the smallest cot of a thrall, and even the barns and booths both great and little.

Therefore, whereas the Markmen were far fewer in all than the Roman main- battle, and whereas this same host was in very good array, no doubt there was that the Markmen would have been grievously handled had the Romans fallen on; but the Roman Captain would not have it so: for though he was a bold man, yet was his boldness that of the wolf, that falleth on when he is hungry and skulketh when he is full.  He was both young and very rich, and a mighty man among his townsmen, and well had he learned that ginger is hot in the mouth, and though he had come forth to the war for the increasing of his fame, he had no will to die among the Markmen, either for the sake of the city of Rome, or of any folk whatsoever, but was liefer to live for his own sake.  Therefore was he come out to vanquish easily, that by his fame won he might win more riches and dominion in Rome; and he was well content also to have for his own whatever was choice amongst the plunder of these wild-men (as he deemed them), if it were but a fair woman or two.  So this man thought, It is my business to cross the ford and come to Wolfstead, and there take the treasure of the tribe, and have a stronghold there, whence we may slay so many of these beasts with little loss to us that we may march away easily and with our hands full, even if Maenius with his men come not to our aid, as full surely he will: therefore as to these angry men, who be not without might and conduct in battle, let us remember the old saw that saith 'a bridge of gold to a fleeing foe,' and let them depart with no more hurt of Romans, and seek us afterwards when we are fenced into their stead, which shall then be our stronghold: even so spake he to his Captains about him.

For it must be told that he had no tidings of the overthrow of the Romans on the Ridge; nor did he know surely how many fighting-men the Markmen might muster, except by the report of those dastards of the Goths; and though he had taken those two women in the wastes, yet had he got no word from them, for they did as the Hall-Sun bade them, when they knew that they would be questioned with torments, and smiting themselves each with a little sharp knife, so went their ways to the Gods.

Thus then the Roman Captain let the Markmen go their ways, and turned toward the ford, and the Markmen went slowly now toward their horses. Howbeit there were many of them who murmured against Otter, saying that it was ill done to have come so far and ridden so hard, and then to have done so little, and that were to-morrow come, they would not be led away so easily: but now they said it was ill; for the Romans would cross the water, and make their ways to Wolfstead, none hindering them, and would burn the dwellings and slay the old men and thralls, and have away the women and children and the Hall-Sun the treasure of the Markmen.  In sooth, they knew not that a band of the Roman light-armed had already crossed the water, and had fallen upon the dwellings of the Wolfings; but that the old men and younglings and thralls of the House had come upon them as they were entangled amidst the tofts and the garths, and had overcome them and slain many.

Thus went Otter and his men to their horses when it was now drawing toward sunset (for all this was some while adoing), and betook them to a rising ground not far from the wood-side, and there made what sort of a garth they might, with their horses and the limbs of trees and long-shafted spears; and they set a watch and abode in the garth right warily, and lighted no fires when night fell, but ate what meat they had with them, which was but little, and so sleeping and watching abode the morning.  But the main body of the Romans did not cross the ford that night, for they feared lest they might go astray therein, for it was an ill ford to those that knew not the water: so they abode on the bank nigh to the water's edge, with the mind to cross as soon as it was fairly daylight.

Now Otter had lost of his men some hundred and twenty slain or grievously hurt, and they had away with them the hurt men and the bodies of the slain.  The tale tells not how many of the Romans were slain, but a many of their light-armed had fallen, since the Markmen had turned so hastily upon them, and they had with them many of the best bowmen of the Mark.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f21]

CHAPTER XXI--THEY BICKER ABOUT THE FORD

In the grey of the morning was Otter afoot with the watchers, and presently he got on his horse and peered over the plain, but the mist yet hung low on it, so that he might see nought for a while; but at last he seemed to note something coming toward the host from the upper water above the ford, so he rode forward to meet it, and lo, it was a lad of fifteen winters, naked save his breeches, and wet from the river; and Otter drew rein, and the lad said to him: "Art thou the War-duke?"  "Yea," said Otter.

Said the lad, "I am Ali, the son of Grey, and the Hall-Sun hath sent me to thee with this word: 'Are ye coming?  Is Thiodolf at hand?  For I have seen the Roof-ridge red in the sunlight as if it were painted with cinnabar.'"

Said Otter, "Art thou going back to Wolfstead, son?"

"Yea, at once, my father," said Ali.

"Then tell her," said Otter, "that Thiodolf is at hand, and when he cometh we shall both together fall upon the Romans either in crossing the ford or in the Wolfing meadow; but tell her also that I am not strong enough to hinder the Romans from crossing."

"Father," said Ali, "the Hall-Sun saith: Thou art wise in war; now tell us, shall we hold the Hall against the Romans that ye may find us there? For we have discomfited their vanguard already, and we have folk who can fight; but belike the main battle of the Romans shall get the upper hand of us ere ye come to our helping: belike it were better to leave the hall, and let the wood cover us."

"Now is this well asked," said Otter; "get thee back, my son, and bid the Hall-Sun trust not to warding of the Hall, for the Romans are a mighty host: and this day, even when Thiodolf cometh hither, shall be hard for the Goth-folk: let her hasten lest these thieves come upon her hastily; let her take the Hall-Sun her namesake, and the old men and children and the women, and let those fighting folk she hath be a guard to all this in the wood.  And hearken moreover; it will, maybe, be six hours ere Thiodolf cometh; tell her I will cast the dice for life or death, and stir up these Romans now at once, that they may have other things to think of than burning old men and women and children in their dwellings; thus may she reach the wood unhindered.  Hast thou all this in thine head?  Then go thy ways."

But the lad lingered, and he reddened and looked on the ground and then he said: "My father, I swam the deeps, and when I reached this bank, I crept along by the mist and the reeds toward where the Romans are, and I came near to them, and noted what they were doing; and I tell thee that they are already stirring to take the water at the ford.  Now then do what thou wilt."

Therewith he turned about, and went his way at once, running like a colt which has never felt halter or bit.

But Otter rode back hastily and roused certain men in whom he trusted, and bid them rouse the captains and all the host and bid men get to horse speedily and with as little noise as might be.  So did they, and there was little delay, for men were sleeping with one eye open, as folk say, and many were already astir.  So in a little while they were all in the saddle, and the mist yet stretched low over the meadow; for the morning was cool and without wind.  Then Otter bade the word be carried down the ranks that they should ride as quietly as may be and fare through the mist to do the Romans some hurt, but in nowise to get entangled in their ranks, and all men to heed well the signal of turning and drawing aback; and therewith they rode off down the meadow led by men who could have led them through the dark night.

But for the Romans, they were indeed getting ready to cross the ford when the mist should have risen; and on the bank it was thinning already and melting away; for a little air of wind was beginning to breathe from the north-east and the sunrise, which was just at hand; and the bank, moreover, was stonier and higher than the meadow's face, which fell away from it as a shallow dish from its rim: thereon yet lay the mist like a white wall.

So the Romans and their friends the dastards of the Goths had well nigh got all ready, and had driven stakes into the water from bank to bank to mark out the safe ford, and some of their light-armed and most of their Goths were by now in the water or up on the Wolfing meadow with the more part of their baggage and wains; and the rest of the host was drawn up in good order, band by band, waiting the word to take the water, and the captain was standing nigh to the river bank beside their God the chief banner of the Host.

Of a sudden one of the dastards of the Goths who was close to the Captain cried out that he heard horse coming; but because he spake in the Gothic tongue, few heeded; but even therewith an old leader of a hundred cried out the same tidings in the Roman tongue, and all men fell to handling their weapons; but before they could face duly toward the meadow, came rushing from out of the mist a storm of shafts that smote many men, and therewithal burst forth the sound of the Markmen's war-horn, like the roaring of a hundred bulls mingled with the thunder of horses at the gallop; and then dark over the wall of mist showed the crests of the riders of the Mark, though scarce were their horses seen till their whole war-rank came dark and glittering into the space of the rising-ground where the mist was but a haze now, and now at last smitten athwart by the low sun just arisen.

Therewith came another storm of shafts, wherein javelins and spears cast by the hand were mingled with the arrows: but the Roman ranks had faced the meadow and the storm which it yielded, swiftly and steadily, and they stood fast and threw their spears, albeit not with such good aim as might have been, because of their haste, so that few were slain by them.  And the Roman Captain still loth to fight with the Goths in earnest for no reward, and still more and more believing that this was the only band of them that he had to look to, bade those who were nighest the ford not to tarry for the onset of a few wild riders, but to go their ways into the water; else by a sudden onrush might the Romans have entangled Otter's band in their ranks, and so destroyed all.  As it was the horsemen fell not on the Roman ranks full in face, but passing like a storm athwart the ranks to the right, fell on there where they were in thinnest array (for they were gathered to the ford as aforesaid), and slew some and drave some into the deeps and troubled the whole Roman host.

So now the Roman Captain was forced to take new order, and gather all his men together, and array his men for a hard fight; and by now the mist was rolling off from the face of the whole meadow and the sun was bright and hot.  His men serried their ranks, and the front rank cast their spears, and slew both men and horses of the Goths as those rode along their front casting their javelins, and shooting here and there from behind their horses if occasion served, or making a shift to send an arrow even as they sat a-horseback; then the second rank of the Romans would take the place of the first, and cast in their turn, and they who had taken the water turned back and took their place behind the others, and many of the light-armed came with them, and all the mass of them flowed forward together, looking as if it might never be broken.  But Otter would not abide the shock, since he had lost men and horses, and had no mind to be caught in the sweep of their net; so he made the sign, and his Company drew off to right and left, yet keeping within bowshot, so that the bowmen still loosed at the Romans.

But they for their part might not follow afoot men on untired horses, and their own horse was on the west side with the baggage, and had it been there would have been but of little avail, as the Roman Captain knew.  So they stood awhile making grim countenance, and then slowly drew back to the ford under cover of their light-armed who shot at the Goths as they rode forward, but abode not their shock.

But Otter and his folk followed after the Romans again, and again did them some hurt, and at last drew so nigh, that once more the Romans stormed forth, and once more smote a stroke in the air; nor even so would the Markmen cease to meddle with them, though never would Otter suffer his men to be mingled with them.  At the last the Romans, seeing that Otter would not walk into the open trap, and growing weary of this bickering, began to take the water little by little, while a strong Company kept face to the Markmen; and now Otter saw that they would not be hindered any longer, and he had lost many men, and even now feared lest he should be caught in the trap, and so lose all.  And on the other hand it was high noon by now, so that he had given respite to the stay-at- homes of the Wolfings, so that they might get them into the wood.  So he drew out of bowshot and bade his men breathe their horses and rest themselves and eat something; and they did so gladly, since they saw that they might not fall upon the Romans to live and die for it until Thiodolf was come, or until they knew that he was not coming.  But the Romans crossed the ford in good earnest and were soon all gathered together on the western bank making them ready for the march to Wolfstead.  And it must be told that the Roman Captain was the more deliberate about this because after the overthrow of his light-armed there the morning before, he thought that the Roof was held by warriors of the kindreds, and not by a few old men, and women, and lads.  Therefore he had no fear of their escaping him.  Moreover it was this imagination of his, to wit that a strong band of warriors was holding Wolf-stead, that made him deem there were no more worth thinking about of the warriors of the Mark save Otter's Company and the men in the Hall of the Wolfings.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f22]

CHAPTER XXII--OTTER FALLS ON AGAINST HIS WILL

It was with the same imagination working in him belike that the Roman Captain set none to guard the ford on the westward side of Mirkwood-water.  The Romans tarried there but a little hour, and then went their ways; but Otter sent a man on a swift horse to watch them, and when they were clean gone for half an hour, he bade his folk to horse, and they departed, all save a handful of the swains and elders, who were left to tell the tidings to Thiodolf when he should come into Mid-mark.

So Otter and his folk crossed the ford, and drew up in good order on the westward bank, and it was then somewhat more than three hours after noon. He had been there but a little while before he noted a stir in the Bearing meadow, and lo, it was the first of Thiodolf's folk, who had gotten out of the wood and had fallen in with the men whom he had left behind.  And these first were the riders of the Bearings, and the Wormings, (for they had out-gone the others who were afoot).  It may well be thought how fearful was their anger when they set eyes on the smouldering ashes of the dwellings; nor even when those folk of Otter had told them all they had to tell could some of them refrain them from riding off to the burnt houses to seek for the bodies of their kindred. But when they came there, and amidst the ashes could find no bones, their hearts were lightened, and yet so mad wroth they were, that some could scarce sit their horses, and great tears gushed from the eyes of some, and pattered down like hail-stones, so eager were they to see the blood of the Romans.  So they rode back to where they had left their folk talking with them of Otter; and the Bearings were sitting grim upon their horses and somewhat scowling on Otter's men.  Then the foremost of those who had come back from the houses waved his hand toward the ford, but could say nought for a while; but the captain and chief of the Bearings, a grizzled man very big of body, whose name was Arinbiorn, spake to that man and said; "What aileth thee Sweinbiorn the Black?  What hast thou seen?"

He said:

   "Now red and grey is the pavement of the Bearings' house of old:
    Red yet is the floor of the dais, but the hearth all grey and cold.
    I knew not the house of my fathers; I could not call to mind
    The fashion of the building of that Warder of the Wind.
    O wide were grown the windows, and the roof exceeding high!
    For nought there was to look on 'twixt the pavement and the sky.
    But the tie-beam lay on the dais, and methought its staining fair;
    For rings of smoothest charcoal were round it here and there,
    And the red flame flickered o'er it, and never a staining wight
    Hath red earth in his coffer so clear and glittering bright,
    And still the little smoke-wreaths curled o'er it pale and blue.
    Yea, fair is our hall's adorning for a feast that is strange and new."

Said Arinbiorn: "What sawest thou therein, O Sweinbiorn, where sat thy grandsire at the feast?  Where were the bones of thy mother lying?"

Said Sweinbiorn:

   "We sought the feast-hall over, and nought we found therein
    Of the bones of the ancient mothers, or the younglings of the kin.
    The men are greedy, doubtless, to lose no whit of the prey,
    And will try if the hoary elders may yet outlive the way
    That leads to the southland cities, till at last they come to stand
    With the younglings in the market to be sold in an alien land."

Arinbiorn's brow lightened somewhat; but ere he could speak again an ancient thrall of the Galtings spake and said:

"True it is, O warriors of the Bearings, that we might not see any war- thralls being led away by the Romans when they came away from the burning dwellings; and we deem it certain that they crossed the water before the coming of the Romans, and that they are now with the stay-at-homes of the Wolfings in the wild-wood behind the Wolfing dwellings, for we hear tell that the War-duke would not that the Hall-Sun should hold the Hall against the whole Roman host."

Then Sweinbiorn tossed up his sword into the air and caught it by the hilts as it fell, and cried out: "On, on to the meadow, where these thieves abide us!"  Arinbiorn spake no word, but turned his horse and rode down to the ford, and all men followed him; and of the Bearings there were an hundred warriors save one, and of the Wormings eighty and seven.

So rode they over the meadow and into the ford and over it, and Otter's company stood on the bank to meet them, and shouted to see them; but the others made but little noise as they crossed the water.

So when they were on the western bank Arinbiorn came among them of Otter, and cried out: "Where then is Otter, where is the War-duke, is he alive or dead?"

And the throng opened to him and Otter stood facing him; and Arinbiorn spake and said: "Thou art alive and unhurt, War-duke, when many have been hurt and slain; and methinks thy company is little minished though the kindred of the Bearings lacketh a roof; and its elders and women and children are gone into captivity.  What is this?  Was it a light thing that gangrel thieves should burn and waste in Mid-mark and depart unhurt, that ye stand here with clean blades and cold bodies?"

Said Otter: "Thou grievest for the hurt of thine House, Arinbiorn; but this at least is good, that though ye have lost the timber of your house ye have not lost its flesh and blood; the shell is gone, but the kernel is saved: for thy folk are by this time in the wood with the Wolfing stay- at-homes, and among these are many who may fight on occasion, so they are safe as for this time: the Romans may not come at them to hurt them."

Said Arinbiorn: "Had ye time to learn all this, Otter, when ye fled so fast before the Romans, that the father tarried not for the son, nor the son for the father?"

He spoke in a loud voice so that many heard him, and some deemed it evil; for anger and dissension between friends seemed abroad; but some were so eager for battle, that the word of Arinbiorn seemed good to them, and they laughed for pride and anger.

Then Otter answered meekly, for he was a wise man and a bold: "We fled not, Arinbiorn, but as the sword fleeth, when it springeth up from the iron helm to fall on the woollen coat.  Are we not now of more avail to you, O men of the Bearings, than our dead corpses would have been?"

Arinbiorn answered not, but his face waxed red, as if he were struggling with a weight hard to lift: then said Otter:

"But when will Thiodolf and the main battle be with us?"

Arinbiorn answered calmly: "Maybe in a little hour from now, or somewhat more."

Said Otter: "My rede is that we abide him here, and when we are all met and well ordered together, fall on the Romans at once: for then shall we be more than they; whereas now we are far fewer, and moreover we shall have to set on them in their ground of vantage."

Arinbiorn answered nothing; but an old man of the Bearings, one Thorbiorn, came up and spake:

"Warriors, here are we talking and taking counsel, though this is no Hallowed Thing to bid us what we shall do, and what we shall forbear; and to talk thus is less like warriors than old women wrangling over the why and wherefore of a broken crock.  Let the War-duke rule here, as is but meet and right.  Yet if I might speak and not break the peace of the Goths, then would I say this, that it might be better for us to fall on these Romans at once before they have cast up a dike about them, as Fox telleth is their wont, and that even in an hour they may do much."

As he spake there was a murmur of assent about him, but Otter spake sharply, for he was grieved.

"Thorbiorn, thou art old, and shouldest not be void of prudence.  Now it had been better for thee to have been in the wood to-day to order the women and the swains according to thine ancient wisdom than to egg on my young warriors to fare unwarily.  Here will I abide Thiodolf."

Then Thorbiorn reddened and was wroth; but Arinbiorn spake:

"What is this to-do?  Let the War-duke rule as is but right: but I am now become a man of Thiodolf's company; and he bade me haste on before to help all I might.  Do thou as thou wilt, Otter: for Thiodolf shall be here in an hour's space, and if much diking shall be done in an hour, yet little slaying, forsooth, shall be done, and that especially if the foe is all armed and slayeth women and children.  Yea if the Bearing women be all slain, yet shall not Tyr make us new ones out of the stones of the waste to wed with the Galtings and the fish-eating Houses?--this is easy to be done forsooth.  Yea, easier than fighting the Romans and overcoming them!"

And he was very wrath, and turned away; and again there was a murmur and a hum about him.  But while these had been speaking aloud, Sweinbiorn had been talking softly to some of the younger men, and now he shook his naked sword in the air and spake aloud and sang:

   "Ye tarry, Bears of Battle! ye linger, Sons of the Worm!
    Ye crouch adown, O kindreds, from the gathering of the storm!
    Ye say, it shall soon pass over and we shall fare afield
    And reap the wheat with the war-sword and winnow in the shield.
    But where shall be the corner wherein ye then shall abide,
    And where shall be the woodland where the whelps of the bears shall hide
    When 'twixt the snowy mountains and the edges of the sea
    These men have swept the wild-wood and the fields where men may be
    Of every living sword-blade, and every quivering spear,
    And in the southland cities the yoke of slaves ye bear?
    Lo ye! whoever follows I fare to sow the seed
    Of the days to be hereafter and the deed that comes of deed."

Therewith he waved his sword over his head, and made as if he would spur onward.  But Arinbiorn thrust through the press and outwent him and cried out:

"None goeth before Arinbiorn the Old when the battle is pitched in the meadows of the kindred.  Come, ye sons of the Bear, ye children of the Worm!  And come ye, whosoever hath a will to see stout men die!"

Then on he rode nor looked behind him, and the riders of the Bearings and the Wormings drew themselves out of the throng, and followed him, and rode clattering over the meadow towards Wolfstead.  A few of the others rode with them, and yet but a few.  For they remembered the holy Folk- mote and the oath of the War-duke, and how they had chosen Otter to be their leader.  Howbeit, man looked askance at man, as if in shame to be left behind.

But Otter bethought him in the flash of a moment, "If these men ride alone, they shall die and do nothing; and if we ride with them it may be that we shall overthrow the Romans, and if we be vanquished, it shall go hard but we shall slay many of them, so that it shall be the easier for Thiodolf to deal with them."

Then he spake hastily, and bade certain men abide at the ford for a guard; then he drew his sword and rode to the front of his folk, and cried out aloud to them:

"Now at last has come the time to die, and let them of the Markmen who live hereafter lay us in howe.  Set on, Sons of Tyr, and give not your lives away, but let them be dearly earned of our foemen."

Then all shouted loudly and gladly; nor were they otherwise than exceeding glad; for now had they forgotten all other joys of life save the joy of fighting for the kindred and the days to be.

So Otter led them forth, and when he heard the whole company clattering and thundering on the earth behind him and felt their might enter into him, his brow cleared, and the anxious lines in the face of the old man smoothed themselves out, and as he rode along the soul so stirred within him that he sang out aloud:

   "Time was when hot was the summer and I was young on the earth,
    And I grudged me every moment that lacked its share of mirth.
    I woke in the morn and was merry and all the world methought
    For me and my heart's deliverance that hour was newly wrought.
    I have passed through the halls of manhood, I have reached the doors of eld,
    And I have been glad and sorry, but ever have upheld
    My heart against all trouble that none might call me sad,
    But ne'er came such remembrance of how my heart was glad
    In the afternoon of summer 'neath the still unwearied sun
    Of the days when I was little and all deeds were hopes to be won,
    As now at last it cometh when e'en in such-like tide,
    For the freeing of my trouble o'er the fathers' field I ride."

Many men perceived that he sang, and saw that he was merry, howbeit few heard his very words, and yet all were glad of him.

Fast they rode, being wishful to catch up with the Bearings and the Wormings, and soon they came anigh them, and they, hearing the thunder of the horse-hoofs, looked and saw that it was the company of Otter, and so slacked their speed till they were all joined together with joyous shouting and laughter.  So then they ordered the ranks anew and so set forward in great joy without haste or turmoil toward Wolfstead and the Romans.  For now the bitterness of their fury and the sourness of their abiding wrath were turned into the mere joy of battle; even as the clear red and sweet wine comes of the ugly ferment and rough trouble of the must.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f23]

CHAPTER XXIII--THIODOLF MEETETH THE ROMANS IN THE WOLFING MEADOW

It was scarce an hour after this that the footmen of Thiodolf came out of the thicket road on to the meadow of the Bearings; there saw they men gathered on a rising ground, and they came up to them and saw how some of them were looking with troubled faces towards the ford and what lay beyond it, and some toward the wood and the coming of Thiodolf.  But these were they whom Otter had bidden abide Thiodolf there, and he had sent two messengers to them for Thiodolf's behoof that he might have due tidings so soon as he came out of the thicket: the first told how Otter had been compelled in a manner to fall on the Romans along with the riders of the Bearings and the Wormings, and the second who had but just then come, told how the Markmen had been worsted by the Romans, and had given back from the Wolfing dwellings, and were making a stand against the foemen in the meadow betwixt the ford and Wolfstead.

Now when Thiodolf heard of these tidings he stayed not to ask long questions, but led the whole host straightway down to the ford, lest the remnant of Otter's men should be driven down there, and the Romans should hold the western bank against him.

At the ford there was none to withstand them, nor indeed any man at all; for the men whom Otter had set there, when they heard that the battle had gone against their kindred, had ridden their ways to join them.  So Thiodolf crossed over the ford, he and his in good order all afoot, he like to the others; but for him he was clad in the Dwarf-wrought Hauberk, but was unhelmeted and bare no shield.  Throng-plough was naked in his hand as he came up all dripping on to the bank and stood in the meadow of the Wolfings; his face was stern and set as he gazed straight onward to the place of the fray, but he did not look as joyous as his wont was in going down to the battle.

Now they had gone but a short way from the ford before the noise of the fight and the blowing of horns came down the wind to them, but it was a little way further before they saw the fray with their eyes; because the ground fell away from the river somewhat at first, and then rose and fell again before it went up in one slope toward the Wolfing dwellings.

But when they were come to the top of the next swelling of the ground, they beheld from thence what they had to deal with; for there round about a ground of vantage was the field black with the Roman host, and in the midst of it was a tangle of struggling men and tossing spears, and glittering swords.

So when they beheld the battle of their kindred they gave a great shout and hastened onward the faster; and they were ordered into the wedge-array and Thiodolf led them, as meet it was.  And now even as they who were on the outward edge of the array and could see what was toward were looking on the battle with eager eyes, there came an answering shout down the wind, which they knew for the voice of the Goths amid the foemen, and then they saw how the ring of the Romans shook and parted, and their array fell back, and lo the company of the Markmen standing stoutly together, though sorely minished; and sure it was that they had not fled or been scattered, but were ready to fall one over another in one band, for there were no men straggling towards the ford, though many masterless horses ran here and there about the meadow.  Now, therefore, none doubted but that they would deliver their friends from the Romans, and overthrow the foemen.

But now befel a wonder, a strange thing to tell of.  The Romans soon perceived what was adoing, whereupon the half of them turned about to face the new comers, while the other half still withstood the company of Otter: the wedge-array of Thiodolf drew nearer and nearer till it was hard on the place where it should spread itself out to storm down on the foe, and the Goths beset by the Romans made them ready to fall on from their side.  There was Thiodolf leading his host, and all men looking for the token and sign to fall on; but even as he lifted up Throng-plough to give that sign, a cloud came over his eyes and he saw nought of all that was before him, and he staggered back as one who hath gotten a deadly stroke, and so fell swooning to the earth, though none had smitten him. Then stayed was the wedge-array even at the very point of onset, and the hearts of the Goths sank, for they deemed that their leader was slain, and those who were nearest to him raised him up and bore him hastily aback out of the battle; and the Romans also had beheld him fall, and they also deemed him dead or sore hurt, and shouted for joy and loitered not, but stormed forth on the wedge-array like valiant men; for it must be told that they, who erst out-numbered the company of Otter, were now much out-numbered, but they deemed it might well be that they could dismay the Goths since they had been stayed by the fall of their leader; and Otter's company were wearied with sore fighting against a great host. Nevertheless these last, who had not seen the fall of Thiodolf (for the Romans were thick between him and them) fell on with such exceeding fury that they drove the Romans who faced them back on those who had set on the wedge-array, which also stood fast undismayed; for he who stood next to Thiodolf, a man big of body, and stout of heart, hight Thorolf, hove up a great axe and cried out aloud:

"Here is the next man to Thiodolf! here is one who will not fall till some one thrusts him over, here is Thorolf of the Wolfings!  Stand fast and shield you, and smite, though Thiodolf be gone untimely to the Gods!"

So none gave back a foot, and fierce was the fight about the wedge-array; and the men of Otter--but there was no Otter there, and many another man was gone, and Arinbiorn the Old led them--these stormed on so fiercely that they cleft their way through all and joined themselves to their kindred, and the battle was renewed in the Wolfing meadow.  But the Romans had this gain, that Thiodolf's men had let go their occasion for falling on the Romans with their line spread out so that every man might use his weapons; yet were the Goths strong both in valiancy and in numbers, nor might the Romans break into their array, and as aforesaid the Romans were the fewer, for it was less than half of their host that had pursued the Goths when they had been thrust back from their fierce onset: nor did more than the half seem needed, so many of them had fallen along with Otter the War-duke and Sweinbiorn of the Bearings, that they seemed to the Romans but a feeble band easy to overcome.

So fought they in the Wolfing meadow in the fifth hour after high-noon, and neither yielded to the other: but while these things were a-doing, men laid Thiodolf adown aloof from the battle under a doddered oak half a furlong from where the fight was a-doing, round whose bole clung flocks of wool from the sheep that drew around it in the hot summer-tide and rubbed themselves against it, and the ground was trodden bare of grass round the bole, and close to the trunk was worn into a kind of trench. There then they laid Thiodolf, and they wondered that no blood came from him, and that there was no sign of a shot-weapon in his body.

But as for him, when he fell, all memory of the battle and what had gone before it faded from his mind, and he passed into sweet and pleasant dreams wherein he was a lad again in the days before he had fought with the three Hun-Kings in the hazelled field.  And in these dreams he was doing after the manner of young lads, sporting in the meadows, backing unbroken colts, swimming in the river, going a-hunting with the elder carles.  And especially he deemed that he was in the company of one old man who had taught him both wood-craft and the handling of weapons: and fair at first was his dream of his doings with this man; he was with him in the forge smithying a sword-blade, and hammering into its steel the thin golden wires; and fishing with an angle along with him by the eddies of Mirkwood-water; and sitting with him in an ingle of the Hall, the old man telling a tale of an ancient warrior of the Wolfings hight Thiodolf also: then suddenly and without going there, they were in a little clearing of the woods resting after hunting, a roe-deer with an arrow in her lying at their feet, and the old man was talking, and telling Thiodolf in what wise it was best to go about to get the wind of a hart; but all the while there was going on the thunder of a great gale of wind through the woodland boughs, even as the drone of a bag-pipe cleaves to the tune.  Presently Thiodolf arose and would go about his hunting again, and stooped to take up his spear, and even therewith the old man's speech stayed, and Thiodolf looked up, and lo, his face was white like stone, and he touched him, and he was hard as flint, and like the image of an ancient god as to his face and hands, though the wind stirred his hair and his raiment, as they did before.  Therewith a great pang smote Thiodolf in his dream, and he felt as if he also were stiffening into stone, and he strove and struggled, and lo, the wild-wood was gone, and a white light empty of all vision was before him, and as he moved his head this became the Wolfing meadow, as he had known it so long, and thereat a soft pleasure and joy took hold of him, till again he looked, and saw there no longer the kine and sheep, and the herd-women tending them, but the rush and turmoil of that fierce battle, the confused thundering noise of which was going up to the heavens; for indeed he was now fully awake again.

So he stood up and looked about; and around him was a ring of the sorrowful faces of the warriors, who had deemed that he was hurt deadly, though no hurt could they find upon him.  But the Dwarf-wrought Hauberk lay upon the ground beside him; for they had taken it off him to look for his hurts.

So he looked into their faces and said: "What aileth you, ye men?  I am alive and unhurt; what hath betided?"

And one said: "Art thou verily alive, or a man come back from the dead? We saw thee fall as thou wentest leading us against the foe as if thou hadst been smitten by a thunder-bolt, and we deemed thee dead or grievously hurt.  Now the carles are fighting stoutly, and all is well since thou livest yet."

So he said: "Give me the point and edges that I know, that I may smite myself therewith and not the foemen; for I have feared and blenched from the battle."

Said an old warrior: "If that be so, Thiodolf, wilt thou blench twice?  Is not once enough?  Now let us go back to the hard handplay, and if thou wilt, smite thyself after the battle, when we have once more had a man's help of thee."

Therewith he held out Throng-plough to him by the point, and Thiodolf took hold of the hilts and handled it and said: "Let us hasten, while the Gods will have it so, and while they are still suffering me to strike a stroke for the kindred."

And therewith he brandished Throng-plough, and went forth toward the battle, and the heart grew hot within him, and the joy of waking life came back to him, the joy which but erewhile he had given to a mere dream.

But the old man who had rebuked him stooped down and lifted the Hauberk from the ground, and cried out after him, "O Thiodolf, and wilt thou go naked into so strong a fight? and thou with this so goodly sword-rampart?"

Thiodolf stayed a moment, and even therewith they looked, and lo! the Romans giving back before the Goths and the Goths following up the chase, but slowly and steadily.  Then Thiodolf heeded nothing save the battle, but ran forward hastily, and those warriors followed him, the old man last of all holding the Hauberk in his hand, and muttering:

   "So fares hot blood to the glooming and the world beneath the grass;
    And the fruit of the Wolfings' orchard in a flash from the world must pass.
    Men say that the tree shall blossom in the garden of the folk,
    And the new twig thrust him forward from the place where the old one broke,
    And all be well as aforetime: but old and old I grow,
    And I doubt me if such another the folk to come shall know."

And he still hurried forward as fast as his old body might go, so that he might wrap the safeguard of the Hauberk round Thiodolf's body.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f24]

CHAPTER XXIV--THE GOTHS ARE OVERTHROWN BY THE ROMANS

Now rose up a mighty shout when Thiodolf came back to the battle of the kindreds, for many thought he had been slain; and they gathered round about him, and cried out to him joyously out of their hearts of good-fellowship, and the old man who had rebuked Thiodolf, and who was Jorund of the Wolfings, came up to him and reached out to him the Hauberk, and he did it on scarce heeding; for all his heart and soul was turned toward the battle of the Romans and what they were a-doing; and he saw that they were falling back in good order, as men out-numbered, but undismayed.  So he gathered all his men together and ordered them afresh; for they were somewhat disarrayed with the fray and the chase: and now he no longer ordered them in the wedge array, but in a line here three deep, here five deep, or more, for the foes were hard at hand, and outnumbered, and so far overcome, that he and all men deemed it a little matter to give these their last overthrow, and then onward to Wolf-stead to storm on what was left there and purge the house of the foemen.  Howbeit Thiodolf bethought him that succour might come to the Romans from their main-battle, as they needed not many men there, since there was nought to fear behind them: but the thought was dim within him, for once more since he had gotten the Hauberk on him the earth was wavering and dream-like: he looked about him, and nowise was he as in past days of battle when he saw nought but the foe before him, and hoped for nothing save the victory.  But now indeed the Wood-Sun seemed to him to be beside him, and not against his will, as one besetting and hindering him, but as though his own longing had drawn her thither and would not let her depart; and whiles it seemed to him that her beauty was clearer to be seen than the bodies of the warriors round about him.  For the rest he seemed to be in a dream indeed, and, as men do in dreams, to be for ever striving to be doing something of more moment than anything which he did, but which he must ever leave undone.  And as the dream gathered and thickened about him the foe before him changed to his eyes, and seemed no longer the stern brown-skinned smooth-faced men under their crested iron helms with their iron-covered shields before them, but rather, big-headed men, small of stature, long-bearded, swart, crooked of body, exceeding foul of aspect.  And he looked on and did nothing for a while, and his head whirled as though he had been grievously smitten.

Thus tarried the kindreds awhile, and they were bewildered and their hearts fell because Thiodolf did not fly on the foemen like a falcon on the quarry, as his wont was.  But as for the Romans, they had now stayed, and were facing their foes again, and that on a vantage-ground, since the field sloped up toward the Wolfing dwelling; and they gathered heart when they saw that the Goths tarried and forbore them.  But the sun was sinking, and the evening was hard at hand.

So at last Thiodolf led forward with Throng-plough held aloft in his right hand; but his left hand he held out by his side, as though he were leading someone along.  And as he went, he muttered: "When will these accursed sons of the nether earth leave the way clear to us, that we may be alone and take pleasure each in each amidst of the flowers and the sun?"

Now as the two hosts drew near to one another, again came the sound of trumpets afar off, and men knew that this would be succour coming to the Romans from their main-battle, and the Romans thereon shouted for joy, and the host of the kindreds might no longer forbear, but rushed on fiercely against them; and for Thiodolf it was now come to this, that so entangled was he in his dream that he rather went with his men than led them.  Yet had he Throng-plough in his right hand, and he muttered in his beard as he went, "Smite before! smite behind! and smite on the right hand! but never on the left!"

Thus then they met, and as before, neither might the Goths sweep the Romans away, nor the Romans break the Goths into flight; yet were many of the kindred anxious and troubled, since they knew that aid was coming to the Romans, and they heard the trumpets sounding nearer and more joyous; and at last, as the men of the kindreds were growing a-wearied with fighting, they heard those horns as it were in their very ears, and the thunder of the tramp of footmen, and they knew that a fresh host of men was upon them; then those they had been fighting with opened before them, falling aside to the right and the left, and the fresh men passing between them, fell on the Goths like the waters of a river when a sluice- gate is opened.  They came on in very good order, never breaking their ranks, but swift withal, smiting and pushing before them, and so brake through the array of the Goth-folk, and drave them this way and that way down the slopes.

Yet still fought the warriors of the kindred most valiantly, making stand and facing the foe again and again in knots of a score or two score, or maybe ten score; and though many a man was slain, yet scarce any one before he had slain or hurt a Roman; and some there were, and they the oldest, who fought as if they and the few about them were all the host that was left to the folk, and heeded not that others were driven back, or that the Romans gathered about them, cutting them off from all succour and aid, but went on smiting till they were felled with many strokes.

Howbeit the array of the Goths was broken and many were slain, and perforce they must give back, and it seemed as if they would be driven into the river and all be lost.

But for Thiodolf, this befell him: that at first, when those fresh men fell on, he seemed, as it were, to wake unto himself again, and he cried aloud the cry of the Wolf, and thrust into the thickest of the fray, and slew many and was hurt of none, and for a moment of time there was an empty space round about him, such fear he cast even into the valiant hearts of the foemen.  But those who had time to see him as they stood by him noted that he was as pale as a dead man, and his eyes set and staring; and so of a sudden, while he stood thus threatening the ring of doubtful foemen, the weakness took him again, Throng-plough tumbled from his hand, and he fell to earth as one dead.

Then of those who saw him some deemed that he had been striving against some secret hurt till he could do no more; and some that there was a curse abroad that had fallen upon him and upon all the kindreds of the Mark; some thought him dead and some swooning.  But, dead or alive, the warriors would not leave their War-duke among the foemen, so they lifted him, and gathered about him a goodly band that held its own against all comers, and fought through the turmoil stoutly and steadily; and others gathered to them, till they began to be something like a host again, and the Romans might not break them into knots of desperate men any more.

Thus they fought their way, Arinbiorn of the Bearings leading them now, with a mind to make a stand for life or death on some vantage-ground; and so, often turning upon the Romans, they came in array ever growing more solid to the rising ground looking one way over the ford and the other to the slopes where the battle had just been.  There they faced the foe as men who may be slain, but will be driven no further; and what bowmen they had got spread out from their flanks and shot on the Romans, who had with them no light-armed, or slingers or bowmen, for they had left them at Wolf-stead.  So the Romans stood a while, and gave breathing-space to the Markmen, which indeed was the saving of them: for if they had fallen on hotly and held to it steadily, it is like that they would have passed over all the bodies of the Markmen: for these had lost their leader, either slain, as some thought, or, as others thought, banned from leadership by the Gods; and their host was heavy-hearted; and though it is like that they would have stood there till each had fallen over other, yet was their hope grown dim, and the whole folk brought to a perilous and fearful pass, for if these were slain or scattered there were no more but they, and nought between fire and the sword and the people of the Mark.

But once again the faint-heart folly of the Roman Captain saved his foes: for whereas he once thought that the whole power of the Markmen lay in Otter and his company, and deemed them too little to meddle with, so now he ran his head into the other hedge, and deemed that Thiodolf's company was but a part of the succour that was at hand for the Goths, and that they were over-big for him to meddle with.

True it is also that now dark night was coming on, and the land was unknown to the Romans, who moreover trusted not wholly to the dastards of the Goths who were their guides and scouts: furthermore the wood was at hand, and they knew not what it held; and with all this and above it all, it is to be said that over them also had fallen a dread of some doom anear; for those habitations amidst of the wild-woods were terrible to them as they were dear to the Goths; and the Gods of their foemen seemed to be lying in wait to fall upon them, even if they should slay every man of the kindreds.

So now having driven back the Goths to that height over the ford, which indeed was no stronghold, no mountain, scarce a hill even, nought but a gentle swelling of the earth, they forebore them; and raising up the whoop of victory drew slowly aback, picking up their own dead and wounded, and slaying the wounded Markmen.  They had with them also some few captives, but not many; for the fighting had been to the death between man and man on the Wolfing Meadow.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f25]

CHAPTER XXV--THE HOST OF THE MARKMEN COMETH INTO THE WILD-WOOD

Yet though the Romans were gone, the Goth-folk were very hard bested. They had been overthrown, not sorely maybe if they had been in an alien land, and free to come and go as they would; yet sorely as things were, because the foeman was sitting in their own House, and they must needs drag him out of it or perish: and to many the days seemed evil, and the Gods fighting against them, and both the Wolfings and the other kindreds bethought them of the Hall-Sun and her wisdom and longed to hear of tidings concerning her.

But now the word ran through the host that Thiodolf was certainly not slain.  Slowly he had come to himself, and yet was not himself, for he sat among his men gloomy and silent, clean contrary to his wont; for hitherto he had been a merry man, and a joyous fellow.

Amidst of the ridge whereon the Markmen now abode, there was a ring made of the chief warriors and captains and wise men who had not been slain or grievously hurt in the fray, and amidst them all sat Thiodolf on the ground, his chin sunken on his breast, looking more like a captive than the leader of a host amidst of his men; and that the more as his scabbard was empty; for when Throng-plough had fallen from his hand, it had been trodden under foot, and lost in the turmoil.  There he sat, and the others in that ring of men looked sadly upon him; such as Arinbiorn of the Bearings, and Wolfkettle and Thorolf of his own House, and Hiarandi of the Elkings, and Geirbald the Shielding, the messenger of the woods, and Fox who had seen the Roman Garth, and many others.  It was night now, and men had lighted fires about the host, for they said that the Romans knew where to find them if they listed to seek; and about those fires were men eating and drinking what they might come at, but amidmost of that ring was the biggest fire, and men turned them towards it for counsel and help, for elsewhere none said, "What do we?" for they were heavy-hearted and redeless, since the Gods had taken the victory out of their hands just when they seemed at point to win it.

But amidst all this there was a little stir outside that biggest ring, and men parted, and through them came a swain amongst the chiefs, and said, "Who will lead me to the War-duke?"

Thiodolf, who was close beside the lad, answered never a word; but Arinbiorn said; "This man here sitting is the War-duke: speak to him, for he may hearken to thee: but first who art thou?"

Said the lad; "My name is Ali the son of Grey, and I come with a message from the Hall-Sun and the stay-at-homes who are in the Woodland."

Now when he named the Hall-Sun Thiodolf started and looked up, and turning to his left-hand said, "And what sayeth thy daughter?"

Men did not heed that he said _thy_ daughter, but deemed that he said _my_ daughter, since he was wont as her would-be foster-father to call her so.  But Ali spake:

"War-duke and ye chieftains, thus saith the Hall-Sun: 'I know that by this time Otter hath been slain and many another, and ye have been overthrown and chased by the Romans, and that now there is little counsel in you except to abide the foe where ye are and there to die valiantly. But now do my bidding and as I am bidden, and then whosoever dieth or liveth, the kindreds shall vanquish that they may live and grow greater. Do ye thus: the Romans think no otherwise but to find you here to-morrow or else departed across the water as broken men, and they will fall upon you with their whole host, and then make a war-garth after their manner at Wolf-stead and carry fire and the sword and the chains of thralldom into every House of the Mark.  Now therefore fetch a compass and come into the wood on the north-west of the houses and make your way to the Thing-stead of the Mid-mark.  For who knoweth but that to-morrow we may fall upon these thieves again?  Of this shall ye hear more when we may speak together and take counsel face to face; for we stay-at-homes know somewhat closely of the ways of these Romans.  Haste then! let not the grass grow over your feet!

"'But to thee, Thiodolf, have I a word to say when we meet; for I wot that as now thou canst not hearken to my word.'  Thus saith the Hall-Sun."

"Wilt thou speak, War-duke?" said Arinbiorn.  But Thiodolf shook his head.  Then said Arinbiorn; "Shall I speak for thee?" and Thiodolf nodded yea.  Then said Arinbiorn: "Ali son of Grey, art thou going back to her that sent thee?"

"Yea," said the lad, "but in your company, for ye will be coming straightway and I know all the ways closely; and there is need for a guide through the dark night as ye will see presently."

Then stood up Arinbiorn and said: "Chiefs and captains, go ye speedily and array your men for departure: bid them leave all the fires burning and come their ways as silently as maybe; for now will we wend this same hour before moonrise into the Wild-wood and the Thing-stead of Mid-mark; thus saith the War-duke."

But when they were gone, and Arinbiorn and Thiodolf were left alone, Thiodolf lifted up his head and spake slowly and painfully:

"Arinbiorn, I thank thee: and thou dost well to lead this folk: since as for me that is somewhat that weighs me down, and I know not whether it be life or death; therefore I may no longer be your captain, for twice now have I blenched from the battle.  Yet command me, and I will obey, set a sword in my hand and I will smite, till the God snatches it out of my hand, as he did Throng-plough to-day."

"And that is well," said Arinbiorn, "it may be that ye shall meet that God to-morrow, and heave up sword against him, and either overcome him or go to thy fathers a proud and valiant man."

So they spake, and Thiodolf stood up and seemed of better cheer.  But presently the whole host was afoot, and they went their ways warily with little noise, and wound little by little about the Wolfing meadow and about the acres towards the wood at the back of the Houses; and they met nothing by the way except an out-guard of the Romans, whom they slew there nigh silently, and bore away their bodies, twelve in number, lest the Romans when they sent to change the guard, should find the slain and have an inkling of the way the Goths were gone; but now they deemed that the Romans might think their guard fled, or perchance that they had been carried away by the Gods of the woodland folk.

So came they into the wood, and Arinbiorn and the chiefs were for striking the All-men's road to the Thing-stead and so coming thither; but the lad Ali when he heard it laughed and said:

"If ye would sleep to-night ye shall wend another way.  For the Hall-Sun hath had us at work cumbering it against the foe with great trees felled with limbs, branches, and all.  And indeed ye shall find the Thing-stead fenced like a castle, and the in-gate hard to find; yet will I bring you thither."

So did he without delay, and presently they came anigh the Thing-stead; and the place was fenced cunningly, so that if men would enter they must go by a narrow way that had a fence of tree-trunks on each side wending inward like the maze in a pleasance.  Thereby now wended the host all afoot, since it was a holy place and no beast must set foot therein, so that the horses were left without it: so slowly and right quietly once more they came into the garth of the Thing-stead; and lo, a many folk there, of the Wolfings and the Bearings and other kindreds, who had gathered thereto; and albeit these were not warriors in their prime, yet were there none save the young children and the weaker of the women but had weapons of some kind; and they were well ordered, standing or sitting in ranks like folk awaiting battle.  There were booths of boughs and rushes set up for shelter of the feebler women and the old men and children along the edges of the fence, for the Hall-Sun had bidden them keep the space clear round about the Doom-ring and the Hill-of-Speech as if for a mighty folk-mote, so that the warriors might have room to muster there and order their array.  There were some cooking-fires lighted about the aforesaid booths, but neither many nor great, and they were screened with wattle from the side that lay toward the Romans; for the Hall-Sun would not that they should hold up lanterns for their foemen to find them by.  Little noise there was in that stronghold, moreover, for the hearts of all who knew their right hands from their left were set on battle and the destruction of the foe that would destroy the kindreds.

Anigh the Speech-Hill, on its eastern side, had the bole of a slender beech tree been set up, and at the top of it a cross-beam was nailed on, and therefrom hung the wondrous lamp, the Hall-Sun, glimmering from on high, and though its light was but a glimmer amongst the mighty wood, yet was it also screened on three sides from the sight of the chance wanderer by wings of thin plank.  But beneath her namesake as beforetime in the Hall sat the Hall-Sun, the maiden, on a heap of faggots, and she was wrapped in a dark blue cloak from under which gleamed the folds of the fair golden-broidered gown she was wont to wear at folk-motes, and her right hand rested on a naked sword that lay across her knees: beside her sat the old man Sorli, the Wise in War, and about her were slim lads and sturdy maidens and old carles of the thralls or freedmen ready to bear the commands that came from her mouth; for she and Sorli were the captains of the stay-at-homes.

Now came Thiodolf and Arinbiorn and other leaders into the ring of men before her, and she greeted them kindly and said:

"Hail, Sons of Tyr! now that I behold you again it seemeth to me as if all were already won: the time of waiting hath been weary, and we have borne the burden of fear every day from morn till even, and in the waking hour we presently remembered it.  But now ye are come, even if this Thing- stead were lighted by the flames of the Wolfing Roof instead of by these moonbeams; even if we had to begin again and seek new dwellings, and another water and other meadows, yet great should grow the kindreds of the Men who have dwelt in the Mark, and nought should overshadow them: and though the beasts and the Romans were dwelling in their old places, yet should these kindreds make new clearings in the Wild-wood; and they with their deeds should cause other waters to be famous, that as yet have known no deeds of man; and they should compel the Earth to bear increase round about their dwelling-places for the welfare of the kindreds.  O Sons of Tyr, friendly are your faces, and undismayed, and the Terror of the Nations has not made you afraid any more than would the onrush of the bisons that feed adown the grass hills.  Happy is the eve, O children of the Goths, yet shall to-morrow morn be happier."

Many heard what she spake, and a murmur of joy ran through the ranks of men: for they deemed her words to forecast victory.

And now amidst her speaking, the moon, which had arisen on Mid-mark, when the host first entered into the wood, had overtopped the tall trees that stood like a green wall round about the Thing-stead, and shone down on that assembly, and flashed coldly back from the arms of the warriors.  And the Hall-Sun cast off her dark blue cloak and stood up in her golden-broidered raiment, which flashed back the grey light like as it had been an icicle hanging from the roof of some hall in the midnight of Yule, when the feast is high within, and without the world is silent with the night of the ten-weeks' frost.

Then she spake again: "O War-duke, thy mouth is silent; speak to this warrior of the Bearings that he bid the host what to do; for wise are ye both, and dear are the minutes of this night and should not be wasted; since they bring about the salvation of the Wolfings, and the vengeance of the Bearings, and the hope renewed of all the kindreds."

Then Thiodolf abode a while with his head down cast; his bosom heaved, and he set his left hand to his swordless scabbard, and his right to his throat, as though he were sore troubled with something he might not tell of: but at last he lifted up his head and spoke to Arinbiorn, but slowly and painfully, as he had spoken before:

"Chief of the Bearings, go up on to the Hill of Speech, and speak to the folk out of thy wisdom, and let them know that to-morrow early before the sun-rising those that may, and are not bound by the Gods against it, shall do deeds according to their might, and win rest for themselves, and new days of deeds for the kindreds."

Therewith he ceased, and let his head fall again, and the Hall-Sun looked at him askance.  But Arinbiorn clomb the Speech-Hill and said:

"Men of the kindreds, it is now a few days since we first met the Romans and fought with them; and whiles we have had the better, and whiles the worse in our dealings, as oft in war befalleth: for they are men, and we no less than men.  But now look to it what ye will do; for we may no longer endure these outlanders in our houses, and we must either die or get our own again: and that is not merely a few wares stored up for use, nor a few head of neat, nor certain timbers piled up into a dwelling, but the life we have made in the land we have made.  I show you no choice, for no choice there is.  Here are we bare of everything in the wild-wood: for the most part our children are crying for us at home, our wives are longing for us in our houses, and if we come not to them in kindness, the Romans shall come to them in grimness.  Down yonder in the plain, moreover, is our wain-burg slowly drawing near to us, and with it is much livelihood of ours, which is a little thing, for we may get more; but also there are our banners of battle and the tokens of the kindred, which is a great thing.  And between all this and us there lieth but little; nought but a band of valiant men, and a few swords and spears, and a few wounds, and the hope of death amidst the praise of the people; and this ye have to set out to wend across within two or three hours.  I will not ask if ye will do so, for I wot that even so ye will; therefore when I have done, shout not, nor clash sword on shield, for we are no great way off that house of ours wherein dwells the foe that would destroy us.  Let each man rest as he may, and sleep if he may with his war-gear on him and his weapons by his side, and when he is next awakened by the captains and the leaders of hundreds and scores, let him not think that it is night, but let him betake himself to his place among his kindred and be ready to go through the wood with as little noise as may be.  Now all is said that the War-duke would have me say, and to-morrow shall those see him who are foremost in falling upon the foemen, for he longeth sorely for his seat on the days of the Wolfing Hall."

So he spake, and even as he bade them, they made no sound save a joyous murmur; and straightway the more part of them betook themselves to sleep as men who must busy themselves about a weighty matter; for they were wise in the ways of war.  So sank all the host to the ground save those who were appointed as watchers of the night, and Arinbiorn and Thiodolf and the Hall-Sun; they three yet stood together; and Arinbiorn said:

"Now it seems to me not so much as if we had vanquished the foe and were safe and at rest, but rather as if we had no foemen and never have had. Deep peace is on me, though hitherto I have been deemed a wrathful man, and it is to me as if the kindreds that I love had filled the whole earth, and left no room for foemen: even so it may really be one day.  To- night it is well, yet to-morrow it shall be better.  What thine errand may be, Thiodolf, I scarce know; for something hath changed in thee, and thou art become strange to us.  But as for mine errand, I will tell it thee; it is that I am seeking Otter of the Laxings, my friend and fellow, whose wisdom my foolishness drave under the point and edge of the Romans, so that he is no longer here; I am seeking him, and to-morrow I think I shall find him, for he hath not had time to travel far, and we shall be blithe and merry together.  And now will I sleep; for I have bidden the watchers awaken me if any need be.  Sleep thou also, Thiodolf! and wake up thine old self when the moon is low."  Therewith he laid himself down under the lee of the pile of faggots, and was presently asleep.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f26]

CHAPTER XXVI--THIODOLF TALKETH WITH THE WOOD-SUN

Now were Thiodolf and the Hall-Sun left alone together standing by the Speech-Hill; and the moon was risen high in the heavens above the tree- tops of the wild-wood.  Thiodolf scarce stirred, and he still held his head bent down as one lost in thought.

Then said the Hall-Sun, speaking softly amidst the hush of the camp:

"I have said that the minutes of this night are dear, and they are passing swiftly; and it may be that thou wilt have much to say and to do before the host is astir with the dawning.  So come thou with me a little way, that thou mayst hear of new tidings, and think what were best to do amidst them."

And without more ado she took him by the hand and led him forth, and he went as he was led, not saying a word.  They passed out of the camp into the wood, none hindering, and went a long way where under the beech-leaves there was but a glimmer of the moonlight, and presently Thiodolf's feet went as it were of themselves; for they had hit a path that he knew well and over-well.

So came they to that little wood-lawn where first in this tale Thiodolf met the Wood-Sun; and the stone seat there was not empty now any more than it was then; for thereon sat the Wood-Sun, clad once more in her glittering raiment.  Her head was sunken down, her face hidden by her hands; neither did she look up when she heard their feet on the grass, for she knew who they were.

Thiodolf lingered not; for a moment it was to him as if all that past time had never been, and its battles and hurry and hopes and fears but mere shows, and the unspoken words of a dream.  He went straight up to her and sat down by her side and put his arm about her shoulders, and strove to take her hand to caress it; but she moved but little, and it was as if she heeded him not.  And the Hall-Sun stood before them and looked at them for a little while; and then she fell to speech; but at the first sound of her voice, it seemed that the Wood-Sun trembled, but still she hid her face.  Said the Hall-Sun:

   "Two griefs I see before me in mighty hearts grown great;
    And to change both these into gladness out-goes the power of fate.
    Yet I, a lonely maiden, have might to vanquish one
    Till it melt as the mist of the morning before the summer sun.
    O Wood-Sun, thou hast borne me, and I were fain indeed
    To give thee back thy gladness; but thou com'st of the Godhead's seed,
    And herein my might avails not; because I can but show
    Unto these wedded sorrows the truth that the heart should know
    Ere the will hath wielded the hand; and for thee, I can tell thee nought
    That thou hast not known this long while; thy will and thine hand have wrought,
    And the man that thou lovest shall live in despite of Gods and of men,
    If yet thy will endureth.  But what shall it profit thee then
    That after the fashion of Godhead thou hast gotten thee a thrall
    To be thine and never another's, whatso in the world may befall?
    Lo! yesterday this was a man, and to-morrow it might have been
    The very joy of the people, though never again it were seen;
    Yet a part of all they hoped for through all the lapse of years,
    To make their laughter happy and dull the sting of tears;
    To quicken all remembrance of deeds that never die,
    And death that maketh eager to live as the days go by.
    Yea, many a deed had he done as he lay in the dark of the mound;
    As the seed-wheat plotteth of spring, laid under the face of the ground
    That the foot of the husbandman treadeth, that the wind of the winter wears,
    That the turbid cold flood hideth from the constant hope of the years.
    This man that should leave in his death his life unto many an one
    Wilt thou make him a God of the fearful who live lone under the sun?
    And then shalt thou have what thou wouldedst when amidst of the hazelled field
    Thou kissed'st the mouth of the helper, and the hand of the people's shield,
    Shalt thou have the thing that thou wouldedst when thou broughtest me to birth,
    And I, the soul of the Wolfings, began to look on earth?
    Wilt thou play the God, O mother, and make a man anew,
    A joyless thing and a fearful?  Then I betwixt you two,
    'Twixt your longing and your sorrow will cast the sundering word,
    And tell out all the story of that rampart of the sword!
    I shall bid my mighty father make choice of death in life,
    Or life in death victorious and the crowned end of strife."

Ere she had ended, the Wood-Sun let her hands fall down, and showed her face, which for all its unpaled beauty looked wearied and anxious; and she took Thiodolf's hand in hers, while she looked with eyes of love upon the Hall-Sun, and Thiodolf laid his cheek to her cheek, and though he smiled not, yet he seemed as one who is happy.  At last the Wood-Sun spoke and said:

   "Thou sayest sooth, O daughter: I am no God of might,
    Yet I am of their race, and I think with their thoughts and see with their sight,
    And the threat of the doom did I know of, and yet spared not to lie:
    For I thought that the fate foreboded might touch and pass us by,
    As the sword that heweth the war-helm and cleaveth a cantle away,
    And the cunning smith shall mend it and it goeth again to the fray;
    If my hand might have held for a moment, yea, even against his will,
    The life of my beloved!  But Weird is the master still:
    And this man's love of my body and his love of the ancient kin
    Were matters o'er mighty to deal with and the game withal to win.
    Woe's me for the waning of all things, and my hope that needs must fade
    As the fruitless sun of summer on the waste where nought is made!
    And now farewell, O daughter, thou mayst not see the kiss
    Of the hapless and the death-doomed when I have told of this;
    Yet once again shalt thou see him, though I no more again,
    Fair with the joy that hopeth and dieth not in vain."

Then came the Hall-Sun close to her, and knelt down by her, and laid her head upon her knees and wept for love of her mother, who kissed her oft and caressed her; and Thiodolf's hand strayed, as it were, on to his daughter's head, and he looked kindly on her, though scarce now as if he knew her.  Then she arose when she had kissed her mother once more, and went her ways from that wood-lawn into the woods again, and so to the Folk-mote of her people.

But when those twain were all alone again, the Wood-Sun spoke: "O Thiodolf canst thou hear me and understand?"

"Yea," he said, "when thou speakest of certain matters, as of our love together, and of our daughter that came of our love."

"Thiodolf," she said, "How long shall our love last?"

"As long as our life," he said.

"And if thou diest to-day, where then shall our love be?" said the Wood- Sun.

He said, "I must now say, I wot not; though time was I had said, It shall abide with the soul of the Wolfing Kindred."

She said: "And when that soul dieth, and the kindred is no more?"

"Time agone," quoth he, "I had said, it shall abide with the Kindreds of the Earth; but now again I say, I wot not."

"Will the Earth hide it," said she, "when thou diest and art borne to mound?"

"Even so didst thou say when we spake together that other night," said he; "and now I may say nought against thy word."

"Art thou happy, O Folk-Wolf?" she said.

"Why dost thou ask me?" said he; "I know not; we were sundered and I longed for thee; thou art here; it is enough."

"And the people of thy Kindred?" she said, "dost thou not long for them?"

He said; "Didst thou not say that I was not of them?  Yet were they my friends, and needed me, and I loved them: but by this evening they will need me no more, or but little; for they will be victorious over their foes: so hath the Hall-Sun foretold.  What then! shall I take all from thee to give little to them?"

"Thou art wise," she said; "Wilt thou go to battle to-day?"

"So it seemeth," said he.

She said: "And wilt thou bear the Dwarf-wrought Hauberk? for if thou dost, thou wilt live, and if thou dost not, thou wilt die."

"I will bear it," said he, "that I may live to love thee."

"Thinkest thou that any evil goes with it?" said she.

There came into his face a flash of his ancient boldness as he answered: "So it seemed to me yesterday, when I fought clad in it the first time; and I fell unsmitten on the meadow, and was shamed, and would have slain myself but for thee.  And yet it is not so that any evil goes with it; for thou thyself didst say that past night that there was no evil weird in it."

She said: "How then if I lied that night?"

Said he; "It is the wont of the Gods to lie, and be unashamed, and men- folk must bear with it."

"Ah! how wise thou art!" she said; and was silent for a while, and drew away from him a little, and clasped her hands together and wrung them for grief and anger.  Then she grew calm again, and said:

"Wouldest thou die at my bidding?"

"Yea," said he, "not because thou art of the Gods, but because thou hast become a woman to me, and I love thee."

Then was she silent some while, and at last she said, "Thiodolf, wilt thou do off the Hauberk if I bid thee?"

"Yea, yea," said he, "and let us depart from the Wolfings, and their strife, for they need us not."

She was silent once more for a longer while still, and at last she said in a cold voice; "Thiodolf, I bid thee arise, and put off the Hauberk from thee."

He looked at her wondering, not at her words, but at the voice wherewith she spake them; but he arose from the stone nevertheless, and stood stark in the moonlight; he set his hand to the collar of the war-coat, and undid its clasps, which were of gold and blue stones, and presently he did the coat from off him and let it slide to the ground where it lay in a little grey heap that looked but a handful.  Then he sat down on the stone again, and took her hand and kissed her and caressed her fondly, and she him again, and they spake no word for a while: but at the last he spake in measure and rhyme in a low voice, but so sweet and clear that it might have been heard far in the hush of the last hour of the night:

   "Dear now are this dawn-dusk's moments as is the last of the light
    When the foemen's ranks are wavering, and the victory feareth night;
    And of all the time I have loved thee of these am I most fain,
    When I know not what shall betide me, nor what shall be my gain.
    But dear as they are, they are waning, and at last the time is come
    When no more shall I behold thee till I wend to Odin's Home.
    Now is the time so little that once hath been so long
    That I fain would ask thee pardon wherein I have done thee wrong,
    That thy longing might be softer, and thy love more sweet to have.
    But in nothing have I wronged thee, there is nought that I may crave.
    Strange too! as the minutes fail me, so do my speech-words fail,
    Yet strong is the joy within me for this hour that crowns the tale."

Therewith he clipped her and caressed her, and she spake nothing for a while; and he said; "Thy face is fair and bright; art thou not joyous of these minutes?"

She said: "Thy words are sweet; but they pierce my heart like a sharp knife; for they tell me of thy death and the ending of our love."

Said he; "I tell thee nothing, beloved, that thou hast not known: is it not for this that we have met here once more?"

She answered after a while; "Yea, yea; yet mightest thou have lived."

He laughed, but not scornfully or bitterly and said:

"So thought I in time past: but hearken, beloved; If I fall to-day, shall there not yet be a minute after the stroke hath fallen on me, wherein I shall know that the day is won and see the foemen fleeing, and wherein I shall once again deem I shall never die, whatever may betide afterwards, and though the sword lieth deep in my breast?  And shall I not see then and know that our love hath no end?"

Bitter grief was in her face as she heard him.  But she spake and said: "Lo here the Hauberk which thou hast done off thee, that thy breast might be the nearer to mine!  Wilt thou not wear it in the fight for my sake?"

He knit his brows somewhat, and said:

"Nay, it may not be: true it is that thou saidest that no evil weird went with it, but hearken!  Yesterday I bore it in the fight, and ere I mingled with the foe, before I might give the token of onset, a cloud came before my eyes and thick darkness wrapped me around, and I fell to the earth unsmitten; and so was I borne out of the fight, and evil dreams beset me of evil things, and the dwarfs that hate mankind.  Then I came to myself, and the Hauberk was off me, and I rose up and beheld the battle, that the kindreds were pressing on the foe, and I thought not then of any past time, but of the minutes that were passing; and I ran into the fight straightway: but one followed me with that Hauberk, and I did it on, thinking of nought but the battle.  Fierce then was the fray, yet I faltered in it; till the fresh men of the Romans came in upon us and broke up our array.  Then my heart almost broke within me, and I faltered no more, but rushed on as of old, and smote great strokes all round about: no hurt I got, but once more came that ugly mist over my eyes, and again I fell unsmitten, and they bore me out of battle: then the men of our folk gave back and were overcome; and when I awoke from my evil dreams, we had gotten away from the fight and the Wolfing dwellings, and were on the mounds above the ford cowering down like beaten men. There then I sat shamed among the men who had chosen me for their best man at the Holy Thing, and lo I was their worst!  Then befell that which never till then had befallen me, that life seemed empty and worthless and I longed to die and be done with it, and but for the thought of thy love I had slain myself then and there.

"Thereafter I went with the host to the assembly of the stay-at-homes and fleers, and sat before the Hall-Sun our daughter, and said the words which were put into my mouth.  But now must I tell thee a hard and evil thing; that I loved them not, and was not of them, and outside myself there was nothing: within me was the world and nought without me.  Nay, as for thee, I was not sundered from thee, but thou wert a part of me; whereas for the others, yea, even for our daughter, thine and mine, they were but images and shows of men, and I longed to depart from them, and to see thy body and to feel thine heart beating.  And by then so evil was I grown that my very shame had fallen from me, and my will to die: nay, I longed to live, thou and I, and death seemed hateful to me, and the deeds before death vain and foolish.

"Where then was my glory and my happy life, and the hope of the days fresh born every day, though never dying?  Where then was life, and Thiodolf that once had lived?

"But now all is changed once more; I loved thee never so well as now, and great is my grief that we must sunder, and the pain of farewell wrings my heart.  Yet since I am once more Thiodolf the Mighty, in my heart there is room for joy also.  Look at me, O Wood-Sun, look at me, O beloved! tell me, am I not fair with the fairness of the warrior and the helper of the folk?  Is not my voice kind, do not my lips smile, and mine eyes shine?  See how steady is mine hand, the friend of the folk!  For mine eyes are cleared again, and I can see the kindreds as they are, and their desire of life and scorn of death, and this is what they have made me myself.  Now therefore shall they and I together earn the merry days to come, the winter hunting and the spring sowing, the summer haysel, the ingathering of harvest, the happy rest of midwinter, and Yuletide with the memory of the Fathers, wedded to the hope of the days to be.  Well may they bid me help them who have holpen me!  Well may they bid me die who have made me live!

"For whereas thou sayest that I am not of their blood, nor of their adoption, once more I heed it not.  For I have lived with them, and eaten and drunken with them, and toiled with them, and led them in battle and the place of wounds and slaughter; they are mine and I am theirs; and through them am I of the whole earth, and all the kindreds of it; yea, even of the foemen, whom this day the edges in mine hand shall smite.

"Therefore I will bear the Hauberk no more in battle; and belike my body but once more: so shall I have lived and death shall not have undone me.

"Lo thou, is not this the Thiodolf whom thou hast loved? no changeling of the Gods, but the man in whom men have trusted, the friend of Earth, the giver of life, the vanquisher of death?"

And he cast himself upon her, and strained her to his bosom and kissed her, and caressed her, and awoke the bitter-sweet joy within her, as he cried out:

"O remember this, and this, when at last I am gone from thee!"

But when they sundered her face was bright, but the tears were on it, and she said: "O Thiodolf, thou wert fain hadst thou done a wrong to me so that I might forgive thee; now wilt thou forgive me the wrong I have done thee?"

"Yea," he said, "Even so would I do, were we both to live, and how much more if this be the dawn of our sundering day!  What hast thou done?"

She said: "I lied to thee concerning the Hauberk when I said that no evil weird went with it: and this I did for the saving of thy life."

He laid his hand fondly on her head, and spake smiling: "Such is the wont of the God-kin, because they know not the hearts of men.  Tell me all the truth of it now at last."

She said:

   "Hear then the tale of the Hauberk and the truth there is to tell:
    There was a maid of the God-kin, and she loved a man right well,
    Who unto the battle was wending; and she of her wisdom knew
    That thence to the folk-hall threshold should come back but a very few;
    And she feared for her love, for she doubted that of these he should not be;
    So she wended the wilds lamenting, as I have lamented for thee;
    And many wise she pondered, how to bring her will to pass
    (E'en as I for thee have pondered), as her feet led over the grass,
    Till she lifted her eyes in the wild-wood, and lo! she stood before
    The Hall of the Hollow-places; and the Dwarf-lord stood in the door
    And held in his hand the Hauberk, whereon the hammer's blow
    The last of all had been smitten, and the sword should be hammer now.
    Then the Dwarf beheld her fairness, and the wild-wood many-leaved
    Before his eyes was reeling at the hope his heart conceived;
    So sorely he longed for her body; and he laughed before her and cried,
    'O Lady of the Disir, thou farest wandering wide
    Lamenting thy beloved and the folk-mote of the spear,
    But if amidst of the battle this child of the hammer he bear
    He shall laugh at the foemen's edges and come back to thy lily breast
    And of all the days of his life-time shall his coming years be best.'
    Then she bowed adown her godhead and sore for the Hauberk she prayed;
    But his greedy eyes devoured her as he stood in the door and said;
    'Come lie in mine arms!  Come hither, and we twain the night to wake!
    And then as a gift of the morning the Hauberk shall ye take.'
    So she humbled herself before him, and entered into the cave,
    The dusky, the deep-gleaming, the gem-strewn golden grave.
    But he saw not her girdle loosened, or her bosom gleam on his love,
    For she set the sleep-thorn in him, that he saw, but might not move,
    Though the bitter salt tears burned him for the anguish of his greed;
    And she took the hammer's offspring, her unearned morning meed,
    And went her ways from the rock-hall and was glad for her warrior's sake.
    But behind her dull speech followed, and the voice of the hollow spake:
    'Thou hast left me bound in anguish, and hast gained thine heart's desire;
    Now I would that the dewy night-grass might be to thy feet as the fire,
    And shrivel thy raiment about thee, and leave thee bare to the flame,
    And no way but a fiery furnace for the road whereby ye came!
    But since the folk of God-home we may not slay nor smite,
    And that fool of the folk that thou lovest, thou hast saved in my despite,
    Take with thee, thief of God-home, this other word I say:
    Since the safeguard wrought in the ring-mail I may not do away
    I lay this curse upon it, that whoso weareth the same,
    Shall save his life in the battle, and have the battle's shame;
    He shall live through wrack and ruin, and ever have the worse,
    And drag adown his kindred, and bear the people's curse.'

   "Lo, this the tale of the Hauberk, and I knew it for the truth:
    And little I thought of the kindreds; of their day I had no ruth;
    For I said, They are doomed to departure; in a little while must they wane,
    And nought it helpeth or hindreth if I hold my hand or refrain.
    Yea, thou wert become the kindred, both thine and mine; and thy birth
    To me was the roofing of heaven, and the building up of earth.
    I have loved, and I must sorrow; thou hast lived, and thou must die;
    Ah, wherefore were there others in the world than thou and I?"

He turned round to her and clasped her strongly in his arms again, and kissed her many times and said:

   "Lo, here art thou forgiven; and here I say farewell!
    Here the token of my wonder which my words may never tell;
    The wonder past all thinking, that my love and thine should blend;
    That thus our lives should mingle, and sunder in the end!
    Lo, this, for the last remembrance of the mighty man I was,
    Of thy love and thy forbearing, and all that came to pass!
    Night wanes, and heaven dights her for the kiss of sun and earth;
    Look up, look last upon me on this morn of the kindreds' mirth!"

Therewith he arose and lingered no minute longer, but departed, going as straight towards the Thing-stead and the Folk-mote of his kindred as the swallow goes to her nest in the hall-porch.  He looked not once behind him, though a bitter wailing rang through the woods and filled his heart with the bitterness of her woe and the anguish of the hour of sundering.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f27]

CHAPTER XXVII--THEY WEND TO THE MORNING BATTLE

Now when Thiodolf came back to the camp the signs of dawn were plain in the sky, the moon was low and sinking behind the trees, and he saw at once that the men were stirring and getting ready for departure.  He looked gladly and blithely at the men he fell in with, and they at him, and scarce could they refrain a shout when they beheld his face and the brightness of it.  He went straight up to where the Hall-Sun was yet sitting under her namesake, with Arinbiorn standing before her amidst of a ring of leaders of hundreds and scores: but old Sorli sat by her side clad in all his war-gear.

When Thiodolf first came into that ring of men they looked doubtfully at him, as if they dreaded somewhat, but when they had well beheld him their faces cleared, and they became joyous.

He went straight up to Arinbiorn and kissed the old warrior, and said to him, "I give thee good morrow, O leader of the Bearings!  Here now is come the War-duke! and meseems that we should get to work as speedily as may be, for lo the dawning!"

"Hail to thine hand, War-duke!" said Arinbiorn joyously; "there is no more to do but to take thy word concerning the order wherein we shall wend; for all men are armed and ready."

Said Thiodolf; "Lo ye, I lack war-gear and weapons!  Is there a good sword hereby, a helm, a byrny and a shield?  For hard will be the battle, and we must fence ourselves all we may."

"Hard by," said Arinbiorn, "is the war-gear of Ivar of our House, who is dead in the night of his hurts gotten in yesterday's battle: thou and he are alike in stature, and with a good will doth he give them to thee, and they are goodly things, for he comes of smithying blood.  Yet is it a pity of Throng-plough that he lieth on the field of the slain."

But Thiodolf smiled and said: "Nay, Ivar's blade shall serve my turn to- day; and thereafter shall it be seen to, for then will be time for many things."

So they went to fetch him the weapons; but he said to Arinbiorn, "Hast thou numbered the host?  What are the gleanings of the Roman sword?"

Said Arinbiorn: "Here have we more than three thousand three hundred warriors of the host fit for battle: and besides this here are gathered eighteen hundred of the Wolfings and the Bearings, and of the other Houses, mostly from over the water, and of these nigh upon seven hundred may bear sword or shoot shaft; neither shall ye hinder them from so doing if the battle be joined."

Then said Thiodolf: "We shall order us into three battles; the Wolfings and the Bearings to lead the first, for this is our business; but others of the smaller Houses this side the water to be with us; and the Elkings and Galtings and the other Houses of the Mid-mark on the further side of the water to be in the second, and with them the more part of the Nether- mark; but the men of Up-mark to be in the third, and the stay-at-homes to follow on with them: and this third battle to let the wood cover them till they be needed, which may not be till the day of fight draws to an end, when all shall be needed: for no Roman man must be left alive or untaken by this even, or else must we all go to the Gods together. Hearken, Arinbiorn.  I am not called fore-sighted, and yet meseems I see somewhat how this day shall go; and it is not to be hidden that I shall not see another battle until the last of all battles is at hand.  But be of good cheer, for I shall not die till the end of the fight, and once more I shall be a man's help unto you.  Now the first of the Romans we meet shall not be able to stand before us, for they shall be unready, and when their men are gotten ready and are fighting with us grimly, ye of the second battle shall hear the war-token, and shall fall on, and they shall be dismayed when they see so many fresh men come into the fight; yet shall they stand stoutly; for they are valiant men, and shall not all be taken unawares.  Then, if they withstand us long enough, shall the third battle come forth from the wood, and fall on either flank of them, and the day shall be won.  But I think not that they shall withstand us so long, but that the men of Up-mark and the stay-at-homes shall have the chasing of them.  Now get me my war-gear, and let the first battle get them to the outgate of the garth."

So they brought him his arms; and meanwhile the Hall-Sun spake to one of the Captains, and he turned and went away a little space, and then came back, having with him three strong warriors of the Wolfings, and he brought them before the Hall-Sun, who said to them:

"Ye three, Steinulf, Athalulf, and Grani the Grey, I have sent for you because ye are men both mighty in battle and deft wood-wrights and house- smiths; ye shall follow Thiodolf closely, when he winneth into the Roman garth, yet shall ye fight wisely, so that ye be not slain, or at least not all; ye shall enter the Hall with Thiodolf, and when ye are therein, if need be, ye shall run down the Hall at your swiftest, and mount up into the loft betwixt the Middle-hearth and the Women's-Chamber, and there shall ye find good store of water in vats and tubs, and this ye shall use for quenching the fire of the Hall if the foemen fire it, as is not unlike to be."

Then Grani spoke for the others and said he would pay all heed to her words, and they departed to join their company.

Now was Thiodolf armed; and Arinbiorn, turning about before he went to his place, beheld him and knit his brow, and said: "What is this, Thiodolf?  Didst thou not swear to the Gods not to bear helm or shield in the battles of this strife? yet hast thou Ivar's helm on thine head and his shield ready beside thee: wilt thou forswear thyself? so doing shalt thou bring woe upon the House."

"Arinbiorn," said Thiodolf, "where didst thou hear tell of me that I had made myself the thrall of the Gods?  The oath that I sware was sworn when mine heart was not whole towards our people; and now will I break it that I may keep what of good intent there was in it, and cast away the rest. Long is the story; but if we journey together to-night I will tell it thee.  Likewise I will tell it to the Gods if they look sourly upon me when I see them, and all shall be well."

He smiled as he spoke, and Arinbiorn smiled on him in turn and went his ways to array the host.  But when he was gone Thiodolf was alone in that place with the Hall-Sun, and he turned to her, and kissed her, and caressed her fondly, and spake and said:

   "So fare we, O my daughter, to the sundering of the ways;
    Short is my journey henceforth to the door that ends my days,
    And long the road that lieth as yet before thy feet.
    How fain were I that thy journey from day to day were sweet
    With peace to thee and pleasure; that a noble warrior's hand
    In its early days might lead thee adown the flowery land,
    And thy children in its noon-tide cling round about thy gown,
    And the wise that thy womb has carried when the sun is going down,
    Be thy happy fellow-farers to tell the tale of Earth,
    But I wot that for no such sweetness did we bring thee unto birth,
    But to be the soul of the Wolfings till the other days should come,
    And the fruit of the kindreds' harvest with thee is garnered home.
    Yet if for no blithe faring thy life-day is ordained,
    Yet peace that long endureth maybe thy soul hath gained;
    And thy sorrow of this even thy latest grief shall be,
    The grief wherewith thou singest the death-song over me."

She looked up at him and smiled, though the tears were on her face; then she said:

   "Though to-day the grief beginneth yet the bitterness is done.
    Though my body wendeth barren 'neath the beams of the quickening sun,
    Yet remembrance still abideth, and long after the days of my life
    Shall I live in the tale of the morning, when they tell of the ending of strife;
    And the deeds of this little hand, and the thought conceived in my heart,
    And never again henceforward from the folk shall I fare apart.
    And if of the Earth, my father, thou hast tidings in thy place
    Thou shalt hear how they call me the Ransom and the Mother of happy days."

Then she wept outright for a brief space, and thereafter she said:

   "Keep this in thine heart, O father, that I shall remember all
    Since thou liftedst the she-wolf's nursling in the oak-tree's leafy hall.
    Yea, every time I remember when hand in hand we went
    Amidst the shafts of the beech-trees, and down to the youngling bent
    The Folk-wolf in his glory when the eve of fight drew nigh;
    And every time I remember when we wandered joyfully
    Adown the sunny meadow and lived a while of life
    'Midst the herbs and the beasts and the waters so free from fear and strife,
    That thy years and thy might and thy wisdom, I had no part therein;
    But thou wert as the twin-born brother of the maiden slim and thin,
    The maiden shy in the feast-hall and blithe in wood and field.
    Thus have we fared, my father; and e'en now when thou bearest shield,
    On the last of thy days of mid-earth, twixt us 'tis even so
    That the heart of my like-aged brother is the heart of thee that I know."

Then the bitterness of tears stayed her speech, and he spake no word more, but took her in his arms a while and soothed her and fondled her, and then they parted, and he went with great strides towards the outgoing of the Thing-stead.

There he found the warriors of his House and of the Bearings and the lesser Houses of Mid-mark, all duly ordered for wending through the wood. The dawn was coming on apace, but the wood was yet dark.  But whereas the Wolfings led, and each man of them knew the wood like his own hand, there was no straying or disarray, and in less than a half-hour's space Thiodolf and the first battle were come to the wood behind the hazel-trees at the back of the hall, and before them was the dawning round about the Roof of the Kindred; the eastern heavens were brightening, and they could see all things clear without the wood.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f28]

CHAPTER XXVIII--OF THE STORM OF DAWNING

Then Thiodolf bade Fox and two others steal forward, and see what of foemen was before them; so they fell to creeping on towards the open: but scarcely had they started, before all men could hear the tramp of men drawing nigh; then Thiodolf himself took with him a score of his House and went quietly toward the wood-edge till they were barely within the shadow of the beech-wood; and he looked forth and saw men coming straight towards their lurking-place.  And those he saw were a good many, and they were mostly of the dastards of the Goths; but with them was a Captain of an Hundred of the Romans, and some others of his kindred; and Thiodolf deemed that the Goths had been bidden to gather up some of the night-watchers and enter the wood and fall on the stay-at-homes.  So he bade his men get them aback, and he himself abode still at the very wood's edge listening intently with his sword bare in his hand.  And he noted that those men of the foe stayed in the daylight outside the wood, but a few yards from it, and, by command as it seemed, fell silent and spake no word; and the morn was very still, and when the sound of their tramp over the grass had ceased, Thiodolf could hear the tramp of more men behind them.  And then he had another thought, to wit that the Romans had sent scouts to see if the Goths yet abided on the vantage-ground by the ford, and that when they had found them gone, they were minded to fall on them unawares in the refuge of the Thing-stead and were about to do so by the counsel and leading of the dastard Goths; and that this was one body of the host led by those dastards, who knew somewhat of the woods.  So he drew aback speedily, and catching hold of Fox by the shoulder (for he had taken him alone with him) he bade him creep along through the wood toward the Thing-stead, and bring back speedy word whether there were any more foemen near the wood thereaway; and he himself came to his men, and ordered them for onset, drawing them up in a shallow half moon, with the bowmen at the horns thereof, with the word to loose at the Romans as soon as they heard the war-horn blow: and all this was done speedily and with little noise, for they were well nigh so arrayed already.

Thus then they waited, and there was more than a glimmer of light even under the beechen leaves, and the eastern sky was yellowing to sunrise. The other warriors were like hounds in the leash eager to be slipped; but Thiodolf stood calm and high-hearted turning over the memory of past days, and the time he thought of seemed long to him, but happy.

Scarce had a score of minutes passed, and the Romans before them, who were now gathered thick behind those dastards of the Goths, had not moved, when back comes Fox and tells how he has come upon a great company of the Romans led by their thralls of the Goths who were just entering the wood, away there towards the Thing-stead.

"But, War-duke," says he, "I came also across our own folk of the second battle duly ordered in the wood ready to meet them; and they shall be well dealt with, and the sun shall rise for us and not for them."

Then turns Thiodolf round to those nighest to him and says, but still softly:

   "Hear ye a word, O people, of the wisdom of the foe!
    Before us thick they gather, and unto the death they go.
    They fare as lads with their cur-dogs who have stopped a fox's earth,
    And standing round the spinny, now chuckle in their mirth,
    Till one puts by the leafage and trembling stands astare
    At the sight of the Wood wolf's father arising in his lair--
    They have come for our wives and our children, and our sword-edge shall they meet;
    And which of them is happy save he of the swiftest feet?"

Speedily then went that word along the ranks of the Kindred, and men were merry with the restless joy of battle: but scarce had two minutes passed ere suddenly the stillness of the dawn was broken by clamour and uproar; by shouts and shrieks, and the clashing of weapons from the wood on their left hand; and over all arose the roar of the Markmen's horn, for the battle was joined with the second company of the Kindreds.  But a rumour and murmur went from the foemen before Thiodolf's men; and then sprang forth the loud sharp word of the captains commanding and rebuking, as if the men were doubtful which way they should take.

Amidst all which Thiodolf brandished his sword, and cried out in a great voice:

   "Now, now, ye War-sons!
    Now the Wolf waketh!
    Lo how the Wood-beast
    Wendeth in onset.
    E'en as his feet fare
    Fall on and follow!"

And he led forth joyously, and terrible rang the long refrained gathered shout of his battle as his folk rushed on together devouring the little space between their ambush and the hazel-beset greensward.

In the twinkling of an eye the half-moon had lapped around the Roman-Goths and those that were with them; and the dastards made no stand but turned about at once, crying out that the Gods of the Kindreds were come to aid and none could withstand them.  But these fleers thrust against the band of Romans who were next to them, and bore them aback, and great was the turmoil; and when Thiodolf's storm fell full upon them, as it failed not to do, so close were they driven together that scarce could any man raise his hand for a stroke.  For behind them stood a great company of those valiant spearmen of the Romans, who would not give way if anywise they might hold it out: and their ranks were closely serried, shield nigh touching shield, and their faces turned toward the foe; and so arrayed, though they might die, they scarce knew how to flee.  As they might these thrust and hewed at the fleers, and gave fierce words but few to the Roman-Goths, driving them back against their foemen: but the fleers had lost the cunning of their right hands, and they had cast away their shields and could not defend their very bodies against the wrath of the kindreds; and when they strove to flee to the right hand or to the left, they were met by the horns of the half-moon, and the arrows began to rain in upon them, and from so close were they shot at that no shaft failed to smite home.

There then were the dastards slain; and their bodies served for a rampart against the onrush of the Markmen to those Romans who had stood fast.  To them were gathering more and more every minute, and they faced the Goths steadily with their hard brown visages and gleaming eyes above their iron- plated shields; not casting their spears, but standing closely together, silent, but fierce.  The light was spread now over all the earth; the eastern heavens were grown golden-red, flecked here and there with little crimson clouds: this battle was fallen near silent, but to the North was great uproar of shouts and cries, and the roaring of the war-horns, and the shrill blasts of the brazen trumpets.

Now Thiodolf, as his wont was when he saw that all was going well, had refrained himself of hand-strokes, but was here and there and everywhere giving heart to his folk, and keeping them in due order, and close array, lest the Romans should yet come among them.  But he watched the ranks of the foe, and saw how presently they began to spread out beyond his, and might, if it were not looked to, take them in flank; and he was about to order his men anew to meet them, when he looked on his left hand and saw how Roman men were pouring thick from the wood out of all array, followed by a close throng of the kindreds: for on this side the Romans were outnumbered and had stumbled unawares into the ambush of the Markmen, who had fallen on them straightway and disarrayed them from the first.  This flight of their folk the Romans saw also, and held their men together, refraining from the onset, as men who deem that they will have enough to do to stand fast.

But the second battle of the Markmen, (who were of the Nether-mark, mingled with the Mid-mark) fought wisely, for they swept those fleers from before them, slaying many and driving the rest scattering, yet held the chase for no long way, but wheeling about came sidelong on toward the battle of the Romans and Thiodolf.  And when Thiodolf saw that, he set up the whoop of victory, he and his, and fell fiercely on the Romans, casting everything that would fly, as they rushed on to the handplay; so that there was many a Roman slain with the Roman spears that those who had fallen had left among their foemen.

Now the Roman captains perceived that it availed not to tarry till the men of the Mid and Nether-marks fell upon their flank; so they gave command, and their ranks gave back little by little, facing their foes, and striving to draw themselves within the dike and garth, which, after their custom, they had already cast up about the Wolfing Roof, their stronghold.

Now as fierce as was the onset of the Markmen, the main body of the Romans could not be hindered from doing this much before the men of the second battle were upon them; but Thiodolf and Arinbiorn with some of the mightiest brake their array in two places and entered in amongst them. And wrath so seized upon the soul of Arinbiorn for the slaying of Otter, and his own fault towards him, that he cast away his shield, and heeding no strokes, first brake his sword in the press, and then, getting hold of a great axe, smote at all before him as though none smote at him in turn; yea, as though he were smiting down tree-boles for a match against some other mighty man; and all the while amidst the hurry, strokes of swords and spears rained on him, some falling flatwise and some glancing sideways, but some true and square, so that his helm was smitten off and his hauberk rent adown, and point and edge reached his living flesh; and he had thrust himself so far amidst the foe that none could follow to shield him, so that at last he fell shattered and rent at the foot of the new clayey wall cast up by the Romans, even as Thiodolf and a band with him came cleaving the press, and the Romans closed the barriers against friend and foe, and cast great beams adown, and masses of iron and lead and copper taken from the smithying-booths of the Wolfings, to stay them if it were but a little.

Then Thiodolf bestrode the fallen warrior, and men of his House were close behind him, for wisely had he fought, cleaving the press like a wedge, helping his friends that they might help him, so that they all went forward together.  But when he saw Arinbiorn fall he cried out:

"Woe's me, Arinbiorn! that thou wouldest not wait for me; for the day is young yet, and over-young!"

There then they cleared the space outside the gate, and lifted up the Bearing Warrior, and bare him back from the rampart.  For so fierce had been the fight and so eager the storm of those that had followed after him that they must needs order their battle afresh, since Thiodolf's wedge which he had driven into the Roman host was but of a few and the foe had been many and the rampart and the shot-weapons were close anigh. Wise therefore it seemed to abide them of the second battle and join with them to swarm over the new-built slippery wall in the teeth of the Roman shot.

In this, the first onset of the Morning Battle, some of the Markmen had fallen, but not many, since but a few had entered outright into the Roman ranks; and when they first rushed on from the wood but three of them were slain, and the slaughter was all of the dastards and the Romans; and afterwards not a few of the Romans were slain, what by Arinbiorn, what by the others; for they were fighting fleeing, and before their eyes was the image of the garth-gate which was behind them; and they stumbled against each other as they were driven sideways against the onrush of the Goths, nor were they now standing fair and square to them, and they were hurried and confused with the dread of the onset of them of the two Marks.

As yet Thiodolf had gotten no great hurt, so that when he heard that Arinbiorn's soul had passed away he smiled and said:

"Yea, yea, Arinbiorn might have abided the end, for ere then shall the battle be hard."

So now the Wolfings and the Bearings met joyously the kindreds of the Nether Mark and the others of the second battle, and they sang the song of victory arrayed in good order hard by the Roman rampart, while bowstrings twanged and arrows whistled, and sling-stones hummed from this side and from that.

And of their song of victory thus much the tale telleth:

      "Now hearken and hear
       Of the day-dawn of fear,
       And how up rose the sun
       On the battle begun.
       All night lay a-hiding,
       Our anger abiding,
       Dark down in the wood
       The sharp seekers of blood;
    But ere red grew the heaven we bore them all bare,
    For against us undriven the foemen must fare;
    They sought and they found us, and sorrowed to find,
    For the tree-boles around us the story shall mind,
    How fast from the glooming they fled to the light,
    Yeasaying the dooming of Tyr of the fight.

      "Hearken yet and again
       How the night gan to wane,
       And the twilight stole on
       Till the world was well won!
       E'en in such wise was wending
       A great host for our ending;
       On our life-days e'en so
       Stole the host of the foe;
    Till the heavens grew lighter, and light grew the world,
    And the storm of the fighter upon them was hurled,
    Then some fled the stroke, and some died and some stood,
    Till the worst of the storm broke right out from the wood,
    And the war-shafts were singing the carol of fear,
    The tale of the bringing the sharp swords anear.

      "Come gather we now,
       For the day doth grow.
       Come, gather, ye bold,
       Lest the day wax old;
       Lest not till to-morrow
       We slake our sorrow,
       And heap the ground
       With many a mound.
    Come, war-children, gather, and clear we the land!
    In the tide of War-father the deed is to hand.
    Clad in gear that we gilded they shrink from our sword;
    In the House that we builded they sit at the board;
    Come, war-children, gather, come swarm o'er the wall
    For the feast of War-father to sweep out the Hall!"

Now amidst of their singing the sun rose upon the earth, and gleamed in the arms of men, and lit the faces of the singing warriors as they stood turned toward the east.

In this first onset of battle but twenty and three Markmen were slain in all, besides Arinbiorn; for, as aforesaid, they had the foe at a disadvantage.  And this onset is called in the tale the Storm of Dawning.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f29]

CHAPTER XXI--OF THIODOLF'S STORM

The Goths tarried not over their victory; they shot with all the bowmen that they had against the Romans on the wall, and therewith arrayed themselves to fall on once more.  And Thiodolf, now that the foe were covered by a wall, though it was but a little one, sent a message to the men of the third battle, them of Up-mark to wit, to come forward in good array and help to make a ring around the Wolfing Stead, wherein they should now take the Romans as a beast is taken in a trap.  Meanwhile, until they came, he sent other men to the wood to bring tree-boles to batter the gate, and to make bridges whereby to swarm over the wall, which was but breast-high on the Roman side, though they had worked at it ceaselessly since yesterday morning.

In a long half-hour, therefore, the horns of the men of Up-mark sounded, and they came forth from the wood a very great company, for with them also were the men of the stay-at-homes and the homeless, such of them as were fit to bear arms.  Amongst these went the Hall-Sun surrounded by a band of the warriors of Up-mark; and before her was borne her namesake the Lamp as a sign of assured victory.  But these stay-at-homes with the Hall-Sun were stayed by the command of Thiodolf on the crown of the slope above the dwellings, and stood round about the Speech-Hill, on the topmost of which stood the Hall-Sun, and the wondrous Lamp, and the men who warded her and it.

When the Romans saw the new host come forth from the wood, they might well think that they would have work enough to do that day; but when they saw the Hall-Sun take her stand on the Speech-Hill with the men-at-arms about her, and the Lamp before her, then dread of the Gods fell upon them, and they knew that the doom had gone forth against them. Nevertheless they were not men to faint and die because the Gods were become their foes, but they were resolved rather to fight it out to the end against whatsoever might come against them, as was well seen afterwards.

Now they had made four gates to their garth according to their custom, and at each gate within was there a company of their mightiest men, and each was beset by the best of the Markmen.  Thiodolf and his men beset the western gate where they had made that fierce onset.  And the northern gate was beset by the Elkings and some of the kindreds of the Nether-mark; and the eastern gate by the rest of the men of Nether-mark; and the southern gate by the kindreds of Up-mark.

All this the Romans noted, and they saw how that the Markmen were now very many, and they knew that they were men no less valiant than themselves, and they perceived that Thiodolf was a wise Captain; and in less than two hours' space from the Storm of Dawning they saw those men coming from the wood with plenteous store of tree-trunks to bridge their ditch and rampart; and they considered how the day was yet very young, so that they might look for no shelter from the night-tide; and as for any aid from their own folk at the war-garth aforesaid, they hoped not for it, nor had they sent any messenger to the Captain of the garth; nor did they know as yet of his overthrow on the Ridge.

Now therefore there seemed to be but two choices before them; either to abide within the rampart they had cast up, or to break out like valiant men, and either die in the storm, or cleave a way through, whereby they might come to their kindred and their stronghold south-east of the Mark.

This last way then they chose; or, to say the truth, it was their chief captain who chose it for them, though they were nothing loth thereto: for this man was a mocker, yet hot-headed, unstable, and nought wise in war, and heretofore had his greed minished his courage; yet now, being driven into a corner, he had courage enough and to spare, but utterly lacked patience; for it had been better for the Romans to have abided one or two onsets from the Goths, whereby they who should make the onslaught would at the least have lost more men than they on whom they should fall, before they within stormed forth on them; but their pride took away from the Romans their last chance.  But their captain, now that he perceived, as he thought, that the game was lost and his life come to its last hour wherein he would have to leave his treasure and pleasure behind him, grew desperate and therewith most fierce and cruel.  So all the captives whom they had taken (they were but two score and two, for the wounded men they had slain) he caused to be bound on the chairs of the high-seat clad in their war-gear with their swords or spears made fast to their right hands, and their shields to their left hands; and he said that the Goths should now hold a Thing wherein they should at last take counsel wisely, and abstain from folly.  For he caused store of faggots and small wood smeared with grease and oil to be cast into the hall that it might be fired, so that it and the captives should burn up altogether; "So," said he, "shall we have a fair torch for our funeral fire;" for it was the custom of the Romans to burn their dead.

Thus, then, he did; and then he caused men to do away the barriers and open all the four gates of the new-made garth, after he had manned the wall with the slingers and bowmen, and slain the horses, so that the woodland folk should have no gain of them.  Then he arrayed his men at the gates and about them duly and wisely, and bade those valiant footmen fall on the Goths who were getting ready to fall on them, and to do their best.  But he himself armed at all points took his stand at the Man's- door of the Hall, and swore by all the Gods of his kindred that he would not move a foot's length from thence either for fire or for steel.

So fiercely on that fair morning burned the hatred of men about the dwellings of the children of the Wolf of the Goths, wherein the children of the Wolf of Rome were shut up as in a penfold of slaughter.

Meanwhile the Hall-Sun standing on the Hill of Speech beheld it all, looking down into the garth of war; for the new wall was no hindrance to her sight, because the Speech-Hill was high and but a little way from the Great Roof; and indeed she was within shot of the Roman bowmen, though they were not very deft in shooting.

So now she lifted up her voice and sang so that many heard her; for at this moment of time there was a lull in the clamour of battle both within the garth and without; even as it happens when the thunder-storm is just about to break on the world, that the wind drops dead, and the voice of the leaves is hushed before the first great and near flash of lightening glares over the fields.

So she sang:

   "Now the latest hour cometh and the ending of the strife;
    And to-morrow and to-morrow shall we take the hand of life,
    And wend adown the meadows, and skirt the darkling wood,
    And reap the waving acres, and gather in the good.
    I see a wall before me built up of steel and fire,
    And hurts and heart-sick striving, and the war-wright's fierce desire;
    But there-amidst a door is, and windows are therein;
    And the fair sun-litten meadows and the Houses of the kin
    Smile on me through the terror my trembling life to stay,
    That at my mouth now flutters, as fain to flee away.
    Lo e'en as the little hammer and the blow-pipe of the wright
    About the flickering fire deals with the silver white,
    And the cup and its beauty groweth that shall be for the people's feast,
    And all men are glad to see it from the greatest to the least;
    E'en so is the tale now fashioned, that many a time and oft
    Shall be told on the acre's edges, when the summer eve is soft;
    Shall be hearkened round the hall-blaze when the mid-winter night
    The kindreds' mirth besetteth, and quickeneth man's delight,
    And we that have lived in the story shall be born again and again
    As men feast on the bread of our earning, and praise the grief-born grain."

As she made an end of singing, those about her understood her words, that she was foretelling victory, and the peace of the Mark, and for joy they raised a shrill cry; and the warriors who were nighest to her took it up, and it spread through the whole host round about the garth, and went up into the breath of the summer morning and went down the wind along the meadow of the Wolfings, so that they of the wain-burg, who were now drawing somewhat near to Wolf-stead heard it and were glad.

But the Romans when they heard it knew that the heart of the battle was reached, and they cast back that shout wrathfully and fiercely, and made toward the foe.

Therewithal those mighty men fell on each other in the narrow passes of the garth; for fear was dead and buried in that Battle of the Morning.

On the North gate Hiarandi of the Elkings was the point of the Markmen's wedge, and first clave the Roman press.  In the Eastern gate it was Valtyr, Otter's brother's son, a young man and most mighty.  In the South gate it was Geirbald of the Shieldings, the Messenger.

In the west gate Thiodolf the War-duke gave one mighty cry like the roar of an angry lion, and cleared a space before him for the wielding of Ivar's blade; for at that moment he had looked up to the Roof of the Kindred and had beheld a little stream of smoke curling blue out of a window thereof, and he knew what had betided, and how short was the time before them.  But his wrathful cry was taken up by some who had beheld that same sight, and by others who saw nought but the Roman press, and terribly it rang over the swaying struggling crowd.

Then fell the first rank of the Romans before those stark men and mighty warriors; and they fell even where they stood, for on neither side could any give back but for a little space, so close the press was, and the men so eager to smite.  Neither did any crave peace if he were hurt or disarmed; for to the Goths it was but a little thing to fall in hot blood in that hour of love of the kindred, and longing for the days to be.  And for the Romans, they had had no mercy, and now looked for none: and they remembered their dealings with the Goths, and saw before them, as it were, once more, yea, as in a picture, their slayings and quellings, and lashings, and cold mockings which they had dealt out to the conquered foemen without mercy, and now they longed sore for the quiet of the dark, when their hard lives should be over, and all these deeds forgotten, and they and their bitter foes should be at rest for ever.

Most valiantly they fought; but the fury of their despair could not deal with the fearless hope of the Goths, and as rank after rank of them took the place of those who were hewn down by Thiodolf and the Kindred, they fell in their turn, and slowly the Goths cleared a space within the gates, and then began to spread along the wall within, and grew thicker and thicker.  Nor did they fight only at the gates; but made them bridges of those tree-trunks, and fell to swarming over the rampart, till they had cleared it of the bowmen and slingers, and then they leaped down and fell upon the flanks of the Romans; and the host of the dead grew, and the host of the living lessened.

Moreover the stay-at-homes round about the Speech-Hill, and that band of the warriors of Up-mark who were with them, beheld the Great Roof and saw the smoke come gushing out of the windows, and at last saw the red flames creep out amidst it and waver round the window jambs like little banners of scarlet cloth.  Then they could no longer refrain themselves, but ran down from the Speech-Hill and the slope about it with great and fierce cries, and clomb the wall where it was unmanned, helping each other with hand and back, both stark warriors, and old men and lads and women: and thus they gat them into the garth and fell upon the lessening band of the Romans, who now began to give way hither and thither about the garth, as they best might.

Thus it befell at the West-gate, but at the other gates it was no worser, for there was no diversity of valour between the Houses; nay, whereas the more part and the best part of the Romans faced the onset of Thiodolf, which seemed to them the main onset, they were somewhat easier to deal with elsewhere than at the West gate; and at the East gate was the place first won, so that Valtyr and his folk were the first to clear a space within the gate, and to tell the tale shortly (for can this that and the other sword-stroke be told of in such a medley?) they drew the death-ring around the Romans that were before them, and slew them all to the last man, and then fell fiercely on the rearward of them of the North gate, who still stood before Hiarandi's onset.  There again was no long tale to tell of, for Hiarandi was just winning the gate, and the wall was cleared of the Roman shot-fighters, and the Markmen were standing on the top thereof, and casting down on the Romans spears and baulks of wood and whatsoever would fly.  There again were the Romans all slain or put out of the fight, and the two bands of the kindred joined together, and with what voices the battle-rage had left them cried out for joy and fared on together to help to bind the sheaves of war which Thiodolf's sickle had reaped.  And now it was mere slaying, and the Romans, though they still fought in knots of less than a score, yet fought on and hewed and thrust without more thought or will than the stone has when it leaps adown the hill-side after it has first been set agoing.

But now the garth was fairly won and Thiodolf saw that there was no hope for the Romans drawing together again; so while the kindreds were busied in hewing down those knots of desperate men, he gathered to him some of the wisest of his warriors, amongst whom were Steinulf and Grani the Grey, the deft wood-wrights (but Athalulf had been grievously hurt by a spear and was out of the battle), and drave a way through the confused turmoil which still boiled in the garth there, and made straight for the Man's-door of the Hall.  Soon he was close thereto, having hewn away all fleers that hindered him, and the doorway was before him.  But on the threshold, the fire and flames of the kindled hall behind him, stood the Roman Captain clad in gold-adorned armour and surcoat of sea-born purple; the man was cool and calm and proud, and a mocking smile was on his face: and he bore his bright blade unbloodied in his hand.

Thiodolf stayed a moment of time, and their eyes met; it had gone hard with the War-duke, and those eyes glittered in his pale face, and his teeth were close set together; though he had fought wisely, and for life, as he who is most valiant ever will do, till he is driven to bay like the lone wood-wolf by the hounds, yet had he been sore mishandled.  His helm and shield were gone, his hauberk rent; for it was no dwarf-wrought coat, but the work of Ivar's hand: the blood was running down from his left arm, and he was hurt in many places: he had broken Ivar's sword in the medley, and now bore in his hand a strong Roman short-sword, and his feet stood bloody on the worn earth anigh the Man's-door.

He looked into the scornful eyes of the Roman lord for a little minute and then laughed aloud, and therewithal, leaping on him with one spring, turned sideways, and dealt him a great buffet on his ear with his unarmed left hand, just as the Roman thrust at him with his sword, so that the Captain staggered forward on to the next man following, which was Wolfkettle the eager warrior, who thrust him through with his sword and shoved him aside as they all strode into the hall together.  Howbeit no sword fell from the Roman Captain as he fell, for Thiodolf's side bore it into the Hall of the Wolfings.

Most wrathful were those men, and went hastily, for their Roof was full of smoke, and the flames flickered about the pillars and the wall here and there, and crept up to the windows aloft; yet was it not wholly or fiercely burning; for the Roman fire-raisers had been hurried and hasty in their work.  Straightway then Steinulf and Grani led the others off at a run towards the loft and the water; but Thiodolf, who went slowly and painfully, looked and beheld on the dais those men bound for the burning, and he went quietly, and as a man who has been sick, and is weak, up on to the dais, and said:

"Be of good cheer, O brothers, for the kindreds have vanquished the foemen, and the end of strife is come."

His voice sounded strange and sweet to them amidst the turmoil of the fight without; he laid down his sword on the table, and drew a little sharp knife from his girdle and cut their bonds one by one and loosed them with his blood-stained hands; and each one as he loosed him he kissed and said to him, "Brother, go help those who are quenching the fire; this is the bidding of the War-duke."

But as he loosed one after other he was longer and longer about it, and his words were slower.  At last he came to the man who was bound in his own high-seat close under the place of the wondrous Lamp, the Hall-Sun, and he was the only one left bound; that man was of the Wormings and was named Elfric; he loosed him and was long about it; and when he was done he smiled on him and kissed him, and said to him:

"Arise, brother! go help the quenchers of the fire, and leave to me this my chair, for I am weary: and if thou wilt, thou mayst bring me of that water to drink, for this morning men have forgotten the mead of the reapers!"

Then Elfric arose, and Thiodolf sat in his chair, and leaned back his head; but Elfric looked at him for a moment as one scared, and then ran his ways down the hall, which now was growing noisy with the hurry and bustle of the quenchers of the fire, to whom had divers others joined themselves.

There then from a bucket which was still for a moment he filled a wooden bowl, which he caught up from the base of one of the hall-pillars, and hastened up the Hall again; and there was no man nigh the dais, and Thiodolf yet sat in his chair, and the hall was dim with the rolling smoke, and Elfric saw not well what the War-duke was doing.  So he hastened on, and when he was close to Thiodolf he trod in something wet, and his heart sank for he knew that it was blood; his foot slipped therewith and as he put out his hand to save himself the more part of the water was spilled, and mingled with the blood.  But he went up to Thiodolf and said to him, "Drink, War-duke! here hath come a mouthful of water."

But Thiodolf moved not for his word, and Elfric touched him, and he moved none the more.

Then Elfric's heart failed him and he laid his hand on the War-duke's hand, and looked closely into his face; and the hand was cold and the face ashen-pale; and Elfric laid his hand on his side, and he felt the short-sword of the Roman leader thrust deep therein, besides his many other hurts.

So Elfric knew that he was dead, and he cast the bowl to the earth, and lifted up his hands and wailed out aloud, like a woman who hath come suddenly on her dead child, and cried out in a great voice:

"Hither, hither, O men in this hall, for the War-duke of the Markmen is dead!  O ye people, Hearken!  Thiodolf the Mighty, the Wolfing is dead!"

And he was a young man, and weak with the binding and the waiting for death, and he bowed himself adown and crouched on the ground and wept aloud.

But even as he cried that cry, the sunlight outside the Man's-door was darkened, and the Hall-Sun came over the threshold in her ancient gold- embroidered raiment, holding in her hand her namesake the wondrous Lamp; and the spears and the war-gear of warriors gleamed behind her; but the men tarried on the threshold till she turned about and beckoned to them, and then they poured in through the Man's-door, their war-gear rent and they all befouled and disarrayed with the battle, but with proud and happy faces: as they entered she waved her hand to them to bid them go join the quenchers of the fire; so they went their ways.

But she went with unfaltering steps up to the dais, and the place where the chain of the Lamp hung down from amidst the smoke-cloud wavering a little in the gusts of the hall.  Straightway she made the Lamp fast to its chain, and dealt with its pulleys with a deft hand often practised therein, and then let it run up toward the smoke-hidden Roof till it gleamed in its due place once more, a token of the salvation of the Wolfings and the welfare of all the kindreds.

Then she turned toward Thiodolf with a calm and solemn face, though it was very pale and looked as if she would not smile again.  Elfric had risen up and was standing by the board speechless and the passion of sobs still struggling in his bosom.  She put him aside gently, and went up to Thiodolf and stood above him, and looked down on his face a while: then she put forth her hand and closed his eyes, and stooped down and kissed his face.  Then she stood up again and faced the Hall and looked and saw that many were streaming in, and that though the smoke was still eddying overhead, the fire was well nigh quenched within; and without the sound of battle had sunk and died away.  For indeed the Markmen had ended their day's work before noon-tide that day, and the more part of the Romans were slain, and to the rest they had given peace till the Folk-mote should give Doom concerning them; for pity of these valiant men was growing in the hearts of the valiant men who had vanquished them, now that they feared them no more.

And this second part of the Morning Battle is called Thiodolf's Storm.

So now when the Hall-Sun looked and beheld that the battle was done and the fire quenched, and when she saw how every man that came into the Hall looked up and beheld the wondrous Lamp and his face quickened into joy at the sight of it; and how most looked up at the high-seat and Thiodolf lying leaned back therein, her heart nigh broke between the thought of her grief and of the grief of the Folk that their mighty friend was dead, and the thought of the joy of the days to be and all the glory that his latter days had won.  But she gathered heart, and casting back the dark tresses of her hair, she lifted up her voice and cried out till its clear shrillness sounded throughout all the Roof:

"O men in this Hall the War-duke is dead!  O people hearken! for Thiodolf the Mighty hath changed his life: Come hither, O men, Come hither, for this is true, that Thiodolf is dead!"

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f30]

CHAPTER XXX--THIODOLF IS BORNE OUT OF THE HALL AND OTTER IS LAID BESIDE HIM

So when they heard her voice they came thither flockmeal, and a great throng mingled of many kindreds was in the Hall, but with one consent they made way for the Children of the Wolf to stand nearest to the dais. So there they stood, the warriors mingled with the women, the swains with the old men, the freemen with the thralls: for now the stay-at-homes of the House were all gotten into the garth, and the more part of them had flowed into the feast-hall when they knew that the fire was slackening.

All these now had heard the clear voice of the Hall-Sun, or others had told them what had befallen; and the wave of grief had swept coldly over them amidst their joy of the recoverance of their dwelling-place; yet they would not wail nor cry aloud, even to ease their sorrow, till they had heard the words of the Hall-Sun, as she stood facing them beside their dead War-duke.

Then she spake: "O Sorli the Old, come up hither! thou hast been my fellow in arms this long while."

So the old man came forth, and went slowly in his clashing war-gear up on to the dais.  But his attire gleamed and glittered, since over-old was he to thrust deep into the press that day, howbeit he was wise in war.  So he stood beside her on the dais holding his head high, and proud he looked, for all his thin white locks and sunken eyes.

But again said the Hall-Sun: "Canst thou hear me, Wolfkettle, when I bid thee stand beside me, or art thou, too, gone on the road to Valhall?"

Forth then strode that mighty warrior and went toward the dais: nought fair was his array to look on; for point and edge had rent it and stained it red, and the flaring of the hall-flames had blackened it; his face was streaked with black withal, and his hands were as the hands of a smith among the thralls who hath wrought unwashen in the haste and hurry when men look to see the war-arrow abroad.  But he went up on to the dais and held up his head proudly, and looked forth on to the hall-crowd with eyes that gleamed fiercely from his stained and blackened face.

Again the Hall-Sun said: "Art thou also alive, O Egil the messenger? Swift are thy feet, but not to flee from the foe: Come up and stand with us!"

Therewith Egil clave the throng; he was not so roughly dealt with as was Wolfkettle, for he was a bowman, and had this while past shot down on the Romans from aloof; and he yet held his bended bow in his hand.  He also came up on to the dais and stood beside Wolfkettle glancing down on the hall-crowd, looking eagerly from side to side.

Yet again the Hall-Sun spake: "No aliens now are dwelling in the Mark; come hither, ye men of the kindreds!  Come thou, our brother Hiarandi of the Elkings, for thy sisters, our wives, are fain of thee.  Come thou, Valtyr of the Laxings, brother's son of Otter; do thou for the War-duke what thy father's brother had done, had he not been faring afar.  Come thou, Geirbald of the Shieldings the messenger!  Now know we the deeds of others and thy deeds.  Come, stand beside us for a little!"

Forth then they came in their rent and battered war-gear: and the tall Hiarandi bore but the broken truncheon of his sword; and Valtyr a woodman's axe notched and dull with work; and Geirbald a Roman cast-spear, for his own weapons had been broken in the medley; and he came the last of the three, going as a belated reaper from the acres. There they stood by the others and gazed adown the hall-throng.

But the Hall-Sun spake again: "Agni of the Daylings, I see thee now.  How camest thou into the hard handplay, old man?  Come hither and stand with us, for we love thee.  Angantyr of the Bearings, fair was thy riding on the day of the Battle on the Ridge!  Come thou, be with us.  Shall the Beamings whose daughters we marry fail the House of the Wolf to-day? Geirodd, thou hast no longer a weapon, but the fight is over, and this hour thou needest it not.  Come to us, brother!  Gunbald of the Vallings, the Falcon on thy shield is dim with the dint of point and edge, but it hath done its work to ward thy valiant heart: Come hither, friend!  Come all ye and stand with us!"

As she named them so they came, and they went up on to the dais and stood altogether; and a terrible band of warriors they looked had the fight been to begin over again, and they to meet death once more.  And again spake the Hall-Sun:

"Steinulf and Grani, deft are your hands!  Take ye the stalks of the war blossoms, the spears of the kindreds, and knit them together to make a bier for our War-duke, for he is weary and may not go afoot.  Thou Ali, son of Grey; thou hast gone errands for me before; go forth now from the garth, and wend thy ways toward the water, and tell me when thou comest back what thou hast seen of the coming of the wain-burg.  For by this time it should be drawing anigh."

So Ali went forth, and there was silence of words for a while in the Hall; but there arose the sound of the wood-wrights busy with the wimble and the hammer about the bier.  No long space had gone by when Ali came back into the hall panting with his swift running; and he cried out:

"O Hall-Sun, they are coming; the last wain hath crossed the ford, and the first is hard at hand: bright are their banners in the sun."

Then said the Hall-Sun: "O warriors, it is fitting that we go to meet our banners returning from the field, and that we do the Gods to wit what deeds we have done; fitting is it also that Thiodolf our War-duke wend with us.  Now get ye into your ordered bands, and go we forth from the fire-scorched hall, and out into the sunlight, that the very earth and the heavens may look upon the face of our War-duke, and bear witness that he hath played his part as a man."

Then without more words the folk began to stream out of the Hall, and within the garth which the Romans had made they arrayed their companies. But when they were all gone from the Hall save they who were on the dais, the Hall-Sun took the waxen torch which she had litten and quenched at the departure of the host to battle, and now she once more kindled it at the flame of the wondrous Lamp, the Hall-Sun.  But the wood-wrights brought the bier which they had made of the spear-shafts of the kindred, and they laid thereon a purple cloak gold-embroidered of the treasure of the Wolfings, and thereon was Thiodolf laid.

Then those men took him up; to wit, Sorli the Old, and Wolfkettle and Egil, all these were of the Wolfing House; Hiarandi of the Elkings also, and Valtyr of the Laxings, Geirbald of the Shieldings, Agni of the Daylings, Angantyr of the Bearings, Geirodd of the Beamings, Gunbald of the Vallings: all these, with the two valiant wood-wrights, Steinulf and Grani, laid hand to the bier.

So they bore it down from the dais, and out at the Man's-door into the sunlight, and the Hall-Sun followed close after it, holding in her hand the Candle of Returning.  It was an hour after high-noon of a bright midsummer day when she came out into the garth; and the smoke from the fire-scorched hall yet hung about the trees of the wood-edge.  She looked neither down towards her feet nor on the right side or the left, but straight before her.  The ordered companies of the kindreds hid the sight of many fearful things from her eyes; though indeed the thralls and women had mostly gleaned the dead from the living both of friend and foe, and were tending the hurt of either host.  Through an opening in the ranks moreover could they by the bier behold the scanty band of Roman captives, some standing up, looking dully around them, some sitting or lying on the grass talking quietly together, and it seemed by their faces that for them the bitterness of death was passed.

Forth then fared the host by the West gate, where Thiodolf had done so valiantly that day, and out on to the green amidst the booths and lesser dwellings.  Sore then was the heart of the Hall-Sun, as she looked forth over dwelling, and acre, and meadow, and the blue line of the woods beyond the water, and bethought her of all the familiar things that were within the compass of her eyesight, and remembered the many days of her father's loving-kindness, and the fair words wherewith he had solaced her life-days.  But of the sorrow that wrung her heart nothing showed in her face, nor was she paler now than her wont was.  For high was her courage, and she would in no wise mar that fair day and victory of the kindreds with grief for what was gone, whereas so much of what once was, yet abided and should abide for ever.

Then fared they down through the acres, where what was yet left of the wheat was yellowing toward harvest, and the rye hung grey and heavy; for bright and hot had the weather been all through these tidings.  Howbeit much of the corn was spoiled by the trampling of the Roman bands.

So came they into the fair open meadow and saw before them the wains coming to meet them with their folk; to wit a throng of stout carles of the thrall-folk led by the war-wise and ripe men of the Steerings.  Bright was the gleaming of the banner-wains, though for the lack of wind the banners hung down about their staves; the sound of the lowing of the bulls and the oxen, the neighing of horses and bleating of the flocks came up to the ears of the host as they wended over the meadow.

They made stay at last on the rising ground, all trampled and in parts bloody, where yesterday Thiodolf had come on the fight between the remnant of Otter's men and the Romans: there they opened their ranks, and made a ring round about a space, amidmost of which was a little mound whereon was set the bier of Thiodolf.  The wains and their warders came up with them and drew a garth of the wains round about the ring of men with the banners of the kindreds in their due places.

There was the Wolf and the Elk, the Falcon, the Swan, the Boar, the Bear, and the Green-tree: the Willow-bush, the Gedd, the Water-bank and the Wood-Ousel, the Steer, the Mallard and the Roe-deer: all these were of the Mid-mark.  But of the Upper-mark were the Horse and the Spear, and the Shield, and the Daybreak, and the Dale, and the Mountain, and the Brook, and the Weasel, and the Cloud, and the Hart.

Of the Nether-mark were the Salmon, and the Lynx, and the Ling worm, the Seal, the Stone, and the Sea-mew; the Buck-goat, the Apple-tree, the Bull, the Adder, and the Crane.

There they stood in the hot sunshine three hours after noon; and a little wind came out of the west and raised the pictured cloths upon the banner- staves, so that the men could now see the images of the tokens of their Houses and the Fathers of old time.

Now was there silence in the ring of men; but it opened presently and through it came all-armed warriors bearing another bier, and lo, Otter upon it, dead in his war-gear with many a grievous wound upon his body. For men had found him in an ingle of the wall of the Great Roof, where he had been laid yesterday by the Romans when his company and the Bearings with the Wormings made their onset: for the Romans had noted his exceeding valour, and when they had driven off the Goths some of them brought him dead inside their garth, for they would know the name and dignity of so valorous a man.

So now they bore him to the mound where Thiodolf lay and set the bier down beside Thiodolf's, and the two War-dukes of the Markmen lay there together: and when the warriors beheld that sight, they could not forbear, but some groaned aloud, and some wept great tears, and they clashed their swords on their shields and the sound of their sorrow and their praise went up to the summer heavens.

Now the Hall-Sun holding aloft the waxen torch lifted up her voice and said:

   "O warriors of the Wolfings, by the token of the flame
    That here in my right hand flickers, ye are back at the House of the Name,
    And there yet burneth the Hall-Sun beneath the Wolfing Roof,
    And the flame that the foemen quickened hath died out far aloof.
    Ye gleanings of the battle, lift up your hearts on high,
    For the House of the War-wise Wolfings and the Folk undoomed to die.
    But ye kindreds of the Markmen, the Wolfing guests are ye,
    And to-night we hold the high-tide, and great shall the feasting be,
    For to-day by the road that we know not a many wend their ways
    To the Gods and the ancient Fathers, and the hope of the latter days.
    And how shall their feet be cumbered if we tangle them with woe,
    And the heavy rain of sorrow drift o'er the road they go?
    They have toiled, and their toil was troublous to make the days to come;
    Use ye their gifts in gladness, lest they grieve for the Ancient Home!
    Now are our maids arraying that fire-scorched Hall of ours
    With the treasure of the Wolfings and the wealth of summer flowers,
    And this eve the work before you will be the Hall to throng
    And purge its walls of sorrow and quench its scathe and wrong."

She looked on the dead Thiodolf a moment, and then glanced from him to Otter and spake again:

   "O kindreds, here before you two mighty bodies lie;
    Henceforth no man shall see them in house and field go by
    As we were used to behold them, familiar to us then
    As the wind beneath the heavens and the sun that shines on men;
    Now soon shall there be nothing of their dwelling-place to tell,
    Save the billow of the meadows, the flower-grown grassy swell!
    Now therefore, O ye kindreds, if amidst you there be one
    Who hath known the heart of the War-dukes, and the deeds their hands have done,
    Will not the word be with him, while yet your hearts are hot,
    Of our praise and long remembrance, and our love that dieth not?
    Then let him come up hither and speak the latest word
    O'er the limbs of the battle-weary and the hearts outworn with the sword."

She held her peace, and there was a stir in the ring of men: for they who were anigh the Dayling banner saw an old warrior sitting on a great black horse and fully armed.  He got slowly off his horse and walked toward the ring of warriors, which opened before him; for all knew him for Asmund the old, the war-wise warrior of the Daylings, even he who had lamented over the Hauberk of Thiodolf.  He had taken horse the day before, and had ridden toward the battle, but was belated, and had come up with them of the wain-burg just as they had crossed the water.

The House of the Wolfings, by William Morris, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f31]

CHAPTER XXXI--OLD ASMUND SPEAKETH OVER THE WAR-DUKES: THE DEAD ARE LAID IN MOUND

Now while all looked on, he went to the place where lay the bodies of the War-dukes, and looked down on the face of Otter and said:

   "O Otter, there thou liest! and thou that I knew of old,
    When my beard began to whiten, as the best of the keen and the bold,
    And thou wert as my youngest brother, and thou didst lead my sons
    When we fared forth over the mountains to meet the arrowy Huns,
    And I smiled to see thee teaching the lore that I learned thee erst.
    O Otter, dost thou remember how the Goth-folk came by the worst,
    And with thee in mine arms I waded the wide shaft-harrowed flood
    That lapped the feet of the mountains with its water blent with blood;
    And how in the hollow places of the mountains hidden away
    We abode the kindreds' coming as the wet night bideth day?
    Dost thou remember, Otter, how many a joy we had,
    How many a grief remembered has made our high-tide glad?
    O fellow of the hall-glee!  O fellow of the field!
    Why then hast thou departed and left me under shield?
    I the ancient, I the childless, while yet in the Laxing hall
    Are thy brother's sons abiding and their children on thee call.

   "O kindreds of the people! the soul that dwelt herein,
    This goodly way-worn body, was keen for you to win
    Good days and long endurance.  Who knoweth of his deed
    What things for you it hath fashioned from the flame of the fire of need?
    But of this at least well wot we, that forth from your hearts it came
    And back to your hearts returneth for the seed of thriving and fame.
    In the ground wherein ye lay it, the body of this man,
    No deed of his abideth, no glory that he wan,
    But evermore the Markmen shall bear his deeds o'er earth,
    With the joy of the deeds that are coming, the garland of his worth."

He was silent a little as he stood looking down on Otter's face with grievous sorrow, for all that his words were stout.  For indeed, as he had said, Otter had been his battle-fellow and his hall-fellow, though he was much younger than Asmund; and they had been standing foot to foot in that battle wherein old Asmund's sons were slain by his side.

After a while he turned slowly from looking at Otter to gaze upon Thiodolf, and his body trembled as he looked, and he opened his mouth to speak; but no word came from it; and he sat down upon the edge of the bier, and the tears began to gush out of his old eyes, and he wept aloud. Then they that saw him wondered; for all knew the stoutness of his heart, and how he had borne more burdens than that of eld, and had not cowered down under them.  But at last he arose again, and stood firmly on his feet, and faced the folk-mote, and in a voice more like the voice of a man in his prime than of an old man, he sang:

      "Wild the storm is abroad
       Of the edge of the sword!
       Far on runneth the path
       Of the war-stride of wrath!
       The Gods hearken and hear
       The long rumour of fear
       From the meadows beneath
       Running fierce o'er the heath,
    Till it beats round their dwelling-place builded aloof
    And at last all up-swelling breaks wild o'er their roof,
    And quencheth their laughter and crieth on all,
    As it rolleth round rafter and beam of the Hall,
    Like the speech of the thunder-cloud tangled on high,
    When the mountain-halls sunder as dread goeth by.

      "So they throw the door wide
       Of the Hall where they bide,
       And to murmuring song
       Turns that voice of the wrong,
       And the Gods wait a-gaze
       For that Wearer of Ways:
       For they know he hath gone
       A long journey alone.
    Now his feet are they hearkening, and now is he come,
    With his battle-wounds darkening the door of his home,
    Unbyrnied, unshielded, and lonely he stands,
    And the sword that he wielded is gone from his hands--
    Hands outstretched and bearing no spoil of the fight,
    As speechless, unfearing, he stands in their sight.

      "War-father gleams
       Where the white light streams
       Round kings of old
       All red with gold,
       And the Gods of the name
       With joy aflame.
       All the ancient of men
       Grown glorious again:
    Till the Slains-father crieth aloud at the last:
    'Here is one that belieth no hope of the past!
    No weapon, no treasure of earth doth he bear,
    No gift for the pleasure of Godhome to share;
    But life his hand bringeth, well cherished, most sweet;
    And hark! the Hall singeth the Folk-wolf to greet!'

      "As the rain of May
       On earth's happiest day,
       So the fair flowers fall
       On the sun-bright Hall
       As the Gods rise up
       With the greeting-cup,
       And the welcoming crowd
       Falls to murmur aloud.
    Then the God of Earth speaketh; sweet-worded he saith,
    'Lo, the Sun ever seeketh Life fashioned of death;
    And to-day as he turneth the wide world about
    On Wolf-stead he yearneth; for there without doubt
    Dwells the death-fashioned story, the flower of all fame.
    Come hither new Glory, come Crown of the Name!'"

All men's hearts rose high as he sang, and when he had ended arose the clang of sword and shield and went ringing down the meadow, and the mighty shout of the Markmen's joy rent the heavens: for in sooth at that moment they saw Thiodolf, their champion, sitting among the Gods on his golden chair, sweet savours around him, and sweet sound of singing, and he himself bright-faced and merry as no man on earth had seen him, for as joyous a man as he was.

But when the sound of their exultation sank down, the Hall-Sun spake again:

   "Now wendeth the sun westward, and weary grows the Earth
    Of all the long day's doings in sorrow and in mirth;
    And as the great sun waneth, so doth my candle wane,
    And its flickering flame desireth to rest and die again.
    Therefore across the meadows wend we aback once more
    To the holy Roof of the Wolfings, the shrine of peace and war.
    And these that once have loved us, these warriors images,
    Shall sit amidst our feasting, and see, as the Father sees
    The works that men-folk fashion and the rest of toiling hands,
    When his eyes look down from the mountains and the heavens above all lands,
    And up from the flowery meadows and the rolling deeps of the sea.
    There then at the feast with our champions familiar shall we be
    As oft we are with the Godfolk, when in story-rhymes and lays
    We laugh as we tell of their laughter, and their deeds of other days.

   "Come then, ye sons of the kindreds who hither bore these twain!
    Take up their beds of glory, and fare we home again,
    And feast as men delivered from toil unmeet to bear,
    Who through the night are looking to the dawn-tide fresh and fair
    And the morn and the noon to follow, and the eve and its morrow morn,
    All the life of our deliv'rance and the fair days yet unborn."

 

So she spoke, and a murmur arose as those valiant men came forth again. But lo, now were they dight in fresh and fair raiment and gleaming war-array.  For while all this was a-doing and a-saying, they had gotten them by the Hall-Sun's bidding unto the wains of their Houses, and had arrayed them from the store therein.

So now they took up the biers, and the Hall-Sun led them, and they went over the meadow before the throng of the kindreds, who followed them duly ordered, each House about its banner; and when they were come through the garth which the Romans had made to the Man's-door of the Hall, there were the women of the House freshly attired, who cast flowers on the living men of the host, and on the dead War-dukes, while they wept for pity of them.  So went the freemen of the Houses into the Hall, following the Hall-Sun, and the bearers of the War-dukes; but the banners abode without in the garth made by the Romans; and the thralls arrayed a feast for themselves about the wains of the kindreds in the open place before their cots and the smithying booths and the byres.

And as the Hall-Sun went into the Hall, she thrust down the candle against the threshold of the Man's-door, and so quenched it.

Long were the kindreds entering, and when they were under the Roof of the Wolfings, they looked and beheld Thiodolf set in his chair once more, and Otter set beside him; and the chiefs and leaders of the House took their places on the dais, those to whom it was due, and the Hall-Sun sat under the wondrous Lamp her namesake.

Now was the glooming falling upon the earth; but the Hall was bright within even as the Hall-Sun had promised.  Therein was set forth the Treasure of the Wolfings; fair cloths were hung on the walls, goodly broidered garments on the pillars: goodly brazen cauldrons and fair-carven chests were set down in nooks where men could see them well, and vessels of gold and silver were set all up and down the tables of the feast.  The pillars also were wreathed with flowers, and flowers hung garlanded from the walls over the precious hangings; sweet gums and spices were burning in fair-wrought censers of brass, and so many candles were alight under the Roof, that scarce had it looked more ablaze when the Romans had litten the faggots therein for its burning amidst the hurry of the Morning Battle.

There then they fell to feasting, hallowing in the high-tide of their return with victory in their hands: and the dead corpses of Thiodolf and Otter, clad in precious glistering raiment, looked down on them from the High-seat, and the kindreds worshipped them and were glad; and they drank the Cup to them before any others, were they Gods or men.

But before the feast was hallowed in, came Ali the son of Grey up to the High-seat, bearing something in his hand: and lo! it was Throng-plough, which he had sought all over the field where the Markmen had been overcome by the Romans, and had found it at last.  All men saw him how he held it in his hand now as he went up to the Hall-Sun and spake to her. But she kissed the lad on the forehead, and took Throng-plough, and wound the peace-strings round him and laid him on the board before Thiodolf; and then she spake softly as if to herself, yet so that some heard her:

"O father, no more shalt thou draw Throng-plough from the sheath till the battle is pitched in the last field of fight, and the sons of the fruitful Earth and the sons of Day meet Swart and his children at last, when the change of the World is at hand.  Maybe I shall be with thee then: but now and in meanwhile, farewell, O mighty hand of my father!"

Thus then the Houses of the Mark held their High-tide of Returning under the Wolfing Roof with none to blame them or make them afraid: and the moon rose and the summer night wore on towards dawn, and within the Roof and without was there feasting and singing and harping and the voice of abundant joyance: for without the Roof feasted the thralls and the strangers, and the Roman war-captives.

But on the morrow the kindreds laid their dead men in mound betwixt the Great Roof and the Wild-wood.  In one mound they laid them with the War- dukes in their midst, and Arinbiorn by Otter's right side; and Thiodolf bore Throng-plough to mound with him.

But a little way from the mound of their own dead, toward the south they laid the Romans, a great company, with their Captain in the midst: and they heaped a long mound over them not right high; so that as years wore, and the feet of men and beasts trod it down, it seemed a mere swelling of the earth not made by men's hands; and belike men knew not how many bones of valiant men lay beneath; yet it had a name which endured for long, to wit, the Battle-toft.

But the mound whereunder the Markmen were laid was called Thiodolf's Howe for many generations of men, and many are the tales told of him; for men were loth to lose him and forget him: and in the latter days men deemed of him that he sits in that Howe not dead but sleeping, with Throng-plough laid before him on the board; and that when the sons of the Goths are at their sorest need and the falcons cease to sit on the ridge of the Great Roof of the Wolfings, he will wake and come forth from the Howe for their helping.  But none have dared to break open that Howe and behold what is therein.

But that swelling of the meadow where the Goths had their overthrow at the hands of the Romans, and Thiodolf fell to earth unwounded, got a name also, and was called the Swooning Knowe; and it kept that name long after men had forgotten wherefore it was so called.

Now when all this was done, and the warriors of the kindreds were departed each to his own stead, the Wolfings gathered in wheat-harvest, and set themselves to make good all that the Romans had undone; and they cleansed and mended their Great Roof and made it fairer than before, and took from it all signs of the burning, save that they left the charring and marks of the flames on one tie-beam, the second from the dais, for a token of the past tidings.  Also when Harvest was over the Wolfings, the Beamings, the Galtings, and the Elkings, set to work with the Bearings to rebuild their Great Roof and the other dwellings and booths which the Romans had burned; and right fair was that house.

But the Wolfings throve in field and fold, and they begat children who grew up to be mighty men and deft of hand, and the House grew more glorious year by year.

The tale tells not that the Romans ever fell on the Mark again; for about this time they began to stay the spreading of their dominion, or even to draw in its boundaries somewhat.

AND THIS IS ALL THAT THE TALE HAS TO TELL CONCERNING THE HOUSE OF THE WOLFINGS AND THE KINDREDS OF THE MARK.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: tic.txt =====


    The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE INTERIOR CASTLE

  

OR

  

THE MANSIONS

  

By

  

St. Teresa of Avila

  

Translated from the Autograph of St. Teresa of Jesus by

  

The Benedictines of Stanbrook

  

Revised, with Notes and an Introduction, by the

  

Very Rev. Fr. Benedict Zimmerman, O.C.D.

  

PRIOR

 

  

Third Edition with Additional Notes

  

Thomas Baker, London

  

[1921]

 

 

          Nihil Obstat:

       Dom Michael   Barrett, O.S.B.
   Censor Deputatuus

 

     
      Imprimatur:

       ###10016###   Edward
   Apostolic Administrator
   Birmingham, Oscott.
   February 24, 1921

     
    

 

 

DEDICATED TO

The Martyred Daughters of St. Teresa,

The Blessed Martyrs of Compiegne, France,

by the Descendants of Their Fellow Prisoners.

Stanbrook Abbey

Day of the Beatification

May 27, 1906

 

 

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, November 2005. Proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was originally published prior 1923.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

NOTE

IN this new edition the wording has been revised I and condensed, chiefly with a view to rendering the translation more pregnant. Only one passage (VI. Mansion, ch. v. r 3) has been substantially changed, in conformity with an explanation received from a high authority. It is admittedly a very difficult passage which appears to have been misunderstood by nearly all translators; but it is gratifying to notice that the new French translation by the Carmelite nuns of Anderlecht agrees with our interpretation. The editor is under an obligation to that translation for several interesting facts embodied in the Introduction and in the notes to the text.

B. Z.

WINCANTON
 December 25. 1911

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

CONTENTS

           

        

       PAGE

     
      INTRODUCTION

        

       <page 9>

     
       

       THE INTERIOR   CASTLE

        

     
      PREFACE

        

       <page 35>

     
       

       
   THE FIRST MANSIONS

        

     
      CHAPTER

       I. Description   of the Castle.

       <page 38>

     
      "

       II. The Human   Soul.

       <page 45>

     
       

       
   THE SECOND MANSIONS

        

     
      CHAPTER

       I. War.

       <page 59>

     
       

       
   THE THIRD MANSIONS

        

     
      CHAPTER

       I. Fear of God.

       <page 70>

     
      "

       II. Aridity in   Prayer.

       <page 78>

     
       

       
   THE FOURTH MANSIONS

        

     
      CHAPTER

       I. Sweetness in   Prayer.

       <page 88>

     
      "

       II. Divine   Consolations.

       <page 98>

     
      "

       III. Prayer of   Quiet.

       <page 104>

     
      "

       [p. 6]

        

     
       

       
   THE FIFTH MANSIONS

        

     
       

        

       PAGE

     
      CHAPTER

       I. Prayer of   Union.

       <page 119>

     
      "

       II. Effects of   Union.

       <page 129>

     
      "

       III. Cause of   Union.

       <page 138>

     
      "

       IV. Spiritual   Espousals

       <page 147>

     
       

       
   THE SIXTH MANSIONS

        

     
      CHAPTER

       I. Preparation   for Spiritual Marriage

       <page 154>

     
      "

       II. The wound   of love

       <page 165>

     
      "

           Introductory   Note on Visions, Locutions, etc.

       <page 171>

     
      "

       III. Locutions

       <page 174>

     
      "

       IV. Raptures

       <page 187>

     
      "

       V. The Flight   of the Spirit

       <page 198>

     
      "

       VI. Spiritual   Jubilation

       <page 206>

     
      "

       VII. The   Humanity of our Lord

       <page 216>

     
      "

       VIII.   Intellectual Visions

       <page 228>

     
      "

       IX. Imaginary   Visions

       <page 236>

     
      "

       X. Intellectual   Visions continued

       <page 247>

     
      "

       XI. The Dart of   Love

       <page 252>

     
       

       
   THE SEVENTH MANSIONS

        

     
      CHAPTER

       I. God's   Presence Chamber

       <page 261>

     
      "

       II. Spiritual   Marriage

       <page 269>

     
      "

       III. Its   effects

       <page 278>

     
      "

       IV. Martha and   Mary

       <page 286>

     
       

       Conclusion

       <page 298>

     
       

       INDEX

       <page 301>

     
   
     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

THE

  

INTERIOR CASTLE

  

OR

  

THE MANSIONS

[p. 8]

          The Benedictines of Stanbrook desire to   express their gratitude to the very Rev. Benedict Zimmerman for having kindly   revised the translation of the 'Interior Castle' and also for the   Introduction, Notes, and Index which he has added to the book.

     
    

 

[p. 9]

  

INTRODUCTION

SAINT TERESA began to write the Interior Castle on June 2, 1577, Trinity Sunday, and completed it on the eve of St. Andrew, November 29, of the same year. But there was a long interruption of five months, [*1] so that the actual time spent in the composition of this work was reduced to about four weeks--a fortnight for the first, and another fortnight for the second half of the book. The rapidity with which it was written is easily explained by the fact that the Saint had conceived its plan some time previously. On January 17, 1577, she had written to her brother, Don Lorenzo de Cepeda, at Avila: 'I have asked the bishop--Don Alvaro Mendoza--for my book (the Life) because I shall perhaps complete it by adding those new favours our Lord has lately granted me. With these one may even compose a new work of considerable size, provided God grants me the grace of explaining myself; otherwise the loss will be of small account.' [*2] She never asked for permission to write anything, but waited until she received a command from her superiors, which, in this case, came from

[p. 10]

[paragraph continues] Father Jerome Gracian, superior of the Discalced J. Carmelites of the Provinces of Andalusia and Castille, and from Don Alonso Velasquez, canon of Toledo, afterwards bishop of Osma. [*3] The Saint was not in good health at the time; she repeatedly complains of noises in the head and other infirmities, but, worst of all, she was weighed down by troubles and anxieties resulting from the action of the superiors of the Order and of the Papal Nuncio against the nuns and friars of the Reform. Matters became even more serious when, in October, the nuns of the Incarnation of Avila proceeded to the election of a new prioress. Notwithstanding the prohibition of the provincial, fifty-five electors recorded their votes in favour of the Saint and were immediately declared excommunicated. The whole work of the Reform seemed on the brink of ruin, the Saint, as well as all her friends, was in disgrace, subject to obloquy and ill-treatment.

No trace of these trials is to be found in the Interior Castle. Saint Teresa possessed the power of concentration of thought in a marvellous degree. The early mornings and late evenings were devoted to the composition of the book, while the rest of the day was taken up by the affairs of the Order. Mother Mary of the Nativity, a member of the

[p. 11]

community of Toledo, where the book was begun, declared afterwards, [*4] that she often saw her writing, generally after Holy Communion, her face resplendent, with such rapidity and so absorbed in her occupation that she seemed undisturbed by, and in fact quite unconscious of, any noise that was made. Mother Mariana of the Angels [*5] reports having heard from the same witness, that entering her cell one day to deliver a message, the holy Mother was just beginning a new sheet of her book. While taking off her spectacles to listen to the message she was seized by a trance in which she remained for several hours. The nun, terrified at this, did not stir, but kept her eyes steadily on the Saint. When she came to, it was seen that the paper, previously blank, was covered with writing. Noticing that her visitor had discovered it, Saint Teresa put the paper quietly in the box.

[p. 12]

Another nun, Mary of St. Francis, left the following declaration: 'I know that our holy Mother wrote four books, the Life, the Way of Perfection, the Foundations, and the Mansions, which I have seen her writing. Once, while she was composing the last-named work, I entered to deliver a message, and found her so absorbed that she did not notice me; her face seemed quite illuminated and most beautiful. After having listened to me she said: "Sit down, my child, and let me write what our Lord has told me ere I forget it," and she went on writing with great rapidity and without stopping.' [*6]

Mary of St. Joseph says she heard from Mary of the Nativity that Father Jerome Gracian commanded the Saint to write the Mansions; she, however, begged to be excused, because so many books having been written by holy and learned men, there remained nothing for a woman to write. At length she yielded under obedience. This nun (Mary of the Nativity) was frequently in the Saint's cell while she was writing and she noticed her resplendent face and the almost preternatural velocity with which her hand travelled over the paper. [*7]

Writing to Mother Mary of St. Joseph, Prioress of Seville, November 8, 1581, St. Teresa gives her a message for Father Rodrigo Alvarez, S. J.: 'Our Father (Jerome Gracian, then provincial) tells me that he has handed you a book written by me,

[p. 13]

which perhaps you do not feel inclined to read yourself. Kindly read to Father Rodrigo Alvarez, at his next visit, the last Mansion, but under the seal of confession, as he asks this in his superior wisdom. This is only for you two. Tell him that the person he knows has arrived at this Mansion and enjoys the peace there described; that she is entirely at rest, and that some grave theologians have assured her that she is on a safe road. In case you could not read these pages to him do not send him the book, for it might lead to unpleasantness. Until I have his answer on this matter I will not write to him. Give him my compliments.'

At the end of the original manuscript, before the epilogue (marked with Ihs.) there is a notice in Father Alvarez' hand-writing to this effect: 'The Mother Prioress of the convent of Seville has read to me this seventh Mansion, whither a soul may arrive in the present life. Let all the saints praise the infinite goodness of God, Who communicates Himself to His creatures so that they truly seek His glory and the salvation of their neighbour. What I feel and judge of this matter is, that everything that has been read to me is conformable to Catholic truth and in accordance with Holy Scripture and the teaching of the Saints. Whosoever has read the doctrine of the Saints, such as the books of St. Gertrude, St. Catharine of Siena, or St. Bridget of Sweden, and other saints and spiritual writers,

[p. 14]

will clearly understand that the spirit of Mother Tireza (sic) of Jesus is true, since it leads to the same effects as are to be found in the saints; and because this is in truth my judgment and opinion, I have hereunto set my name, this, the 22nd day of February, 1582. P. Rodrigo Alvarez.' [*8]

The work was copied, probably under the supervision of the Saint, who introduced many changes; when completed the original was handed to Father Jerome Gracian and to the Dominican, Fray Diego de Yanguas, for approval. Both, particularly the former, made numerous corrections, which Fuente, not without reason, calls impertinent, scratching out whole sentences and adding others. The book thus revised must have enjoyed a certain celebrity, though not to the same extent as the Life, to which St. Teresa herself preferred it. Scarcely a week after its completion she wrote to Father Salazar, S.J.: 'If Senor Carillo [Salazar himself] came, the person in question [the Saint] thinks he would find another jewel which in her opinion is superior to the former [the Life]. This one reflects nothing foreign to itself, but is resplendent in its own beauty. It is enriched with more delicate enamels than the former, the workmanship, too, is more perfect. For, as the person in question says, the jeweller was less experienced when he fashioned the previous one. Moreover, the gold of the new

[p. 15]

one is of better quality than that of the former, though the precious stones are not so well set. It has been done, as might be expected, according to the designs of the Jeweller Himself.' [*9] Later on she wrote to Father Jerome Gracian: The book I have written since seems to me superior [to the Life]; at least I had more experience when I wrote it.' [*10]

One day, speaking with Mother Mary of Jesus on spiritual matters, she said that our Lord had communicated so much to her since she had reached what she described in the seventh Mansion,--the spiritual Marriage,--that she did not consider it possible to advance further in this life, in the way of prayer, nor even to wish to do so. [*11]

The book was eagerly read by those who were able to obtain copies. At the archiepiscopal Seminary at Salamanca it was read publicly after dinner; the students, contrary to custom, sacrificing the recreation rather than miss so edifying an instruction. The result was that several entered the religious life, one becoming a Franciscan, two others, who had already taken their degrees, joining the Discalced Carmelites. [*12] We also know of a lady who became a Poor Clare through reading the Interior Castle. [*13] The process of Beatification contains the following evidence of Don Francisco de Mora, architect to Philip III: 'The same prioress (of a

[p. 16]

convent of Dominican nuns) being concerned about my salvation gave me a book in manuscript, called The Mansions, by Mother Teresa, hoping I should derive some benefit from it. I fear this was not the case, but it made me acquainted with Teresa of Jesus, the foundress of the Discalced Carmelite nuns, of whom I had not yet heard, but for whom I now felt devotion.' [*14]

In August 1586 it was decided to print Saint Teresa's works, the Augustinian Fray Luis de Leon being selected as editor, as he was unconcerned in the quarrels raging round the Reform. Accordingly, the manuscript of the Interior Castle was handed to him. On the first leaf he wrote the following note:

'Many passages of this book written by the holy Mother have been scored through, other words being substituted or notes being added in the margin. Most of these corrections are badly done, the original text being much better. It will be noticed that the holy Mother's sentences are superior and agree with the context, which is not the case with the corrections. These improvements and glosses may therefore be dispensed with. Having myself read and considered everything with great care, it appears to me that the reader, too, should have before him the words of the author who knew best what to say; for this reason I have left out the additions, and have restored what has been changed, excepting only a

[p. 17]

few corrections made by the writer herself. I beg of the reader that he would in charity reverence the words and even the letters traced by so holy a hand, and strive to understand what has been written. He will then see that there was no need for corrections; should he fail to understand her, let him believe that the writer knew what she said, and that her words cannot be tampered with if they are not to lose their meaning; otherwise what was to the point will seem out of place. This is how books become corrupted, useless, and are finally lost.' [*15]

When Luis de Leon undertook the editing of St. Teresa's writings he received a long letter from Don Diego de Yepes, afterwards Bishop of Tarazona, a former friend and confessor of the Saint, in which he records his personal recollections. I shall only insert here what he says about the Interior Castle:

'This holy Mother desired to see the beauty of a soul in the state of grace, a thing greatly to be coveted both for the sake of seeing and of possessing it. While this desire lasted, she was commanded to write a treatise on prayer, of which she had much personal experience. On the eve of the Blessed Trinity, while considering what subject to choose for this treatise, God, Who disposes everything in due season, fulfilled her wish and furnished a suitable subject. He showed her a most beautiful globe

[p. 18]

of crystal, in the shape of a castle, with seven rooms, the seventh, situated in the centre, being occupied by the King of glory, resplendent with the most exquisite brilliancy, which shone through and adorned the remaining rooms. The nearer these lay to the centre, the more did they partake of that wondrous light. It did not, however, penetrate beyond the crystal, for everything round about was a mass of darkness and impurity, full of toads and vipers and other venomous animals.

She was still admiring this beauty which, by the grace of God dwells in the soul, when, to! the light suddenly disappeared, and the crystal, wherein the King of glory was still residing, became opaque and as dark as coal, emitting an intolerable odour; the venomous animals, formerly held in check outside, obtained admittance into the castle. The holy Mother wished that every one should behold this vision, for she thought that no one having seen the beauty and splendour of grace, which is forfeited by sin and replaced by such repulsive misery, would ever dare to offend God.

'She told me this vision on the same day, for in this as well as in other things she was so communicative that on the following morning she said to me: "How I forgot myself yesterday! I cannot think how it could have happened. Those high aspirations of mine, and the affection I have for you must have caused me to go beyond all reasonable

[p. 19]

limits. God grant I may have derived some profit therefrom." I promised her to say nothing about it during her lifetime, but since her death I should like to make it known to all men. From this vision she learnt four important matters.

'First, she came to understand this axiom, which in this form she had never heard of in her life, [*16] that God is present in all things by His essence, presence, and power. As she was deeply humble and submissive and obedient to the doctrine of the Church and the teaching of the learned ministers of God, she never rested until her revelations had been approved of by her superiors and by theologians, and were shown to be conformable to Holy Scripture. She went so far as to say that if all the angels of heaven said one thing, and her superiors another, though she could not doubt that the former were true angels, yet she would hold what was told her by her superiors, because faith comes through these and there remains no room for deceit, whereas revelations coming from angels might be illusionary.

'With such regard for obedience, she asked me one day at Toledo--probably at the time when she saw the vision of the Castle--whether it was true that God was in all things by His power, presence,

[p. 20]

and essence, to which I replied in the affirmative, explaining it as best I could on the authority of St. Paul, particularly where he says "the sufferings of this time are not worthy to be compared with the glory to come that shall be revealed in us," [*17] Laying stress on these words, "shall be revealed in us," she was so overjoyed that I was quite astonished. Though in a way it seemed to me a kind of curiosity, I could not help thinking there was some mystery about it, for she said: "This is the very thing."

'Secondly, she was greatly surprised at the malice of sin, since, notwithstanding the presence of God in these various ways, it prevents the soul from partaking of that powerful light.

'Thirdly, she derived such humility and self-knowledge from this vision, that from that moment she never thought of herself in all the good she was doing; for she learnt that all the beauty of the soul emanates from that resplendent light, and that the powers of the soul and of the body are enlivened and strengthened by the Power established in the centre, whence comes all our good, so that we have but a small share in our good works. All the good she did, she from this moment referred to God as its principal author.

'Fourthly, she derived from it the subject of the book she was ordered to write on prayer, comparing

[p. 21]

the seven rooms of the Castle with as many degrees of prayer, whereby we enter within ourselves and draw nearer to God. So that, penetrating to the depths of our soul and gaining perfect self-knowledge, we reach the seventh room where God Himself dwells, with Whom we become united by as perfect a union as is possible in the present life, being made partakers of His light and love.

'I will say no more of this vision and the Mansions, because your Reverence must by now have seen this admirable book, and must know with what accuracy, with what majestic doctrine, with what lucid examples she describes the progress of the soul from the gate to the very centre. It is clearly seen in this treatise how she communicated with our Lord, and how His Majesty vouchsafed to place her in the centre and to unite her with Himself, as she puts it, by the bonds of marriage and an inseparable union.' [*18]

After the publication of the Interior Castle, in 1588 at Salamanca, it became not only more widely known, but also more and more appreciated. Francis Suarez, the great theologian of the Society of Jesus, says in his deposition in the process of Beatification that he had read some of St. Teresa's works, particularly the Mansions, which contain an absolutely safe doctrine and give proof of a wonderful spirit of prayer and contemplation. [*19]

[p. 22]

Thomas Hurtado, professor of theology at Seville, speaks as follows:

As often as I read the books of the holy Mother, I admire the wonderful manner in which God instructed her in mystical theology for the sake of souls giving themselves truly to familiar intercourse with His divine Majesty. But where I most regret my inability of expressing in fitting terms my sentiments towards this excellent teacher is when I look at, and refresh myself in that Castle with its seven rooms; for there is seen the effect of infused knowledge such as St. Denis received from St. Hierotheus [*20] and both from St. Paul, and which has been committed to writing in the famous book of Mystical Theology. Hence comes, as from a fountain-head, notwithstanding the obscurity (to our manner of thinking) of its language, the doctrine of the great masters of the spiritual life such as Hugh of St. Victor, St. Bernard, Ruysbroek, Tauler, Gerson, and many others whom I pass by.

'Nevertheless, I will boldly say that no one has given us water more limpid from that Apostolical and Areopagitical well than the holy Mother Teresa, who, in her books, but chiefly in the Mansions, has cleared up in simple language the most difficult questions of this divine theology, and has brought forth light from darkness, as it is

[p. 23]

written: (He) commanded light to shine out of darkness.' [*21] Who has ever been able to show as clearly as our Saint how God takes possession of the soul, how He unites Himself with its substance, whence comes to the intellect the light of faith, to the will the ardour of love, and to the senses the jubilation over His works? No one has ever turned theory into practice in a more convincing or more catholic manner. The most profound secrets of this supernatural wisdom are here treated with such ease, so amiably, so delightfully, they are illustrated by such nice and homely examples, that instead of awe-inspiring obscurity, we find lovely flowers and the sweetness of love, through which, as through an avenue, the soul passes onwards. When God made known His exalted doctrine to St. Dionysius and other mystical writers, He made use of their own language and pen. But St. Teresa in the Mansions is like the light of dawn whose rays are not intercepted by the clouds of this world; like a soft rain from above, whereby the soul grows and profits by its communications with God. Until the teaching of this great door became known it seemed as though God were inaccessible, being surrounded by darkness, through which Moses and some other persons had to pass when approaching Him; [*22] but they neither explained

[p. 24]

the manner nor showed the way whereby they came to the enjoyment of the sweetness of the Spouse. Now, however, this way is clear and patent to all, having been pointed out in the Mansions, in language so straight and so methodical, and no longer such as could not be understood, or required further explanation. In my opinion this holy writer derived not only the substance of her teaching from infused knowledge, but even the words with which she explains it.' [*23]

Likewise Don Alvaro de Villegas, canon of Toledo, expressed his opinion that the Way of Perfection and the Interior Castle contain 'heavenly doctrine.' The weight of the subject-matter, the propriety of the comparisons, the force of the expressions, the consistency of the teaching, the sweetness of her well-chosen, vivid words, the clearness of the arguments, all this proves that she was guided by her heavenly Spouse, in Whom are hidden the treasures of the wisdom of God; and that the Holy Ghost, Who more than once was seen resting on her head like a dove, was dilating these works. Villegas does not believe that any one could read them, as such books ought to be read, without becoming himself a master of the spiritual life. For they are like heavenly dew, rendering the soul fruitful in the matter of prayer. [*24]

[p. 25]

It would be a mistake to consider the Interior Castle a complete treatise of mystical theology. Like St. Teresa's other works, it is intensely personal: she describes the road by which she has been led, being well aware that others may be led in a different way. In the heavenly Father's house there are many mansions, not only seven, and many paths lead to them. What gives the work such high value is, that it is the result of a most searching inquiry into the various phases whereby a soul is gradually transformed into the likeness of God Himself. Here St. Teresa is always at her best. She takes nothing for granted, even her own personal experiences are admitted only after having been fully investigated and found to be consistent one with the other, and conformable to the teaching of the Church and the words of Holy Scripture.

Mystical theology is generally divided into three parts, respectively called the purgative, the illuminative, and the unitive life. In the first, man is cleansed from sin and habitual imperfection by the use of the sacraments and by voluntary mortification of the passions. The mind is purified by sedulous meditation on the last end and on the Life and Passion of Christ, which must ever be the great model of the Christian. This first portion of the way to heaven can be covered by the help of the ordinary means of grace, without any direct and extraordinary intervention of divine power.

[p. 26]

The second part differs in many ways from the first. It comprises the passive purification of the soul and the passive enlightenment of the mind. By sending it keen interior and exterior trials and sufferings, God completes the cleansing of the soul in a manner far surpassing any voluntary effort of man. By raising it to the stage of contemplation He gives it fresh light on the mysteries of our Redemption. The mind is then no longer compelled to strain the memory, the reason, and the will, in order to dwell upon the great truths of religion and to derive some personal benefit therefrom, for these truths are now more or less permanently before it and fill it with holy thoughts, sometimes giving it consolation in trouble, at other times striking a warning note against imperfection. Again, the subtraction of sensible consolation, and the interior aridity arising therefrom, leave a terrible blank in the soul, showing it that, without God's help, it is mere nothingness. This apparent estrangement from God is the keenest trial that can befall a soul, but also the most powerful means of cleansing it from the least, the most subtle imperfections.

Emerging from this state of probation, the soul enters upon the third stage, in which, though perhaps in the midst of severe suffering and sharp persecution, it knows itself to be a chosen child of God, to Whom it is united by perfect conformity of the will. Such phenomena as revelations, visions,

[p. 27]

locutions, and even more wonderful manifestations, like the wound of love, spiritual betrothal and nuptials, are incidental rather than essential to the second and third stages. Some great contemplatives have never experienced anything of the kind, while, on the other hand, some of these occurrences may sometimes have been merely the work of an exuberant imagination, or even the result of diabolical illusion. They should therefore never be wished for, or cherished, but rather shunned and ignored, in as far as that is possible. If they are real and come from God, they will do their work without the co-operation of the soul. The danger of self-deception is so great that a person labouring under such phenomena should offer every resistance, and the spiritual director should exercise the utmost vigilance. St. Teresa is very eloquent on this point, and undeceived many would-be contemplatives, while her disciple, St. John of the Cross, is even more thorough-going in the deprecation of spiritual favours. Among the numerous marks whereby the trained theologian may discriminate between real and imaginary phenomena, there is one about which Saint Teresa speaks with wonderful clearness. If they proceed from hysteria the imagination alone is active and the higher powers of the soul are torpid; if, however, they come from God, the intellect and the will are so intensely active,

[p. 28]

that the lower powers and even the body lose all strength for the time being.

It will be noticed that the first two Mansions belong to the purgative life, the third and fourth to the illuminative, and the remaining three to the unitive life. Compared with similar works, the treatment of the first stage must be called meagre. True, in her Life and in the Way of Perfection St. Teresa has dealt with this subject somewhat more fully. Indeed, the last-named work was designed as a treatise on Christian Ascetics, dealing with the purgation of the soul by mortification and the enlightenment of the mind by meditation. There, too, appears the first idea of the Mansions, [*25] and Fuente remarks that the passage in question may be taken for the parting of the ways between the two works. However, this is not the only, nor, indeed, the chief reason why St. Teresa is so reticent about the preliminary stage of the contemplative life. The fact is that she herself did not pass through these experiences. By God's grace she was preserved from childhood from grievous sin and gross imperfection. Though she never grows tired of bewailing her faults and unfaithfulness, these avowals must be taken cum grano salis. While yet a child, she sometimes gave way to vanity in dress and wasted her time in reading romances. As a young religious, she was sought after by friends and relatives who

[p. 29]

took pleasure in her attractive conversation. This proved further loss of time and caused distractions. Owing to acute suffering, she for some years left off the practice of mental prayer, though she faithfully performed all her religious obligations, as far as her weak state of health allowed. This is all. The war of the flesh against the spirit, the insubordination of the lower parts of nature, the fickleness of the will, which so often thwart the most noble aspirations of a soul, were unknown to her. Under these circumstances, we cannot be surprised to find her entering upon the journey towards God at a point which in many cases marks but the closing stage.

As to the remaining parts of this book, it will be seen from the parallel passages that they cover much the same ground as her Life and the Relations. With her singular gift of introspection and analysis, the Saint studied her own case from every point of view, so as to make sure that her extraordinary experiences were due to no illusion, and offered no obstacle to the safety of her soul. Although the Interior Castle contains little that we do not already know from her other works, it is superior to them by reason of its logical order and the masterly treatment of the most recondite matters of mystical theology. While ostensibly dealing with general facts, St. Teresa in reality records her personal experiences. How definite these were, how little room there remained for the freaks of the imagination,

[p. 30]

will appear from the fact that she nearly always repeats the very words she had used in her Life and in the other reports of her interior progress, although she did not have these writings before her eyes, nor had she ever seen them since they first left her hands. Every one of her experiences must have produced a profound impression to be remembered so minutely after an interval of years.

There is that in the Interior Castle which reminds one of Dante's Paradiso. In the one and the other, the soul, purified from earthly dross, is gradually being invested with new and glorious qualities, and is being led through regions unknown until it arrives at the very threshold of the throne of God. Not even the boldest imagination could have designed so wonderful a picture of a soul adorned with graces at once so varied and so true. In one case we know, the poet has drawn abundantly from the treasury of the Angelical Doctor, putting in verse the conclusions of the scholastic theologian. In the other case we can follow, chapter by chapter, the influence of the teaching of St. Thomas Aquinas. St. Teresa had never studied it herself, but her directors and confessors were deeply versed in it and solved her doubts and perplexities on the lines of the greatest of the school men. The Interior Castle might almost be considered a practical illustration of certain parts of the Summa theologica, [*26]

[p. 31]

as it describes the progress of the soul through every stage of perfection. When we have reached the second chapter of the seventh Mansion, there remains but one thing: the Beatific Vision, and this is reserved for the next life.

After the publication of the Interior Castle by Luis de Leon, the manuscript came into the possession of Father Jerome Gracian, who, after having made a copy of it which is still extant, presented the original, on the occasion of a visit to the convent of Seville, to Don Pedro Cereso Pardo, a great friend of the Saint, and a benefactor to the convent. When his only daughter took the habit there, the precious manuscript was part of her dowry. Dona Juana de Mendoza, Duchess of Beguiar, a novice in the same convent, had it bound in silver and precious stones. It is still there, [*27] and the present writer had the privilege of seeing it. It comprises a hundred and thirteen leaves in folio, but originally there must have been some more leaves which at a later period were torn out. These, it is presumed, contained the headings of the chapters. Unlike the Life and the Foundations, the text of the Castle is divided only by figures, without indication of the contents of each chapter, but the arguments which have come down to us are so entirely  to those of the two works

[p. 32]

named, that it is impossible to consider them otherwise than the genuine work of the author. In the present translation they have been inserted in their proper places.

On the occasion of the ter-centenary of Saint Teresa's death, a photo-lithographic edition of the original was published under the direction of Cardinal Lluch, Carmelite of the old observance, Archbishop of Seville:

El Castillo Ynterior o Tratado de las Moradas,
 escrito por Sta. Teresa de Jesus.
 Litografia de Juan Moyano (Seville) 1882.

The present translation, the third in English, [*28] has been made directly from this autograph edition. It has been thought advisable that, as far as the genius of the language allows it, the wording of the author should be strictly adhered to, and that not even a shade of her expression should be sacrificed. For Teresa is not only a saint whose

[p. 33]

every word is telling, but she is a classic in her own language who knows how to give expression to her deepest thoughts. Having compared word for word the translation with the original, I am in a position to affirm that this programme has been faithfully carried out. For the foot-notes--with few exceptions--as well as for the Index, I am responsible. It seemed to me important to point out all the parallel passages from the various works of the Saint. Only by this means can it be seen how consistent Saint Teresa is in all her writings. [*29] It would have been easy to multiply quotations from the works of other writers on mystical theology. Thus, the influence of the Imitation of Christ and of the Life of our Lord by Ludolphus the Carthusian can be distinctly traced in the Interior Castle. Both these works, as well as some Spanish books, were held in such esteem by St. Teresa, that she ordered the prioress of each convent to keep them at the disposal of the nuns. As there is a limit to footnotes, I have contented myself with such references as seemed to me conducive to the elucidation of the doctrine laid down in this treatise.

In conclusion I venture to express the hope that

[p. 34]

this new translation will be found helpful by those who feel called to a higher life.

BENEDICT ZIMMERMAN,
 Prior, O.C.D.

ST. LUKE'S PRIORY,
    WINCANTON, SOMERSET.
       July, 1, 1905, and December 25, 1911.

Footnotes

^9:1 Castle, Mansions v. ch. iv. I.

^9:2 Letters of St. Teresa, Vol. ii.

^10:3 The French Carmelite nuns in their new translation, Oeuvres completes de Sainte Therese, t. vi, Introduction, p. 5, quoting the Ano Teresiano, t. vii ad 7 July, and Father Gracian's Dilucidario, as well as his additions to Ribera, show the exact share of Fr. Gracian and Dr. Velasquez in the preliminaries of this work.

^11:4 Fuente, Obras de Santa Teresa de Jesus. Edit. 1881, Vol. vi, p. 278.

^11:5 Ibid. p. 178. A somewhat similar incident is reported by Mother Anne of the Incarnation (Ibid. p. 213), but it appears to be wrongly brought into connection with the composition of the Castle. The nun in question had belonged to the convent of St. Joseph at Segovia at an earlier period, but there is no evidence that St. Teresa visited this place in the course of the six months during which she composed this work. The Bollandists, indeed, maintain that it was commenced at Toledo, continued at Segovia and completed at Avila (n. 1541), but their sole authority for including Segovia is the passage in question, which, however, must refer to some other work of the Saint. The sister, passing St. Teresa's door, saw her writing, her face being lit up as by a bright light. She wrote very fast without making any corrections. After an hour, it being about midnight, she ceased and the light disappeared. The Saint then knelt down and remained in prayer for three hours, after which she went to sleep.

^12:6 Fuente, p. 223.

^12:7 Ibid. p. 255.

^14:8 Autograph, fol. cx.

^15:9 December 7, 1577. Letters Vol. II.

^15:10 Jan. 14, 1580. Letters Vol. IV:

^15:11 Fuente, Obras. l.c. p. 275.

^15:12 l.c. p. 217. 

^15:13 Ibid. p. 227.

^16:14 Fuente, Obras. p. 190.

^17:15 Autograph. fol. 1.

^19:16 See Life, ch. xviii. 20. Mansions v. ch. i. 9. The ignorance of the priest who had told her that God was only present by His grace, made a lasting impression on St. Teresa. She was first undeceived by a Dominican.

^20:17 Rom. viii. 18.

^21:18 Fuente; pp. 131-133.

^21:19 l.c. 184.

^22:20 Allusion to the famous Mystical Theology attributed to Dionysius the Areopagite, and long considered the chief authority on this subject.

^23:21 2 Cor. iv. 6.

^23:22 The example of Moses is scarcely to the point (cf. Exod. xxxiii. 11, and Num. xii. 7, 8).

^24:23 Fuente, pp. 330-332.

^24:24 l.c. p. 334. These testimonies could be easily multiplied.

^28:25 Way of Perf. ch. xx. 1

^30:26 S. Theol. 2da 2dae, qq. 171-184.

^31:27 Bollandists, Acta, n. 1495. See also Impressions in Spain. By Lady Herbert. London, 1867, p, 171.

^32:28 The first translation is to be found in the Works of the Holy Mother St. Teresa of Jesus (third part). Printed in the year MDCLXXV, pp. 137-286. It bears the title: The Interiour Castle: or, Mansions. As to the authors of this translation--Abraham Woodhead and another, whose name is not known--see my book Carmel in England, p. 342, note. It is stated there that the third part, containing the Way of Perfection and the Castle, has no title-page. This is true with regard to the copy I had before me when writing that book. The one I have now is more complete.

The second translation, by the Rev. John Dalton, appeared in 1852 and has been repeatedly reprinted. It was dedicated to Bishop Ullathorne.

Of foreign translations it will be sufficient to mention the one by Cyprien de la Nativite, in Oeuvres de la Sainte Mere Terese de Jesus, Paris, 1657, and the new one in Oeuvres already mentioned.

^33:29 The present translation ought to dispose of the reservations expressed by an able critic in his otherwise valuable appreciation of the works of the Saint. See Santa Teresa, by the late Alexander Whyte, D.D. London, 1898, p. 32.

Criticisms which have appeared in various papers, or have been privately conveyed, have been gratefully received and acted upon in the second and the present edition.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 35]

  

THE INTERIOR CASTLE

  

OR THE MANSIONS

  

BY ST. TERESA

IHS

THIS TREATISE, STYLED THE INTERIOR CASTLE, WAS WRITTEN BY TERESA OF JESUS, NUN OF OUR LADY OF CARMEL, FOR HER SISTERS AND DAUGHTERS, THE DISCALCED CARMELITE NUNS.

RARELY has obedience laid upon me so difficult a task as this of writing about prayer; for one reason, because I do not feel that God has given me either the power or the desire for it, besides which, during the last three months I have suffered from noises and a great weakness in my head that have made it painful for me to write even on necessary business. [*1]

However, as I know the power obedience has of making things easy which seem impossible, my will submits with a good grace, although nature seems greatly distressed, for God has not given me such strength as to bear, without repugnance, the constant struggle against illness while performing many different duties. May He, Who has helped

[p. 36]

me in other more difficult matters, aid me with His grace in this, for I trust in His mercy. I think I have but little to say that has not already been put forth in my other works written under obedience; in fact, I fear this will be but repetition of them. I am like a parrot which has learnt to talk; only knowing what it has been taught or has heard, it repeats the same thing over and over again. If God wishes me to write anything new, He will teach it me, or bring back to my memory what I have said elsewhere. I should be content even with this, for as I am very forgetful, I should be glad to be able to recall some of the matters about which people say I have spoken well, lest they should be altogether lost. If our Lord will not even grant me this, still, if I weary my brains and increase my headache by striving to obey, I shall gain in merit, though my words should be useless to any one. So I begin this work on the Feast of the Blessed Trinity in the year 1577, in the Convent of St. Joseph of Carmel at Toledo, where I am living, and I submit all my writings to the judgment of those learned men by whose commands I undertake them. That it will be the fault of ignorance, not malice, if I say anything contrary to the doctrine of the Holy Roman Catholic Church, may be held as certain. By God's goodness I am, and always shall be, faithful to the Church, as I have been in the past. May He be for ever blessed and glorified. Amen.

He who bids me write this, tells me that the nuns of these convents of our Lady of Carmel need some one to solve their difficulties about prayer: he

[p. 37]

thinks that women understand one another's language best and that my sisters' affection for me would make them pay special attention to my words, therefore it is important for me to explain the subject clearly to them. Thus I am writing only to my sisters; the idea that any one else could benefit by what I say would be absurd. Our Lord will be doing me a great favour if He enables me to help but one of the nuns to praise Him a little better; His Majesty knows well that I have no other aim. If anything is to the point, they will understand that it does not originate from me and there is no reason to attribute it to me, as with my scant understanding and skill I could write nothing of the sort, unless God, in His mercy, enabled me to do so.

Footnotes

^35:1 'I am always suffering from my head.' Letter of June 28, 1577. Letters. VOL. II.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38]

  

THE FIRST MANSIONS

  

CHAPTER I.

THIS CHAPTER TREATS OF THE BEAUTY AND DIGNITY OF OUR SOULS AND MAKES A COMPARISON TO EXPLAIN THIS. THE ADVANTAGE OF KNOWING AND UNDERSTANDING THIS AND THE FAVOURS GOD GRANTS TO US IS SHOWN, AND HOW PRAYER IS THE GATE OF THE SPIRITUAL CASTLE.

1. Plan of this book. 2. The Interior Castle. 3. Our curable self ignorance. 4. God dwells in the centre of the soul. 5. Why all souls do not receive certain favours. 6. Reasons for speaking of these favours. 7. The entrance of the Castle. 8. Entering into oneself. 9. Prayer. 10. Those who dwell in the first mansion. 11. Entering. 12. Difficulties of the subject.

1. WHILE I was begging our Lord to-day to speak for me, since I knew not what to say nor how to commence this work which obedience has laid upon me, an idea occurred to me which I will explain, and which will serve as a foundation for that I am about to write.

2. I thought of the soul as resembling a castle, [*1] formed of a single diamond or a very transparent crystal, [*2] and containing many rooms, just as in

[p. 39]

heaven there are many mansions. [*3] If we reflect, sisters, we shall see that the soul of the just man is but a paradise, in which, God tells us, He takes His delight. [*4] What, do you imagine, must that dwelling be in which a King so mighty, so wise, and so pure, containing in Himself all good, can delight to rest? Nothing can be compared to the great beauty and capabilities of a soul; however keen our intellects may be, they are as unable to comprehend them as to comprehend God, for, as He has told us, He created us in His own image and likeness. [*5]

3. As this is so, we need not tire ourselves by trying to realize all the beauty of this castle, although, being His creature, there is all the difference between the soul and God that there is between the creature and the Creator; the fact that it is made in God's image teaches us how great are its dignity and loveliness. It is no small misfortune and disgrace that, through our own fault, we neither understand our nature nor our origin. Would it not be gross ignorance, my daughters, if, when a man was questioned about his name, or country, or parents, he could not answer? Stupid as this would be, it is unspeakably more foolish to care to learn

[p. 40]

nothing of our nature except that we possess bodies, and only to realize vaguely that we have souls, because people say so and it is a doctrine of faith. Rarely do we reflect upon what gifts our souls may possess, Who dwells within them, or how extremely precious they are. Therefore we do little to preserve their beauty; all our care is concentrated on our bodies, which are but the coarse setting of the diamond, or the outer walls of the castle. [*6]

4. Let us imagine, as I said, that there are many rooms in this castle, of which some are above, some below, others at the side; in the centre, in the very midst of them all, is the principal chamber in which God and the soul hold their most secret intercourse. [*7] Think over this comparison very carefully; God grant it may enlighten you about the different kinds of graces He is pleased to bestow upon the soul. No one can know all about them, much less a person so ignorant as I am. The knowledge that such things are possible will console you greatly should our Lord ever grant you

[p. 41]

any of these favours; people themselves deprived of them can then at least praise Him for His great goodness in bestowing them on others. The thought of heaven and the happiness of the saints does us no harm, but cheers and urges us to win this joy for ourselves, nor will it injure us to know that during this exile God can communicate Himself to us loathsome worms; it will rather make us love Him for such immense goodness and infinite mercy.

5. I feel sure that vexation at thinking that during our life on earth God can bestow these graces on the souls of others shows a want of humility and charity for one's neighbour, for why should we not feel glad at a brother's receiving divine favours which do not deprive us of our own share? Should we not rather rejoice at His Majesty's thus manifesting His greatness wherever He chooses? [*8] Sometimes our Lord acts thus solely for the sake of showing His power, as He declared when the Apostles questioned whether the blind man whom He cured had been suffering for his own or his parents' sins. [*9] God does not bestow these favours on certain souls because they are more holy than others who do not receive them, but to manifest His greatness, as in the case of St. Paul and St. Mary Magdalen, and that we may glorify Him in His creatures.

6. People may say such things appear impossible and it is best not to scandalize the weak in faith by

[p. 42]

speaking about them. But it is better that the latter should disbelieve us, than that we should desist from enlightening souls which receive these graces, that they may rejoice and may endeavour to love God better for His favours, seeing He is so mighty and so great. There is no danger here of shocking those for whom I write by treating of such matters, for they know and believe that God gives even greater proofs of His love. I am certain that if any one of you doubts the truth of this, God will never allow her to learn it by experience, for He desires that no limits should be set to His work: therefore, never discredit them because you are not thus led yourselves.

7. Now let us return to our beautiful and charming castle and discover how to enter it. This appears incongruous: if this castle is the soul, clearly no one can have to enter it, for it is the person himself: one might as well tell some one to go into a room he is already in! There are, however, very different ways of being in this castle; many souls live in the courtyard of the building where the sentinels stand, neither caring to enter farther, nor to know who dwells in that most delightful place, what is in it and what rooms it contains.

8. Certain books on prayer that you have read advise the soul to enter into itself, [*10] and this is what I mean. I was recently told by a great theologian that souls without prayer are like bodies, palsied and lame, having hands and feet they cannot use.

[p. 43]

[paragraph continues] Just so, there are souls so infirm and accustomed to think of nothing but earthly matters, that there seems no cure for them. It appears impossible for them to retire into their own hearts; accustomed as they are to be with the reptiles and other creatures which live outside the castle, they have come at last to imitate their habits. Though these souls are by their nature so richly endowed, capable of communion even with God Himself, yet their case seems hopeless. Unless they endeavour to understand and remedy their most miserable plight, their minds will become, as it were, bereft of movement, just as Lot's wife became a pillar of salt for looking backwards in disobedience to God's command. [*11]

9. As far as I can understand, the gate by which to enter this castle is prayer and meditation. I do not allude more to mental than to vocal prayer, for if it is prayer at all, the mind must take part in it. If a person neither considers to Whom he is addressing himself, what he asks, nor what he is who ventures to speak to God, although his lips may utter many words, I do not call it prayer. [*12] Sometimes, indeed, one may pray devoutly without making all these considerations through having practised them at other times. The custom of speaking to God Almighty as freely as with a slave--caring nothing whether the words are suitable or not, but simply saying the first thing that comes to mind from being learnt by rote by frequent repetition--cannot be called prayer: God grant that

[p. 44]

no  may address Him in this manner. I trust His Majesty will prevent any of you, sisters, from doing so. Our habit in this Order of conversing about spiritual matters is a good preservative against such evil ways.

10. Let us speak no more of these crippled souls, who are in a most miserable and dangerous state, unless our Lord bid them rise, as He did the palsied man who had waited more than thirty years at the pool of Bethsaida. [*13] We will now think of the others who at last enter the precincts of the castle; they are still very worldly, yet have some desire to do right, and at times, though rarely, commend themselves to God's care. They think about their souls every now and then; although very busy, they pray a few times a month, with minds generally filled with a thousand other matters, for where their treasure is, there is their heart also. [*14] Still, occasionally they cast aside these cares; it is a great boon for them to realize to some extent the state of their souls, and to see that they will never reach the gate by the road they are following.

11. At length they enter the first rooms in the basement of the castle, accompanied by numerous reptiles [*15] which disturb their peace, and prevent their seeing the beauty of the building; still, it is a great gain that these persons should have found their way in at all.

[p. 45]

12. You may think, my daughters, that all this does not concern you, because, by God's grace, you are farther advanced; still, you must be patient with me, for I can explain myself on some spiritual matters concerning prayer in no other way. May our Lord enable me to speak to the point; the subject is most difficult to understand without personal experience of such graces. Any one who has received them will know how impossible it is to avoid touching on subjects which, by the mercy of God, will never apply to us.

Footnotes

^38:1 Way of Perfection, ch. xxviii, 9.

^38:2 In her Life St. Teresa likened God to a diamond (ch. xl, 14); and elsewhere (ch. xi, 10) the soul to a garden wherein our Lord takes His delight.

^39:3 St. John xiv. 2: 'In domo Patris mei mansiones multae sunt.' St. John of the Cross uses the same comparison: 'If the soul shall overcome the devil in the first combat, it shall then pass on to the second; and if it shall be victorious there also, it shall then pass on to the third; and then through the seven mansions, the seven degrees of love, until the Bridegroom shall bring it to the "cellar of wine" of perfect charity.' (Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xi. 7.)

^39:4 Prov. viii. 31: 'Deliciae meae esse cum filiis hominum.'

^39:5 Gen. i. 26: 'Faciamus hominem ad imaginem et similitudinem nostram.'

^40:6 Way of Perf. ch. xxviii.

^40:7 St. John of the Cross on the words of his stanza: 'In the inner cellar of my Beloved have I drunk.' 'Here the soul speaks of that sovereign grace of God in taking it into the house of His love, which is the union or transformation of love in God . . . The cellar is the highest degree of love to which the soul can attain in this life, and is therefore said to be the inner. It follows from this that there are other cellars not so interior; that is, the degrees of love by which souls reach to this, the last. These cellars are seven in number, and the soul has entered them all when it has in perfection the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost, so far as it is possible for it. . . . Many souls reach and enter the first cellar, each according to the perfection of its love, but the last and inmost cellar is entered by few in this world, because therein is wrought the perfect union with God, the union of the spiritual marriage.' A Spiritual Canticle, stanza xxvi. 1-3. Concept. ch. vi. (Minor Works of St. Teresa.)

^41:8 St. Matt. xx. 15: 'Alit non licet mihi quod volo, facere? an oculus tuus nequam est, quia ego bonus sum?'

^41:9 St. John ix. 2: 'Quis peccavit, hic, aut parentes ejus, ut caecus nasceretur?'

^42:10 Imitation, bk. II. ch. 1: 'Regnum Dei intra vos est.' Luke. xvii. 21. The Imitation is one of the books which according to St. Teresa's Constitutions, ( section 7) every prioress was bound to provide for her convent.

^43:11 Gen. xix. 26: 'Respiciensque uxor ejus post se, versa est in statuam salis.'

^43:12 Way of Perf. ch. xxi. 6; xxix. 4.

^44:13 St. John v. 5: 'Erat autem quidam homo ibi triginta et octo annos habens in infirmitate sua.'

^44:14 St. Matt. vi. 21: 'Ubi enim est thesaurus tuus ibi est et cor tuum.

^44:15 Many an ancient castle was provided with a bear-garden where rare animals were kept for the amusement of the inhabitants. This may have supplied the material for St. Teresa's comparison.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II.

DESCRIBES THE HIDEOUS APPEARANCE OF A SOUL IN MORTAL SIN AS REVEALED BY GOD TO SOME ONE: OFFERS A FEW REMARKS ON SELF-KNOWLEDGE: THIS CHAPTER IS USEFUL AS IT CONTAINS SOME POINTS REQUIRING ATTENTION. AN EXPLANATION OF THE MANSIONS.

1. Effects of mortal sin. 2. It prevents the soul's gaining merit. 3. The soul compared to a tree. 4. Disorder of the soul in mortal sin. 5. Vision of a sinful soul. 6. Profit of realizing these lessons. 7. Prayer. 8. Beauty of the Castle. 9. Self-knowledge 10. Gained by meditating on the divine perfections. 11. Advantages of such meditation. 12. Christ should be our model. 13. The devil entraps beginners. 14. Our strength must come from God. 15. Sin blinds the soul. 16. Worldliness. 17. The world in the cloister. 18. Assaults of the devil. 19. Examples of the devil's arts. 20. Perfection consists in charity. 21. Indiscreet zeal. 22. Danger of detraction.

1. BEFORE going farther, I wish you to consider the state to which mortal sin [*1] brings this magnificent and beautiful castle, this pearl of the East, this tree of life, planted beside the living waters of life [*2]

[p. 46]

which symbolize God Himself. No night can be so dark, no gloom nor blackness can compare to its obscurity. Suffice it to say that the sun in the centre of the soul, which gave it such splendour and beauty, is totally eclipsed, though the spirit is as fitted to enjoy God's presence as is the crystal to reflect the sun. [*3]

2. While the soul is in mortal sin nothing can profit it; none of its good works merit an eternal reward, since they do not proceed from God as their first principle, and by Him alone is our virtue real virtue. The soul separated from Him is no longer pleasing in His eyes, because by committing a mortal sin, instead of seeking to please God, it prefers to gratify the devil, the prince of darkness, and so comes to share his blackness. I knew a person to whom our Lord revealed the result of a mortal sin [*4] and who said she thought no one who realized its effects could ever commit it, but would suffer unimaginable torments to avoid it. This vision made her very desirous for all to grasp this truth, therefore I beg you, my daughters, to pray fervently to God for sinners, who live in blindness and do deeds of darkness.

3. In a state of grace the soul is like a well of limpid water, from which flow only streams of clearest crystal. Its works are pleasing both to God and man, rising from the River of Life, beside which it is rooted like a tree. Otherwise it would produce neither leaves nor fruit, for the waters of grace

[p. 47]

nourish it, keep it from withering from drought, and cause it to bring forth good fruit. But the soul by sinning withdraws from this stream of life, and growing beside a black and fetid pool, can produce nothing but disgusting and unwholesome fruit.

Notice that it is not the fountain and the brilliant sun which lose their splendour and beauty, for they are placed in the very centre of the soul and cannot be deprived of their lustre. The soul is like a crystal in the sunshine over which a thick black cloth has been thrown, so that however brightly the sun may shine the crystal can never reflect it.

4. O souls, redeemed by the Blood of Jesus Christ, take these things to heart; have mercy on yourselves! If you realize your pitiable condition, how can you refrain from trying to remove the darkness from the crystal of your souls? Remember, if death should take you now, you would never again enjoy the light of this Sun. O Jesus! how sad a sight must be a soul deprived of light! What a terrible state the chambers of this castle are in! How disorderly must be the senses--the inhabitants of the castle--the powers of the soul its magistrates, governors, and stewards--blind and uncontrolled as they are! In short, as the soil in which the tree is now planted is in the devil's domain, how can its fruit be anything but evil? A man of great spiritual insight once told me he was not so much surprised at such a soul's wicked deeds as astonished that it did not commit even worse sins. May God in His mercy keep us from such great evil, for nothing in this life merits the name of evil in comparison with

[p. 48]

this, which delivers us over to evil which is eternal.

5. This is what we must dread and pray God to deliver us from, for we are weakness itself, and unless He guards the city, in vain shall we labour to defend it. [*5] The person of whom I spoke [*6] said that she had learnt two things from the vision granted her. The first was, a great fear of offending God; seeing how terrible were the consequences, she constantly begged Him to preserve her from falling into sin. Secondly, it was a mirror to teach her humility, for she saw that nothing good in us springs from ourselves but comes from the waters of grace near which the soul remains like a tree planted beside a river, and from that Sun which gives life to our works. She realized this so vividly that on seeing any good deed performed by herself or by other people she at once turned to God as to its fountain head--without whose help she knew well we can do nothing--and broke out into songs of praise to Him. Generally she forgot all about herself and only thought of God when she did any meritorious action.

6. The time which has been spent in reading or writing on this subject will not have been lost if it has taught us these two truths; for though learned, clever men know them perfectly, women's wits are dull and need help in every way. Perhaps this is why our Lord has suggested these comparisons to me; may He give us grace to profit by them!

7. So obscure are these spiritual matters that to

[p. 49]

explain them an ignorant person like myself must say much that is superfluous, and even alien to the subject, before coming to the point. My readers must be patient with me, as I am with myself while writing what I do not understand; indeed, I often take up the paper like a dunce, not knowing what to say, nor how to begin. Doubtless there is need for me to do my best to explain these spiritual subjects to you, for we often hear how beneficial prayer is for our souls; our Constitutions oblige us to pray so many hours a day, yet tell us nothing of what part we ourselves can take in it and very little of the work God does in the soul by its means. [*7] It will be helpful, in setting it before you in various ways, to consider this heavenly edifice within us, so little understood by men, near as they often come to it. Our Lord gave me grace to understand something of such matters when I wrote on them before, yet I think I have more light now, especially on the more difficult questions. Unfortunately I am too ignorant to treat of such subjects without saying much that is already well known.

8. Now let us turn at last to our castle with its many mansions. You must not think of a suite of rooms placed in succession, but fix your eyes on the keep, the court inhabited by the King. [*8] Like the kernel of the palmito, [*9] from which several rinds

[p. 50]

must be removed before coming to the eatable part, this principal chamber is surrounded by many others. However large, magnificent, and spacious you imagine this castle to be, you cannot exaggerate it; the capacity of the soul is beyond all our understanding, and the Sun within this palace enlightens every part of it.

9. A soul which gives itself to prayer, either much or little, should on no account be kept within narrow bounds. Since God has given it such great dignity, permit it to wander at will through the rooms of the castle, from the lowest to the highest. Let it not force itself to remain for very long in the same mansion, even that of self-knowledge. Mark well, however, that self-knowledge is indispensable, even for those whom God takes to dwell in the same mansion with Himself. Nothing else, however elevated, perfects the soul which must never seek to forget its own nothingness. Let humility be always at work, like the bee at the honeycomb, or all will be lost. But, remember, the bee leaves its hive to fly in search of flowers and the soul should sometimes cease thinking of itself to rise in meditation on the grandeur and majesty of its God. It will learn its own baseness better thus than by self-contemplation, and will be freer from the reptiles which enter the first room where self-knowledge is acquired. Although it is a great grace from God to practise self-examination, yet 'too much is as bad as too little,' as they say; believe me, by God's help, we shall advance more by contemplating the

[p. 51]

[paragraph continues] Divinity than by keeping our eyes fixed on ourselves, poor creatures of earth that we are.

10. I do not know whether I have put this clearly; self-knowledge is of such consequence that I would not have you careless of it, though you may be lifted to heaven in prayer, because while on earth nothing is more needful than humility. Therefore, I repeat, not only a good way, but the best of all ways, is to endeavour to enter first by the room where humility is practised, which is far better than at once rushing on to the others. This is the right road;--if we know how easy and safe it is to walk by it, why ask for wings with which to fly? Let us rather try to learn how to advance quickly. I believe we shall never learn to know ourselves except by endeavouring to know God, for, beholding His greatness we are struck by our own baseness, His purity shows our foulness, and by meditating on His humility we find how very far we are from being humble.

11. Two advantages are gained by this practice. First, it is clear that white looks far whiter when placed near something black, and on the contrary, black never looks so dark as when seen beside something white. Secondly, our understanding and will become more noble and capable of good in every way when we turn from ourselves to God: it is very injurious never to raise our minds above the mire of our own faults. I described how murky and fetid are the streams that spring from the source of a soul in mortal sin. [*10] Thus (although the case is

[p. 52]

not really the same, God forbid! this is only a comparison), while we are continually absorbed in contemplating the weakness of our earthly nature, the springs of our anions will never flow free from the mire of timid, weak, and cowardly thoughts, such as: 'I wonder whether people are noticing me or not! If I follow this course, will harm come to me? Dare I begin this work? Would it not be presumptuous? Is it right for any one as faulty as myself to speak on sublime spiritual subjects? [*11] Will not people think too well of me, if I make myself singular? Extremes are bad, even in virtue; sinful as I am I shall only fall the lower. Perhaps I shall fail and be a source of scandal to good people; such a person as I am has no need of peculiarities.'

12. Alas, my daughters, what loss the devil must have caused to many a soul by such thoughts as these! It thinks such ideas and many others of the same sort I could mention arise from humility. This comes from not understanding our own nature; self-knowledge becomes so warped that, unless we take our thoughts off ourselves, I am not surprised that these and many worse fears should threaten us. Therefore I maintain, my daughters, that we should fix our eyes on Christ our only good, and on His saints; there we shall learn true humility, and our minds will be ennobled, so that self-knowledge will not make us base and cowardly. Although only the first, this mansion contains great riches and such treasures that if the soul only manages to

[p. 53]

elude the reptiles dwelling here, it cannot fail to advance farther. Terrible are the wiles and strata-gems the devil uses to hinder people from realizing their weakness and detecting his snares.

13. From personal experience I could give you much information as to what happens in these first mansions. I will only say that you must not imagine there are only a few, but a number of rooms, for souls enter them by many different ways, and always with a good intention. The devil is so angry at this that he keeps legions of evil spirits hidden in each room to stop the progress of Christians, whom, being ignorant of this, he entraps in a thousand ways. He cannot so easily deceive souls which dwell nearer to the King as he can beginners still absorbed in the world, immersed in its pleasures, and eager for its honours and distinctions. As the vassals of their souls, the senses and powers bestowed on them by God, are weak, such people are easily vanquished, although desirous not to offend God.

14. Those conscious of being in this state must as often as possible have recourse to His Majesty, taking His Blessed Mother and the saints for their advocates to do battle for them, because we creatures possess little strength for self-defence. Indeed in every state of life all our help must come from God; may He in His mercy grant it us, Amen! What a miserable life we lead! As I have spoken more fully in other writings [*12] on the ill that results from ignoring the need of humility and self-knowledge, I will treat

[p. 54]

no more about it here, my daughters, although it is of the first importance. God grant that what I have said may be useful to you.

15 You must notice that the light which comes from the King's palace hardly shines at all in these first mansions; although not as gloomy and black as the soul in mortal sin, yet they are in semi-darkness, and their inhabitants see scarcely anything. I cannot explain myself; I do not mean that this is the fault of the mansions themselves, but that the number of snakes, vipers, and venomous reptiles from outside the castle prevent souls entering them from seeing the light. They resemble a person entering a chamber full of brilliant sunshine, with eyes clogged and half closed with dust. Though the room itself is light, he cannot see because of his self-imposed impediment. In the same way, these fierce and wild beasts blind the eyes of the beginner, so that he sees nothing but them.

16. Such, it appears to me, is the soul which, though not in a state of mortal sin, is so worldly and preoccupied with earthly riches, honours, and affairs, that as I said, even if it sincerely wishes to enter into itself and enjoy the beauties of the castle, it is prevented by these distractions and seems unable to overcome so many obstacles. It is most important to withdraw from all unnecessary cares and business, as far as compatible with the duties of one's state of life, in order to enter the second mansion. This is so essential, that unless done immediately I think it impossible for any one ever to reach the principal room, or even to remain

[p. 55]

where he is without great risk of losing what is already gained; otherwise, although he is inside the castle, he will find it impossible to avoid being bitten some time or other by some of the very venomous creatures surrounding him.

17. What then would become of a religious like ourselves, my daughters, if, after having escaped from all these impediments, and having entered much farther into the more secret mansion, she should, by her own fault, return to all this turmoil? Through her sins, many other people on whom God had bestowed great graces would culpably relapse into their wretched state. In our convents we are free from these exterior evils; please God our minds may be as free from them, and may He deliver us from such ills.

18. Do not trouble yourselves, my daughters, with cares which do not concern you. You must notice that the struggle with the demons continues through nearly all the mansions of this castle. True, in some of them, the guards, which, as I explained, are the powers of the soul, have strength for the combat, but we must be keenly on the watch against the devils's arts, lest he deceive us in the form of an angel of light. He creeps in gradually, in numberless ways, and does us much harm, though we do not discover it until too late. [*13]

19. As I said elsewhere, [*14] he works like a file, secretly and silently wearing its way: I will give you some examples to show how he begins his wiles.

[p. 56]

[paragraph continues] For instance: a nun has such a longing for penance as to feel no peace unless she is tormenting herself in some way. [*15] This is good in itself; but suppose that the Prioress has forbidden her to practise any mortifications without special leave, and the sister thinking that, in such a meritorious cause, she may venture to disobey, secretly leads such a life that she loses her health and cannot even fulfil the requirements of her rule--you see how this show of good ends. Another nun is very zealous about religious perfection; this is very right, but may cause her to think every small fault she sees in her sisters a serious crime, and to watch constantly whether they do anything wrong, that she may run to the Prioress to accuse them of it. At the same time, may be she never notices her own shortcomings because of her great zeal about other people's religious observance, while perhaps her sisters, not seeing her intention but only knowing of the watch she keeps on them, do not take her behaviour in good part.

20. The devil's chief aim here is to cool the charity and lessen the mutual affection of the nuns, which would injure them seriously. Be sure, my daughters, that true perfection consists in the love of God and our neighbour, and the better we keep both these commandments, the more perfect we shall be. The sole object of our Rule and Constitutions is to help us to observe these two laws.

21. Indiscreet zeal about others must not be indulged in; it may do us much harm; let each one look to herself. However, as I have spoken fully

[p. 57]

on this subject elsewhere, [*16] I will not enlarge on it here, and will only beg you to remember the necessity of this mutual affection. Our souls may lose their peace and even disturb other people's if we are always criticizing trivial actions which often are not real defects at all, but we construe them wrongly through ignorance of their motives. See how much it costs to attain perfection! Sometimes the devil tempts nuns in this way about the Prioress, which is still more dangerous. Great prudence is then required, for if she disobeys the Rule or Constitutions the matter must not always be overlooked, but should be mentioned to her; [*17] if, after this, she does not amend, the Superior of the Order should be informed of it. It is true charity to speak in this case, as it would be if we saw our sisters commit a grave fault; to keep silence for fear that speech would be a temptation against charity, would be that very temptation itself. [*18]

22. However, I must warn you seriously not to talk to each other about such things, lest the devil deceive you. He would gain greatly by your doing so, because it would lead to the habit of detraction; rather, as I said, state the matter to those whose duty it is to remedy it. Thank God our custom

[p. 58]

here of keeping almost perpetual silence gives little opportunity for such conversations, still, it is well to stand ever on our guard.

Footnotes

^45:1 Life, ch. xxxviii. 31; ch. xl. 15.

^45:2 Ps. i. 3: 'Et erit tamquam lignum quod plantatum eat secus decursus aquarum.'

^46:3 Way of Perf. ch. xxviii. 9.

^46:4 In this as in most other cases when the Saint speaks of 'a person she knows,' she means herself. Life, ch. xl, 15.

^48:5 cxxvi. 1: 'Nisi Dominus custodierit civitatem, frustra vigilat qui custodit eam.'

^48:6 Life, ch. xxxviii. 33; ch. xl. 15, 16.

^49:7 Life, ch. x. 2 sqq. Constitut. 2, 6.

^49:8 Way of Perf.. ch. xxviii. 1.

^49:9 The palmito here referred to is not a palm, but a shrub about four feet high and very dense with leaves, resembling palm leaves. The poorer classes and principally children dig it up by the roots, which they peel of its many layers until a sort of kernel is disclosed, which is[p. 50] eaten, not without relish, and is somewhat like a filbert in taste. See St. John of the Cross, Accent of Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch, xiv, 3.

^51:10 Supra,  section 3.

^52:11 Life, ch. viii. 6, x. 4, xxiii. 3-5. Way of Perf. ch. xxxix. 1.

^53:12 Life ch. xiii. 23. Way of Perf. ch. x. 4. Castle, M. iii. ch. ii. 8. Concep. ch. ii. 20. Const. 21.

^55:13 Life ch. xxxi. 23.

^55:14 No doubt the Saint often used this excellent comparison in her verbal instructions, but it occurs nowhere else in her writings.

^56:15 Way of Perf. ch. x. 5; xxxix. 4; Rel. iii. 12.

^57:16 The Saint must frequently have spoken on the subject, but she never treated it more fully than in this place. Way of Perf. ch. xii. 7. Life, ch. xiii. 11, 14 sqq. Visitation of convents.

^57:17 Way of Perfection, ch. ii. 3. Visit. 20-22, 34, 36.

^57:18 'It is terrible to think what harm a Prioress can do! For although the Sisters witness things which scandalize them (of which there are plenty here!), yet they think it would be sinning against obedience to see any harm in them.' (Letter to Father Gracian, written at Malagon at the beginning of December, 5579. Letters, Vol. III.)

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 59]

  

THE SECOND MANSIONS

  

ONLY CHAPTER

TREATS OF THE GREAT IMPORTANCE OF PERSEVERANCE IN ORDER TO ENTER THE LAST MANSIONS, AND OF THE FIERCE WAR THE DEVIL WAGES AGAINST US. HOW ESSENTIAL IT IS TO TAKE THE RIGHT PATH FROM THE VERY COMMENCEMENT OF OUR JOURNEY. A METHOD OF ACTION WHICH HAS PROVED VERY EFFICACIOUS.

1. Souls in the second mansions. 2. Their state. 3. Their sufferings. 4. They cannot get rid of their imperfections. 5. How God calls these souls. 6. Perseverance is essential. 7. Temptations of the devil. 8. Delusion of earthly joys. 9. God alone to be loved. 10. Reasons for continuing the journey. 11. War fare of the devil. 12. Importance of choice of friends. 13. Valour required. 14. Presumption of expecting spiritual consolations at first. 15. In the Cross is strength. 16. Our falls should raise us higher. 17. Confidence and perseverance. 18. Recollection. 19. Why we must practise prayer. 20. Meditation kindles love.

1. Now let us consider which are the souls that enter the second mansions, and what they do there: I do not wish to enlarge on this subject, having already treated it very fully elsewhere, [*1] for I could not avoid repeating myself, as my memory is very bad. If I could state my ideas in another form they would not weary you, for we never tire of reading books on this subject, numerous as they are.

[p. 60]

2. In this part of the castle are found souls which. have begun to practise prayer; they realize the importance of their not remaining in the first mansions, yet often lack determination to quit their present condition by avoiding occasions of sin, which is a very perilous state to be in.

3. However, it is a great grace that they should sometimes make good their escape from the vipers and poisonous creatures around them and should understand the need of avoiding them. In some way these souls suffer a great deal more than those in the first mansions, although not in such danger, as they begin to understand their peril and there are great hopes of their entering farther into the castle. I say that they suffer a great deal more, for those in an earlier stage are like deaf-mutes and are not so distressed at being unable to speak, while the others, who can hear but cannot talk, find it much harder. At the same time, it is better not to be deaf, and a decided advantage to hear what is said to us.

4. These souls hear our Lord calling them, for as they approach nearer to where His Majesty dwells He proves a loving Neighbour, though they may still be engaged in the amusements and business, the pleasures and vanities of this world. While in this state we continually fall into sin and rise again, for the creatures amongst whom we dwell are so venomous, so vicious, and so dangerous, that it is almost impossible to avoid being tripped up by them. Yet such are the pity and compassion of this Lord of ours, so desirous is He that we should

[p. 61]

seek Him and enjoy His company, that in one way or another He never ceases calling us to Him. So sweet is His voice, that the poor soul is disconsolate at being unable to follow His bidding at once, and therefore, as I said, suffers more than if it could not hear Him.

5. I do not mean that divine communications and inspirations received in this mansion are the same as those I shall describe later on; God here speaks to souls through words uttered by pious people, by sermons or good books, and in many other such ways. Sometimes He calls souls by means of sickness or troubles, or by some truth He teaches them during prayer, for tepid as they may be in seeking Him, yet God holds them very dear.

6. Do not think lightly, sisters, of this first grace, nor be downcast if you have not responded immediately to Our Lord's voice, for His Majesty is willing to wait for us many a day and even many a year, especially when He sees perseverance and good desires in our hearts. Perseverance is the first essential; with this we are sure to profit greatly. However, the devils now fiercely assault the soul in a thousand different ways: it suffers more than ever, because formerly it was mute and deaf, or at least could hear very little, and offered but feeble resistance, like one who has almost lost all hope of victory.

7. Here, however, the understanding being more vigilant and the powers more on the alert, we cannot avoid hearing the fighting and cannonading around us. For now the devils set on us the reptiles, that is to say, thoughts about the world and its joys

[p. 62]

which they picture as unending; they remind us of the high esteem men held us in, of our friends and relations; they tell us how the penances which souls in this mansion always begin to wish to perform would injure our health: in fine, the evil spirits place a thousand impediments in the way.

8. O Jesus! What turmoil the devils cause in the poor soul! How unhappy it feels, not knowing whether to go forward or to return to the first mansion! On the other hand, reason shows it the delusion of overrating worldly things, while faith teaches what alone can satisfy its cravings. Memory reminds the soul how all earthly joys end, recalling the death of those who lived at ease; how some died suddenly and were soon forgotten, how others, once so prosperous, are now buried beneath the ground and men pass by the graves where they lie, the prey of worms, [*2] while the mind recalls many other such incidents.

9. The will inclines to love Our Lord and longs to make some return to Him Who is so amiable, and Who has given so many proofs of His love, especially by His constant presence with the soul, which this faithful Lover never quits, ever accompanying it and giving it life and being. The understanding

[p. 63]

aids by showing that however many years life might last, no one could ever wish for a better friend than God; that the world is full of falsehood, and that the worldly pleasures pictured by the devil to the mind were but troubles and cares and annoyances in disguise.

10. Reason convinces the soul that as outside its interior castle are found neither peace nor security, it should cease to seek another home abroad, its own being full of riches that it can enjoy at will. Besides, it is not every one who, like itself, possesses all he needs within his own dwelling, and above all, such a Host, Who will give it all it can desire, unless, like the prodigal son, it chooses to go astray and feed with the swine. [*3] Surely these arguments are strong enough to defeat the devil's wiles! But, O my God, how the force of worldly habits and the example of others who practise them ruin everything! Our faith is so dead that we trust less to its teaching than to what is visible, though, indeed, we see that worldly lives bring nothing but unhappiness. All this results from those venomous thoughts I described, which, unless we are very careful, will deform the soul as the sting of a viper poisons and swells the body.

11. When this happens, great care is evidently needed to cure it, and only God's signal mercy prevents its resulting in death. Indeed, the soul passes through severe trials at this time, especially when the devil perceives from a person's character and behaviour that she is likely to make very great

[p. 64]

progress, for then all hell will league together to force her to turn back. O my Lord! what need there is here that, by Thy mercy, Thou shouldst prevent the soul from being deluded into forsaking the good begun! Enlighten it to see that its welfare consists in perseverance in the right way, and in the withdrawing from bad company.

12. It is of the utmost importance for the beginner to associate with those who lead a spiritual life, [*4] and not only with those in the same mansion as herself, but with others who have travelled farther into the castle, who will aid her greatly and draw her to join them. The soul should firmly resolve never to submit to defeat, for if the devil sees it staunchly determined to lose life and comfort and all that he can offer, rather than return to the first mansion, he will the sooner leave it alone.

13. Let the Christian be valiant; let him not be like those who lay down to drink from the brook when they went to battle (I do not remember when). [*5] Let him resolve to go forth to combat with the host of demons, and be convinced that there is no better weapon than the cross. I have already said, [*6] yet it is of such importance that I repeat it here: let no one think on starting of the reward to be reaped: this would be a very ignoble way of commencing such a large and stately building. If built on sand it would soon fall down. [*7] Souls

[p. 65]

who acted thus would continually suffer from discouragement and temptations, for in these mansions no manna rains; [*8] farther on, the soul is pleased with all that comes, because it desires nothing but what God wills.

14. What a farce it is! Here are we, with a thousand obstacles, drawbacks, and imperfections within ourselves, our virtues so newly born that they have scarcely the strength to act (and God grant that they exist at all!) yet we are not ashamed to expect sweetness in prayer and to complain of feeling dryness. [*9]

15. Do not act thus, sisters; embrace the cross your Spouse bore on His shoulders; know that your motto should be: 'Most happy she who suffers most if it be for Christ!' [*10] All else should be looked upon as secondary: if our Lord give it you, render Him grateful thanks. You may imagine you would be resolute in enduring external trials if God gave you interior consolations: His Majesty knows best what is good for us; it is not for us to advise Him how to treat us, for He has the right to tell us that we know not what we ask. [*11] Remember, it is of the greatest importance--the sole aim of one beginning to practise prayer should be to endure trials, and to resolve and strive to the utmost of her power to conform her own will to the will of

[p. 66]

[paragraph continues] God. [*12] Be certain that in this consists all the greatest perfection to be attained in the spiritual life, as I will explain later. She who practises this most perfectly will receive from God the highest reward and is the farthest advanced on the right road. Do not imagine that we have need of a cabalistic formula or any other occult or mysterious thing to attain it our whole welfare consists in doing the will of God. If we start with the false principle of wishing God to follow our will and to lead us in the way we think best, upon what firm foundation can this spiritual edifice rest?

16. Let us endeavour to do our best: beware of the poisonous reptiles--that is to say, the bad thoughts and aridities which are often permitted by God to assail and torment us so that we cannot repel them. Indeed, perchance we feel their sting! He allows this to teach us to be more on our guard in the future and to see whether we grieve much at offending Him. Therefore if you occasionally lapse into sin, do not lose heart and cease trying to advance, for God will draw good even out of our falls, like the merchant who sells theriac, who first takes poison, then the theriac, to prove the power of his elixir. [*13] This combat would suffice to teach us to amend our habits if we realized our failings in no other way, and would show us the injury we receive from a life of dissipation. Can any evil be greater than that we find at home? What peace can we hope to find elsewhere, if we have none

[p. 67]

within us? What friends or kindred can be so close and intimate as the powers of our soul, which, whether we will or no, must ever bear us company? These seem to wage war on us as if they knew the harm our vices had wrought them. 'Peace, peace be unto you,' my sisters, as our Lord said, and many a time proclaimed to His Apostles. [*14] Believe me, if we neither possess nor strive to obtain this peace at home, we shall never find it abroad.

17. By the blood which our Lord shed for us, I implore those who have not yet begun to enter into themselves, to stop this warfare: I beg those already started in the right path, not to let the combat turn them back from it. Let them reflect that a relapse is worse than a fall, and see what ruin it would bring. They should confide in God's mercy, trusting nothing in themselves; then they will see how His Majesty will lead them from one mansion to another, and will set them in a place where these wild beasts can no more touch or annoy them, but will be entirely at their mercy and merely objects of ridicule. Then, even in this life, they will enjoy a far greater happiness than they are able even to desire.

18. As I said at the beginning of this work, I have explained elsewhere [*15] how you should behave when the devil thus disturbs you. I also told you that the habit of recollection is not to be gained by force of arms, but with calmness, which will enable you to practise it for a longer space of time. [*16]

[p. 68]

[paragraph continues] I will say no more now, except that I think it very helpful for those of you who are beginners to consult persons experienced in such matters, lest you imagine that you are injuring yourselves by leaving your prayer to perform any necessary duties. This is not the case; our Lord will direct such things to our profit, although we may have no one to counsel us. [*17] The only remedy for having given up a habit of recollection is to recommence it, otherwise the soul will continue to lose it more and more every day, and God grant it may realize its danger.

19. You may think, that if it is so very injurious to desist, it would have been better never to have begun, and to have remained outside the castle. But, as I began by saying, and as God Himself declares: 'He that loves danger shall perish by it,' [*18] and the door by which we must enter this castle is prayer. Remember, we must get to heaven, and it would be madness to think we could do so without sometimes retiring into our souls so as to know ourselves, or thinking of our failings and of what we owe to God, or frequently imploring His mercy. Our Lord also says, 'No man cometh to the Father but by Me' [*19] (I am not sure whether this quotation is correct, but I think so), and, 'He that seeth Me seeth the Father also.' [*20]

20. If we never look up at Him and reflect on what we owe Him for having died for us, I do not understand how we can know Him, or perform

[p. 69]

good deeds in His service. What value is there in faith without works? and what are they worth if they are not united to the merits of Jesus Christ, our only good? What would incite us to love our Lord unless we thought of Him? May He give us grace to understand how much we cost Him; that 'the servant is not above his lord' [*21]; that we must toil for Him if we would enjoy His glory; and prayer is a necessity to prevent us from constantly falling into temptation. [*22]

Footnotes

^59:1 Life, ch. xi-xiii. Way of Perf. ch. xx.-xxix.

^62:2 'How many, thinking to live long, have been deceived and unexpectedly have been snatched away! How often hast thou heard that such a one was slain by the sword; another drowned; another, falling from on high, broke his neck; this man died at the table; that other came to his death while he was at play. . . . Thus death is the end of all; and man's life passeth suddenly like a shadow' (Imitation, bk. 1. ch. xxiii. 7). The edition of the Imitation known to St. Teresa under the title of Contemptus Mundi was translated by Luis de Granada, printed at Seville in 1536, at Lisbon in 1542, and at Alcala in 1548. See Life, ch. xxxix. 21, note.

^63:3 St. Luke xv. 16: 'Et cupiebat implere ventrem suum de siliquis quas porci manducabant.'

^64:4 Life, ch. vii. 33-37; xvi. 1 2; XXX. 6. Way of Perfection, ch. vi. 1; Vii. 4.

^64:5 With Gedeon. Jud. vii. 5: 'Qui lingua lambuerint aquas, sicut solent canes lambere, separabis eos seorsum.'

^64:6 Life, ch. xi 16.

^64:7 St. Matt. vii. 26, 27: 'Qui aedificavit domum suam super arenam . . . [p. 65] et fuit ruina illius magna.'

^65:8 Ps. lxxvii. 24: 'Pluit illis manna ad manducandum.' Way of Perf. ch. x. 4.

^65:9 Life, ch. xii. 5.

^65:10 Way of Perf. ch. xvii. 6; xxiii. 1.

^65:11 St. Matt. xx. 22: 'Nescitis quid petatis.'

^66:12 Way of Perf. ch. xvi. 2. Found. ch. v. 2, 3. Life, ch. iv. II; xi. 20.

^66:13 A drug greatly in vogue until recent times. It was composed of all the essences supposed to contain life-giving and life-preserving qualities of animals and plants.

^67:14 St. Luke xxiv. 36. St. John xx. 19.

^67:15 Life, ch. xi. and xix. 8. Way of Perfection, ch. xxiii. 3.

^67:16 Way of Perf. ch. xix. 3.

^68:17 Way of Perf. ch. xxiii. 3.

^68:18 Ecclus. iii. 27: 'Qui amat periculum, in illo peribit.'

^68:19 St. John xiv. 6: 'Nemo venit ad Patrem, nisi per Me.'

^68:20 St. John xiv. 9. 'Qui videt me, videt et Patrem.'

^69:21 St. Matt. x. 24: 'Nec servus super dominum suum.'

^69:22 St. Matt. xxvi. 41: 'Orate ut non intretis in tentationem.'

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 70]

  

THE THIRD MANSIONS

  

CHAPTER I.

TREATS OF THE INSECURITY OF LIFE IN THIS EXILE, HOWEVER HIGH WE MAY BE RAISED, AND OF HOW WE MUST ALWAYS WALK IN FEAR. CONTAINS SOME GOOD POINTS.

1. Souls in the Third Mansions. 2. Insecurity of this life. 3. Our danger of falling from grace. 4. The Saint bewails her past life. 5. Our Lady's patronage. 6. Fear necessary even for religious. 7. St. Teresa's contrition. 8. Characteristics of those in the Third Mansions. 9. The rich young man in the Gospel. 10. Reason of aridities in prayer. 11. Humility. 12. Tepidity. 13. We must give all to God. 14. Our debt. 15. Consolations and aridities.

1. As for those who, by the mercy of God, have vanquished in these combats and persevered until they reached the third mansions, what can we say to them but 'Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord'? [*1] It is no small favour from God that I should be able to translate this verse into Spanish so as to explain its meaning, considering how dense I usually am in such matters. We may well call these souls blessed, for, as far as we can tell, unless they turn back in their course they are on the safe road to salvation. Now, my sisters, you see how important it is for them to conquer in their former struggles, for I am convinced that our Lord will

[p. 71]

henceforth never cease to keep them in security of conscience, which is no small boon.

2. I am wrong in saying 'security,' for there is no security in this life; understand that in such cases I always imply: 'If they do not cease to continue as they have begun.' What misery to live in this world! We are like men whose enemies are at the door, who must not lay aside their arms, even while sleeping or eating, and are always in dread lest the foe should enter the fortress by some breach in the walls. O my Lord and my all! How canst Thou wish us to prize such a wretched existence? We could not desist from longing and begging Thee to take us from it, were it not for the hope of losing it for Thy sake or devoting it entirely to Thy service--and above all. because we know it is Thy will that we should live. Since it is so, 'Let us die with Thee!' [*2] as St. Thomas said, for to be away from Thee is but to die again and again, haunted as we are by the dread of losing Thee for ever!

3. This is why I say, daughters, that we ought to ask our Lord as our boon to grant us one day to dwell in safety with the Saints, for with such fears, what pleasure can she enjoy whose only pleasure is to please God? Remember, many Saints have felt this as we do, and were even far more fervent, yet fell into grave sin, and we cannot be sure that God would stretch forth His hand to raise us from sin again to do such penance as they performed. This applies to extraordinary grace. [*3] Truly, my

[p. 72]

daughters, I feel such terror as I tell you this, that I know not how to write it, nor even how to go on living, when I reflect upon it as I very often do. Beg of His Majesty, my daughters, to abide within me, for otherwise, what security could I feel, after a life so badly spent as mine has been?

4. Do not grieve at knowing this. I have often seen you troubled when I spoke about it, for you wish that my past had been a very holy one, in which you are right--indeed, I wish the same myself. But what can be done, now that I have wasted it entirely through my own fault? I have no right to complain that God withheld the aid I needed to fulfil your wishes. It is impossible for me to write this without tears and great shame, when I see that I am explaining these matters to those capable of teaching me. What a hard task has obedience laid, upon me! God grant that, as I do it for Him, it may be of some service to you; therefore beg Him to pardon me for my miserable presumption.

5. His Majesty knows that I have nothing to rely upon but His mercy; as I cannot cancel the past, I have no other remedy but to flee to Him, and to confide in the merits of His Son and of His Virgin Mother, whose habit, unworthy as I am, I wear as you do also. Praise Him, then, my daughters, for making you truly daughters of our Lady, so that you need not blush for my wickedness as you have such a good Mother. Imitate her; think how great she must be and what a blessing it is for you to have her for a patroness, since my sins and evil

[p. 73]

character have brought no tarnish on the lustre of our holy Order.

6. Still I must give you one warning: be not too confident because you are nuns and the daughters of such a Mother. David was very holy, yet you know what Solomon became. [*4] Therefore do not rely on your enclosure, on your penitential life, nor on your continual exercise of prayer and constant communion with God, nor trust in having left the world or in the idea that you hold its ways in horror. All this is good, but is not enough, as I have already said, to remove all fear; therefore meditate on this text and often recall it: 'Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord.' [*5]

7. I do not recollect what I was saying, and have digressed very much: for when I think of myself my mind cannot soar to higher things but is like a bird with broken wings; so I will leave this subject for the present.

8. To return to what I began to explain about the souls which have entered the third mansions. God has shown them no small favour, but a very great one, in enabling them to pass through the first difficulties. Thanks to His mercy I believe there are many such people in the world: they are very desirous not to offend His Majesty even by venial sins, they love penance and spend hours in meditation, they employ their time well, exercise themselves in works of charity to their neighbours, are well-ordered in their conversation and dress,

[p. 74]

and those who own a household govern it well. This is certainly to be desired, and there appears no reason to forbid their entrance to the last mansions; nor will our Lord deny it them if they desire it, for this is the right disposition for receiving all His favours.

9. O Jesus! can any one declare that he does not desire this great blessing, especially after he has passed through the chief difficulties? No; no one can! We all say we desire it, but there is need of more than that for the Lord to possess entire dominion over the soul. It is not enough to say so, any more than it was enough for the young man when our Lord told him what he must do if he desired to be perfect. [*6] Since I began to speak of these dwelling-rooms I have him constantly before my mind, for we are exactly like him; this very frequently produces the great dryness we feel in prayer, though sometimes it proceeds from other causes as well. I am not speaking of certain interior sufferings which give intolerable pain to many devout souls through no fault of their own; from these trials, however, our Lord always delivers them with much profit to themselves. I also except people who suffer from melancholy and other infirmities. But in these cases, as in all others, we must leave aside the judgments of God.

10. I hold that these effects usually result from the first cause I mentioned; such souls know that nothing would induce them to commit a sin (many of them would not even commit a venial sin

[p. 75]

advertently), and that they employ their life and riches well. They cannot, therefore, patiently endure to be excluded from the presence of our King, Whose vassals they consider themselves, as indeed they are. An earthly king may have many subjects yet all do not enter his court. Enter then, enter, my daughters, into your interior; pass beyond the thought of your own petty works, which are no more, nor even as much, as Christians are bound to perform: let it suffice that you are God's servants, do not pursue so much as to catch nothing. [*7] Think of the saints, who have entered the Divine Presence, and you will see the difference between them and ourselves.

11. Do not ask for what you do not deserve, nor should we ever think, however much we may have done for God, that we merit the reward of the saints, for we have offended Him. Oh, humility, humility! I know not why, but I am always tempted to think that persons who complain so much of aridities must be a little wanting in this virtue. However, I am not speaking of severe interior sufferings, which are far worse than a want of devotion.

12. Let us try ourselves, my sisters, or let our Lord try us; He knows well how to do so (although we often pretend to misunderstand Him). We will now speak of these well-ordered souls. Let us consider what they do for God and we shall see at once what little right we have to murmur against His Majesty. If we turn our backs on Him and go away sorrowfully like the youth in the Gospel [*8]

[p. 76]

when He tells us what to do to be perfect, what can God do? for He must proportion the reward to our love for Him. This love, my daughters, must not be the fabric of our imagination; we must prove it by our works. Yet do not suppose that our Lord has need of any works of ours; He only expels us to manifest our goodwill. [*9]

13. It seems to us we have done everything by taking the religious habit of our own will, and renouncing worldly things and all our possessions for God (although they may have been but the nets of St. Peter, [*10] yet they seemed much to us, for they were our all). This is an excellent disposition: if we continue in it and do not return, even in desire, to the company of the reptiles of the first rooms, doubtless, by persevering in this poverty and detachment of soul, we shall obtain all for which we strive. But, mark this--it must be on one condition--that we 'hold ourselves for unprofitable servants,' [*11] as we are told either by St. Paul or by Christ, and that we do not consider that our Lord is bound to grant us any favours, but that, as we have received more from Him, we are the deeper in His debt.

14.. How little is all we can do for so generous a God, Who died for us, Who created us, Who gives us being, that we should not think ourselves happy to be able to acquit ourselves of part of the debt we owe Him for having served us, without asking Him for fresh mercies and favours? I am loth to

[p. 77]

use this expression, yet so it is, for He did nothing else during the whole time He lived in this world but serve us.

15. Think well my daughters, over some of the points I have treated, although confusedly, for I do not know how to explain them better. Our Lord will make you understand them, that you may reap humility from your dryness, instead of the disquietude the devil strives to cause by it. I believe that where true humility exists, although God should never bestow consolations, yet He gives a peace and resignation which make the soul happier than are others with sensible devotion. These consolations, as you have read, are often given by the Divine Majesty to the weakest souls who, I suppose would not exchange them for the fortitude of Christians serving God in aridities: we love consolations better than the cross! Do Thou, O Lord, Who knowest all truth, so prove us that we may know ourselves.

Footnotes

^70:1 Ps. cxi: 1. 'Beatus vir qui timet Dominum.'

^71:2 St. John xi. 16: 'Eamus et nos ut moriamur cum eo.'

^71:3 These last words, in the margin, but in the handwriting of the Saint, were scored through by one of the censors, but Fr. Luis de Leon wrote [p. 72] underneath, (as he did in other cases) 'Nothing to be crossed out.'

^73:4 St. Teresa wrote 'Solomon'; Father Gracian corrected 'Absalom,' and Fr. Luis de Leon restored the original text.

^73:5 Ps. cxi. 1.

^74:6 Matt. xix. 21.

^75:7 Proverbially, like 'having too many irons in the fire.'

^75:8 St. Mark. x. 22. Way of Perf. ch. xvii. 5.

^76:9 Rel. ix. 15.

^76:10 St. Matt. iv. 20: 'Relictis retibus secuti sunt eum.'

^76:11 St. Luke xvii. 10: 'Servi inutiles sumus: quod debuimus facere fecimus.'

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 78]

  

CHAPTER II.

CONTINUES THE SAME SUBJECT AND SPEAKS OF ARIDITIES IN PRAYER AND THEIR RESULTS: OF THE NECESSITY OF TRYING OURSELVES AND HOW OUR LORD PROVES THOSE WHO ARE IN THESE MANSIONS.

1. Imperfections of dwellers in the first three mansions. 2. Our trials show us our weakness. 3. Humility learnt by our faults. 4. Love of money. 5. Liberty of spirit. 6. On bearing contempt. 7. Detachment proved by trials. 8. Virtue and humility are the essentials. 9. Perfection requires detachment. 10. We should try to make rapid progress. 11. Leave our cares in God's hands. 12. Humility more necessary than corporal penances. 13. Consolations rarely received until the fourth mansions. 14. Advantages of hearing of them. 15. Perfection consists in love, not in reward. 16. St. Teresa's joy at seeing other souls favoured. 17. These graces should be striven for. 18. Obedience and direction, 19. Misguided zeal for others.

1. I HAVE known some, in fact, I may say numerous souls, who have reached this state, and for many years lived, apparently, a regular and well-ordered life, both of body and mind. It would seem that they must have gained the mastery over this world, or at least be extremely detached from it, yet if His Majesty sends very moderate trials they become so disturbed and disheartened as not only to astonish but to make me anxious about them. Advice is useless; having practised virtue for so long they

[p. 79]

think themselves capable of teaching it, and believe that they have abundant reason to feel miserable.

2. The only way to help them is to compassionate their troubles; [*1] indeed, one cannot but feel sorry at seeing people in such an unhappy state. They must not be argued with, for they are convinced they suffer only for God's sake, and cannot be made to understand they are acting imperfectly, which is a further error in persons so far advanced. No wonder that they should feel these trials for a time, but I think they ought speedily to overcome their concern about such matters. God, wishing His elect to realize their own misery, often temporarily withdraws His favours: no more is needed to prove to us in a very short time what we really are. [*2]

3. Souls soon learn in this way; they perceive their faults very clearly, and sometimes the discovery of how quickly they are overcome by but slight earthly trials is more painful than the subtraction of God's sensible favours. I consider that God thus shows them great mercy, for though their behaviour may be faulty, yet they gain greatly in humility. Not so with the people of whom I first spoke; they believe their conduct is saintly, and wish others to agree with them. I will give you some examples which will help us to understand and to try ourselves, without waiting for God to try us, since it would be far better to have prepared and examined ourselves beforehand.

4. A rich man, without son or heir, loses part of

[p. 80]

his property, [*3] but still has more than enough to keep himself and his household. If this misfortune grieves and disquiets him as though he were left to beg his bread, how can our Lord ask him to give up all things for His sake? This man will tell you he regrets losing his money because he wished to bestow it on the poor.

5. I believe His Majesty would prefer me to conform to His will, and keep peace of soul while attending to my interests, to such charity as this. If this person cannot resign himself because God has not raised him so high in virtue, well and good: let him know that he is wanting in liberty of spirit; let him beg our Lord to grant it him, and be rightly disposed to receive it. Another person has more than sufficient means to live on, when an opportunity occurs for acquiring more property: if it is offered him, by all means let him accept it; but if he must go out of his way to obtain it and then continues working to gain more and more--however good his intention may be (and it must be good, for I am speaking of people who lead prayerful and good lives), he cannot possibly enter the mansions near the King.

6. Something of the same sort happens if such people meet with contempt or want of due respect. God often gives them grace to bear it well, as He loves to see virtue upheld in public, and will not have it condemned in those who practise it, or else because these persons have served Him faithfully, and He, our supreme Good, is exceedingly good to us all; nevertheless, these persons are disturbed, and

[p. 81]

cannot overcome or get rid of the feeling for some time. [*4] Alas! have they not long meditated on the pains our Lord endured and how well it is for us to suffer, and have even longed to do so? They wish every one were as virtuous as they are; and God grant they do not consider other people to blame for their troubles and attribute merit to themselves!

7. You may think, my daughters, that I have wandered from the subject, for all this does not concern you: nothing of the sort occurs to us here, where we neither own nor wish for any property, nor endeavour to gain it, and no one does us any wrong. The instances I have mentioned do not coincide exactly, yet conclusions applicable to us may be drawn from them, which it would be neither well nor necessary to state. These will teach you whether you are really detached from all you have left; trifling occasions often occur, although perhaps not quite of the same kind, by which you can prove to yourselves whether you have obtained the mastery over your passions.

8. Believe me, the question is not whether we wear the religious habit or not, but whether we practise the virtues and submit our will in all things to the will of God. The object of our life must be to do what He requires of us: let us not ask that our will may be done, but His. If we have not yet attained to this, let us be humble, as I said above. Humility is the ointment for our wounds; if we have it, although perhaps He may defer His coming for a time, God, Who is our Physician, will come and heal us.

[p. 82]

9. The penances performed by the persons I spoke of are as well regulated as their life, which they value very highly because they wish to serve our Lord with it--in which there is nothing to blame--so they are very discreet in their mortifications lest they should injure their health. Never fear they will kill themselves: they are far too sensible! Their love is not strong enough to overcome their reason; I wish it were--that they might not be content to creep on their way to God: a pace that will never bring them to their journey's end!

10. We seem to ourselves to be making progress, yet we become weary, for, believe me, we are walking through a mist; it will be fortunate if we do not lose ourselves. Do you think, my daughters, if we could travel from one country to another in eight days, that it would be well to spend a year on the journey, through wind, snow, and inundations and over bad roads? [*5] Would it not be better to get it over at once, for it is full of dangers and serpents? Oh, how many striking instances could I give you of this! God grant that I have passed beyond this state myself: often I think that I have not.

11. All things obstruct us while prudence rules our actions; we are afraid of everything and therefore fear to make progress--as if we could reach the inner chambers while others make the journey for us! As this is impossible, sisters, for the love of God let us exert ourselves, and leave our reason and

[p. 83]

our fears in His hands, paying no attention to the weaknesses of nature which might retard us. Let our Superiors, to whom the charge belongs, look after our bodies; let our only care be to hasten to our Lord's presence--for though there are few or no indulgences to be obtained here, yet, regard for health might mislead us and it would be none the better for our care, as I know well.

12. I know, too, that our bodies are not the chief factors in the work we have before us; they are accessory: extreme humility is the principal point. It is the want of this, I believe, that stops people's progress. It may seem that we have made but little way: we should believe that is the case, and that our sisters are advancing much more rapidly than we are. Not only should we wish others to consider us the worst of all; we should endeavour to make them think so. If we act in this manner, our soul will do well; otherwise we shall make no progress and shall always remain the prey to a thousand troubles and miseries. The way will be difficult and wearisome without self-renunciation, weighed down as we are by the burden and frailties of human nature, which are no longer felt in the more interior mansions.

13. In these third mansions the Lord never fails to repay our services, both as a just and even as a merciful God, Who always bestows on us far more than we deserve, giving us greater happiness than could be obtained from any earthly pleasures and amusements. I think He grants few consolations here, except, perhaps, occasionally to entice us to

[p. 84]

prepare ourselves to enter the last mansions by showing us their contents. There may appear to you to be no difference except in name between sensible devotion, and consolations and you may ask why I distinguish them. I think there is a very great difference, but I may be mistaken.

14. This will be best explained while writing of the fourth mansion, which comes next, when I must speak of the consolations received there from our Lord. The subject may appear futile, yet may prove useful by urging souls who know what each mansion contains to strive to enter the best. It will solace those whom God has advanced so far; others, who thought they had reached the summit, will be abashed, yet if they are humble they will be led to thank God.

15. Those who do not receive these consolations may feel a despondency that is uncalled for, since perfection does not consist in consolation but in greater love; our reward will be in proportion to this, and to the justice and sincerity of our actions. Perhaps you wonder, then, why I treat of these interior favours and their nature. I do not know; ask him who bade me write this. I must obey Superiors, not argue with them, which I have no right to do.

16. I assure you that when I had neither received these favours, [*6] nor understood them by experience, or ever expected to (and rightly so, for I should have felt reassured if I had known or even conjectured that I was pleasing to God in any way),

[p. 85]

yet when I read of the mercies and consolations that our Lord grants to His servants, I was delighted and praised Him fervently. If such as myself acted thus, how much more would the humble and good glorify Him! I think it is worth while to explain these subjects and show what consolations and delights we lose through our own fault, if only for the sake of moving a single soul to praise God once.

17. When these joys are from God they come laden with love and strength, which aid the soul on its way and increase its good works and virtues. Do not imagine that it is unimportant whether you try to obtain these graces or no; if you are not to blame, the Lord is just: what He refuses in one way, His Majesty will give you in another, as He knows how; His secret ways are very mysterious, and doubtless He will do what is best for you.

18. Souls who by God's mercy are brought so far (which, as I said, is no small mercy, for they are likely to ascend still higher) will be greatly benefited by practising prompt obedience. Even if they are not in the religious state, it would be well if they, like certain other people, were to take a director, [*7] so as never to follow their own will, which is the cause of most of our ills. They should not choose one of their own turn of mind [*8] (as the saying goes), who is over prudent in his actions, but should select one thoroughly detached from worldly things; it is very helpful to consult a person who has learnt and can teach this. It is encouraging to see that trials which seemed to us impossible to

[p. 86]

submit to are possible to others, and that they bear them sweetly. Their flight makes us try to soar, like nestlings taught by the elder birds, who, though they cannot fly far at first, little by little imitate their parents: I know the great benefit of this. However determined such persons may be not to offend our Lord, they must not expose themselves to temptation: they are still near the first mansions to which they might easily return. Their strength is not yet established on a solid foundation like that of souls exercised in sufferings, who know how little cause there is to fear the tempests of this world and care nothing for its pleasures: beginners might succumb before any severe trial. Some great persecution, such as the devil knows how to raise to injure us, might make beginners turn back; while zealously trying to withdraw others from sin they might succumb to the attacks made upon them.

19. Let us look at our own faults, and not at other persons'. People who are extremely correct themselves are often shocked at everything they see [*9]; however, we might often learn a great deal that is essential from the very persons whom we censure. Our exterior comportment and manners may be better--this is well enough, but not of the first importance. We ought not to insist on every one following in our footsteps, nor to take upon ourselves to give instructions in spirituality when, perhaps, we do not even know what it is. Zeal for the good of souls, though given us by God, may

[p. 87]

often lead us astray, sisters; it is best to keep our rule, which bids us ever to live in silence and in hope. [*10] Our Lord will care for the souls belonging to Him; and if we beg His Majesty to do so, by His grace we shall be able to aid them greatly. May He be for ever blessed!

Footnotes

^79:1 See letter concerning Francisco de Salcedo. Nov. 1576. Vol. II.

^79:2 Way of Perf. ch, xxxviii. 7.

^80:3 Way of Perf. ch, xxxviii, 10. Concep. ch. ii. 11, 12. Life, xi. 3.

^81:4 Way of Perf.. ch. xxxviii. 12.

^82:5 St. Teresa very probably had in her mind her journey, to make a foundation at Seville, when the boat, which was crossing the Guadalquivir, narrowly escaped being carried down the river by the current. Found. ch. xxiv, 6

^84:6 Life, ch. xii. 2. Rel. vii. 3.

^85:7 Life. ch. xiii. 29.

^85:8 Rel. vii. 18.

^86:9 Way of Perf. ch. vii. 6. Castle, M. I. ch. ii. 20, 21.

^87:10 Isa. xxx. 15: 'In silentio et in spe erit fortitudo vestra.' Rule  section 13.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 88]

  

THE FOURTH MANSIONS

  

CHAPTER I.

HOW SWEETNESS AND TENDERNESS IN PRAYER DIFFER FROM CONSOLATIONS. EXPLAINS HOW ADVANTAGEOUS IT WAS FOR ST. TERESA TO COMPREHEND THAT THE IMAGINATION AND THE UNDERSTANDING ARE NOT THE SAME THING. THIS CHAPTER IS USEFUL FOR THOSE WHOSE THOUGHTS WANDER MUCH DURING PRAYER.

1. Graces received in this mansion. 2. Mystic favours. 3. Temptations bring humility and merit. 4. Sensible devotion and natural joys. 5. Sweetness in devotion. 6. St. Teresa's experience of it. 7. Love of God, and how to foster it. 8. Distractions. 9. They do not destroy divine union. 10. St. Teresa's physical distractions. 11. How to treat distractions. 12. They should be disregarded. 13. Self-knowledge necessary.

1. Now that I commence writing about the fourth mansions, it is requisite, as I said, [*1] to commend myself to the Holy Ghost and to beg Him henceforth to speak for me, that I may be enabled to treat these matters intelligibly. Henceforth they begin to be supernatural and it will be most difficult to speak clearly about them, [*2] unless His Majesty

[p. 89]

undertakes it for me, as He did when I explained the subject (as far as I understood it) somewhat about fourteen years ago. [*3] I believe I now possess more light about the favours God grants some souls, but that is different from being able to elucidate them. [*4] May His Majesty enable me to do so if it would be useful, but not otherwise.

2. As these mansions are nearer the King's dwelling they are very beautiful, and so subtle are the things seen and heard in them, that, as those tell us who have tried to do so, the mind cannot give a lucid idea of them to those inexperienced in the matter. People who have enjoyed these favours, especially if it was to any great extent, will easily comprehend me.

3. Apparently a person must have dwelt for a long time in the former mansions before entering these; although in ordinary cases the soul must have been in the last one spoken of, yet, as you must often have heard, there is no fixed rule, for God gives when,

[p. 90]

how, and to whom He wills [*5]--the goods are His own, and His choice wrongs no one. [*6] The poisonous reptiles rarely come into these rooms, and, if they enter, do more good than harm. I think it is far better for them to get in and make war on the soul in this state of prayer; were it not tempted, the devil might sometimes deceive it about divine consolations, thus injuring it far more. Besides, the soul would benefit less, because all occasions of gaining merit would be withdrawn, were it left continually absorbed in God. I am not confident that this absorption is genuine when it always remains in the same state, nor does it appear to me possible for the Holy Ghost to dwell constantly within us, to the same extent, during our earthly exile.

4. I will now describe, as I promised, the difference between sweetness in prayer and spiritual consolations. It appears to me that what we acquire for ourselves in meditation and petitions to our Lord may be termed 'sweetness in devotion.' [*7] It is natural, although ultimately aided by the grace of God. I must be understood to imply this in all I say, for we can do nothing without Him. This

[p. 91]

sweetness arises principally from the good work we perform, and appears to result from our labours: well may we feel happy at having thus spent our time. We shall find, on consideration, that many temporal matters give us the same pleasure--such as unexpectedly coming into a large fortune, suddenly meeting with a dearly-loved friend, or succeeding in any important or influential affair which makes a sensation in the world. Again, it would be felt by one who had been told her husband, brother, or son was dead, and who saw him return to her alive. I have seen people weep from such happiness, as I have done myself. I consider both these joys and those we feel in religious matters to be natural ones. Although there is nothing wrong about the former, yet those produced by devotion spring from a more noble source--in short, they begin in ourselves and end in God. Spiritual consolations, on the contrary, arise from God, and our nature feels them and rejoices as keenly in them, and indeed far more keenly, than in the others I described.

5. O Jesus! how I wish I could elucidate this point! It seems to me that I can perfectly distinguish the difference between the two joys, yet I have not the skill to make myself understood; may God give it me! I remember a verse we say at Prime at the end of the final Psalm; the last words are: 'Cum dilatasti cor meum'--'When Thou didst dilate my heart: [*8] To those with much experience, this suffices to show the difference between sweetness in prayer and spiritual consolations; other people will

[p. 92]

require more explanation. The sensible devotion I mentioned does not dilate the heart, but generally appears to narrow it slightly; although joyful at seeing herself work for God, yet such a person sheds tears of sorrow which seem partly produced by the passions. I know little about the passions of the soul, or I could write of them more clearly and could better define what comes from the sensitive disposition and what is natural, having passed through this state myself, but I am very stupid. Knowledge and learning are a great advantage to every one.

6. My own experience of this delight and sweetness in meditation was that when I began to weep over the Passion I could not stop until I had a severe headache; [*9] the same thing occurred when I grieved over my sins: this was a great grace from our Lord. I do not intend to inquire now which of these states of prayer is the better, but I wish I knew how to explain the difference between the two. In that of which I speak, the tears and good desires are often partly caused by the natural disposition, but although this may be the case, yet, as I said, these feelings terminate in God. Sensible devotion is very desirable if the soul is humble enough to understand that it is not more holy on account of these sentiments, which cannot always with certainty be ascribed to charity, and even then are still the gift of God.

7. These feelings of devotion are most common with souls in the first three mansions, who are nearly always using their understanding and reason

[p. 93]

in making meditations. This is good for them, for they have not been given grace for more; they should, however, try occasionally to elicit some acts such as praising God, rejoicing in His goodness and that He is what He is: let them desire that He may be honoured and glorified. They must do this as best they can, for it greatly inflames the will. Let them be very careful, when God gives these sentiments, not to set them aside in order to finish their accustomed meditation. But, having spoken fully on this subject elsewhere, [*10] I will say no more now. I only wish to warn you that to make rapid progress and to reach the mansions we wish to enter, it is not so essential to think much as to love much: therefore you must practise whatever most excites you to this. Perhaps we do not know what love is, nor does this greatly surprise me. Love does not consist in great sweetness of devotion, but in a fervent determination to strive to please God in all things, in avoiding, as far as possible, all that would offend Him, and in praying for the increase of the glory and honour of His Son and for the growth of the Catholic Church. These are the signs of love; do not imagine that it consists in never thinking of anything but God, and that if your thoughts wander a little all is lost. [*11]

8. I, myself, have sometimes been troubled by this turmoil of thoughts. I learnt by experience, but little more than four years ago, that our thoughts, or it is clearer to call it our imagination, are not

[p. 94]

the same thing as the understanding. I questioned a theologian on the subject; he told me it was the fact, which consoled me not a little. As the understanding is one of the powers of the soul, it puzzled me to see it so sluggish at times, while, as a rule, the imagination takes flight at once, so that God alone can control it by so uniting us to Himself [*12] that we seem, in a manner, detached from our bodies. It puzzled me to see that while to all appearance the powers of the soul were occupied with God and recollected in Him, the imagination was wandering elsewhere.

9. Do Thou, O Lord, take into account all that we suffer in this way through our ignorance. We err in thinking that we need only know that we must keep our thoughts fixed on Thee. We do not understand that we should consult those better instructed than ourselves, nor are we aware that there is anything for us to learn. We pass through terrible trials, on account of not understanding our own nature and take what is not merely harmless, but good, for a grave fault. This causes the sufferings felt by many people, particularly by the unlearned, who practise prayer. They complain of interior trials, become melancholy, lose their health, and even give up prayer altogether for want of recognizing that we have within ourselves as it were, an interior world. We cannot stop the revolution of the heavens as they rush with velocity upon their course, neither can we control our imagination. When this wanders we at once imagine that all the powers of the soul follow it; we think everything

[p. 95]

is lost, and that the time spent in God's presence is wasted. Meanwhile, the soul is perhaps entirely united to Him in the innermost mansions, while the imagination is in the precincts of the castle, struggling with a thousand wild and venomous creatures and gaining merit by its warfare. Therefore we need not let ourselves be disturbed, nor give up prayer, as the devil is striving to persuade us. As a rule, all our anxieties and troubles come from misunderstanding our own nature.

10. Whilst writing this I am thinking of the loud noise in my head which I mentioned in the Introduction, and which has made it almost impossible to obey the command given me to write this. It sounds as if there were a number of rushing waterfalls within my brain, while in other parts, drowned by the sound of the waters, are the voices of birds singing and whistling. This tumult is not in my ears, but in the upper part of my head, where, they say, is placed the superior part of the soul. I have long thought that this must be so because the flight of the spirit seems to take place from this part with great velocity. [*13] Please God I may recollect to explain the cause when writing of the latter mansions, this not being the proper place for it. It may be that God has sent this suffering in my head to help me to understand the matter, for all this tumult in my brain does not interfere with my prayer, nor with my speaking to you, but the great calm and love and desires in my soul remain undisturbed and my mind is clear.

11. How, then, can the superior part of the soul

[p. 96]

remain undisturbed if it resides in the upper part of the brain? I cannot account for it, but am sure that I am speaking the truth. This noise disturbs my prayer when unaccompanied with ecstasy, but when it is ecstatic I do not feel any pain, however great. I should suffer keenly were I forced to cease praying on account of these infirmities. We should not be distressed by reason of our thoughts, nor allow ourselves to be worried by them: if they come from the devil, he will let us alone if we take no notice of them; and if they are, as often happens, one of the many frailties entailed by Adam's sin, let us be patient and suffer them for the love of God. Likewise, since we must eat and sleep without being able to avoid it, much to our grief, let us acknowledge that we are human, and long to be where no one may despise us. [*14] Sometimes I recall these words, spoken by the Spouse in the Canticle; [*15] truly never in our lives have we better reason to say them, for I think no earthly scorn or suffering can try us so severely as these struggles within our souls. All uneasiness or conflict can be borne while we have peace in ourselves, as I said; but if, while seeking for rest amidst the thousand trials of the world--knowing that God has prepared this rest for us--the obstacle is found in ourselves, the trial must needs prove painful and almost insufferable.

12. Take us therefore, O Lord, to where these miseries can no longer cause us to be despised, for

[p. 97]

sometimes it seems as if they mocked our souls. Even in this life God delivers us from them when we reach the last mansion, as by His grace I will show you. Everybody is not so violently distressed and assaulted by these weaknesses as I have been for many years, [*16] on account of my wickedness, so that it seems as if I strove to take vengeance on myself. [*17] Since I suffer so much in this way, perhaps you may do the same, so I shall continue to explain the subject to you in different ways, in order to find some means of making it clear. The thing is inevitable, therefore do not let it disturb or grieve you, but let the mill clack on while we grind our wheat; that is, let us continue to work with our will and intellect.

13. These troubles annoy us more or less according to the state of our health or in different circumstances. The poor soul suffers; although not now to blame, it has sinned at other times, and must be patient. We are so ignorant that what we have read and been told has not sufficed to teach us to disregard wandering thoughts, therefore I shall not be wasting time in instructing and consoling you about these trials. However, this will help you but little until God chooses to enlighten you, and additional measures are needed: His Majesty wishes us to learn by ordinary means to understand ourselves and to recognize the share taken in these troubles by our wandering imagination, our nature, and the devil's temptations, instead of laying all the blame on our souls.

Footnotes

^88:1 First Mansions, ch. i. 1.

^88:2 There are two kinds of contemplation: acquired or natural, and infused or supernatural. In their widest sense, including many remarkable phenomena of Natural religion, and, of course, the most wonderful manifestations recorded in the Old Testament, they form the system [p. 89] called Mysticism and are the proper object of Mystical theology. Natural or acquired contemplation is based upon an idealistic turn of mind which enables the soul to gaze upon the Godhead (simple gaze, as St. Teresa calls it) without approaching Him by the laborious process of reasoning, and in so doing embraces Him with its affective powers; like a person who, devoid of technical skill, takes in and is enamoured by, the beauty of a painting. Infused contemplation is the highest act of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost of Knowledge and Wisdom. It is often impossible, nor is it always essential, to determine where acquired contemplation ends and infused contemplation begins. But it should be borne in mind that both the one and the other are operations and not merely a passive state or mere fruition. Even the highest form of contemplation, the Beatific Vision, is a supernatural act of the soul, an operation of unending duration. A ship moved by a gentle breeze is rightly said to be actually sailing though the rowers are at rest.

^89:3 Life, ch. xii. 11.

^89:4 Life, ch. xvii. 7.

^90:5 Philippus a SS. Trinitate, Summa Tleologiae Mysticae, pars iii. tract. i. disc. iii. art. 2. Life, ch. xv. 11, xxii. 22, 23. Way of Perf. ch. xvi. 4, xli. 2. Concep. ch. v. 3.

^90:6 S. Matt. xx. 15: 'Aut non licet mihi quod volo facere?'

^90:7 Way of Perf., ch. xix. 8. Castle, M. iv. ch. ii. 4. The first three mansions of the Interior Castle correspond with the 'first water,' or the prayer of Meditation, explained in ch. xi-xiii. of the Life; the fourth mansion, or the prayer of Quiet, with the 'second water,' Life, ch. xiv. and xv.; the fifth mansion, or the prayer of Union, with the 'third water,' Life, ch. xvi. and xvii.; and the sixth mansion, ecstasy, etc., with the 'fourth water,' Life, ch. xviii.-xxi.

^91:8 Ps. cxviii. 32. Way of Perf. ch. xxviii. 11.

^92:9 Life, ch. iii. 1.

^93:10 Life, ch. xii. 2-4..

^93:11 Found. ch. v. 2. Way of Perf. ch. xxxi. 6, 12. Life, ch. xv, 16, ch. XXX. 19.

^94:12 Life, ch. xv. 9, 10.

^95:13 Second Relation addressed to Fr. Rodrigo Alvarez.

^96:14 Way of Perf. ch. xxxiii. 8. Life, ch. xxi. S. Rel. ii. 12.

^96:15 According to Fr. Gracian the Saint here refers to Cant. viii. 1: 'Et jam me nemo despiciat.'

^97:16 Way of Perf. ch. xvii. 2.

^97:17 Way of Perf. ch, xxxi. 9.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 98]

  

CHAPTER II.

CONTINUES THE SAME SUBJECT, EXPLAINING BY A COMPARISON IN WHAT DIVINE CONSOLATIONS CONSIST: AND HOW WE OUGHT TO TRY TO PREPARE OURSELVES TO RECEIVE THEM, WITHOUT ENDEAVOURING TO OBTAIN THEM.

1. Physical results of sensible devotion. 2. Effects of divine consolations. 3. The two fountains. 4. They symbolize two kinds of prayer. 5. Divine consolations shared by body and soul. 6. The incense within the soul. 7. Graces received in this prayer. 8. Such favours not to be sought after.

1. GOD help me! how I have wandered from my subject! I forget what I was speaking about, for my occupations and ill-health often force me to cease writing until some more suitable time. The sense will be very disconnected; as my memory is extremely bad and I have no time to read over what is written, even what I really understand is expressed very vaguely, at least so I fear. I think I said that spiritual consolations are occasionally connected with the passions. These feelings of devotion produce fits of sobbing; I have even heard that sometimes they cause a compression of the chest, and uncontrollable exterior motions violent enough to cause bleeding at the nose and other painful effects. [*1]

2. I can say nothing about this, never having experienced anything of the kind myself; but there appears some cause for comfort in it, because, as I said, all ends in the desire to please God and to

[p. 99]

enjoy His presence. What I call divine consolations, or have termed elsewhere the 'prayer of quiet,' is a very different thing, as those will understand who, by the mercy of God, have experienced them.

3. To make the matter clearer, let us imagine we see two fountains with basins which fill with water. I can find no simile more appropriate than water by which to explain spiritual things, as I am very ignorant and have poor wits to help me. [*2] Besides, I love this element so much that I have studied it more attentively than other things. God, Who is so great, so wise, has doubtless hidden secrets in all things He created, which we should greatly benefit by knowing, as those say who understand such matters. Indeed, I believe that in each smallest creature He has made, though it be but a tiny ant, there are more wonders than can be comprehended. These two basins are filled in different ways; the one with water from a distance flowing into it through many pipes and waterworks, while the other basin is built near the source of the spring itself and fills quite noiselessly. If the fountain is plentiful, like the one we speak of, after the basin is full the water overflows in a great stream which flows continually. No machinery is needed here, nor does the water run through aqueducts.

4. Such is the difference between the two kinds of prayer. The water running through the aqueducts resembles sensible devotion, which is obtained by meditation. We gain it by our thoughts, by meditating on created things, and by the labour of

[p. 100]

our minds; in short, it is the result of our endeavours, and so makes the commotion I spoke of, while profiting the soul. [*3] The other fountain, like divine consolations, receives the water from the source itself, which signifies God: as usual, when His Majesty wills to bestow on us any supernatural favours, we experience the greatest peace, calm, and sweetness in the inmost depths of our being; I know neither where nor how.

5. This joy is not, like earthly happiness, at once felt by the heart; after gradually filling it to the brim, the delight overflows throughout all the mansions and faculties, until at last it reaches the body. Therefore, I say it arises from God and ends in ourselves, for whoever experiences it will find that the whole physical part of our nature shares in this delight and sweetness. While writing this I have been thinking that the verse 'Dilatasti cor meum,' 'Thou hast dilated my heart,' [*4] declares that the heart is dilated. This joy does not appear to me to originate in the heart, but in some more interior part and, as it were, in the depths of our being. I think this must be the centre of the soul, as I have since learnt and will explain later on. I discover secrets within us which often fill me with astonishment: how many more must there be unknown to me! O my Lord and my God! how stupendous is Thy grandeur! We are like so many foolish peasant lads: we think we know something of Thee, yet it must be comparatively nothing, for there are profound secrets even in ourselves of

[p. 101]

which we know naught. I say 'comparatively nothing' in proportion with all the secrets hidden within Thee, yet how great are Thy mysteries that we are acquainted with and can learn even by the study of such of Thy works as we see! [*5]

6. To return to the verse I quoted, which may help to explain the dilation begun by the celestial waters in the depths of our being. They appear to dilate and enlarge us internally, and benefit us in an inexplicable manner, nor does even the soul itself understand what it receives. It is conscious of what may be described as a certain fragrance, as if within its inmost depths were a brazier sprinkled with sweet perfumes. Although the spirit neither sees the flame nor knows where it is, yet it is penetrated by the warmth, and scented fumes, which are even sometimes perceived by the body. Understand me, the soul does not feel any real heat or scent, but something far more subtle, which I use this metaphor to explain. Let those who have never experienced it believe that it really occurs to others: the soul is conscious of it and feels it more distinctly than can be expressed. It is not a thing we can fancy or gain by anything we can do; clearly it does not arise from the base coin of human nature, but from the most pure gold of Divine Wisdom. I believe that in this case the powers of the soul are not united to God, but are absorbed and astounded at the marvel before them. I may possibly be contradicting what I wrote elsewhere; [*6] nor would

[p. 102]

this be surprising, for it was done about fifteen years ago, and perhaps God has given me since then a clearer insight into the matter. I may be entirely mistaken on the subject, both then and now, but never do I wilfully say what is untrue. No; by the mercy of God, I would rather die a thousand times than tell a falsehood: I speak of the matter as I understand it. I believe that in this case the will must in some way be united with that of God. The after effects on the soul, and the subsequent behaviour of the person, show whether this prayer was genuine or no: this is the best crucible by which to test it.

7. Our Lord bestows a signal grace on the soul if it realizes how great is this favour, and another greater still if it does not turn back on the right road. You are longing, my daughters, to enter into this state of prayer at once, and you are right, for, as I said, the soul cannot understand the value of the graces there bestowed by God upon it, nor the love which draws Him ever closer to it: we should certainly desire to learn how to obtain this favour. I will tell you what I know about it, setting aside certain cases in which God bestows these graces for no other reason than His own choice, into which we have no right to enquire.

8. Practise what I advised in the preceding mansions, then--humility, humility! for God lets Himself be vanquished by this and grants us all we ask. [*7]

[p. 103]

[paragraph continues] The first proof [*8] that you possess humility is that you neither think you now deserve these graces and consolations from God, nor that you ever will as long as you live. You ask me: 'How shall we receive them, if we do not try to gain them?' I answer, that there is no surer way to obtain them than the one I have told you, therefore make no efforts to acquire them, for the following reasons. The first is, that the chief means of obtaining them is to love God without self-interest. The second, that it is a slight lack of humility to think that our wretched services can win so great a reward The third, that the real preparation for them is to desire to suffer and imitate our Lord, rather than to receive consolations, for indeed we have all offended Him. The fourth reason is, that His Majesty has not promised to give us these favours in the same way as He has bound Himself to bestow eternal glory on us if we keep His commandments. We can be saved without these special graces; He sees better than we do what is best for us and which of us love Him sincerely. I know for a certain truth, being acquainted with some who walk by the way of love (and therefore only seek to serve Jesus Christ crucified), that not only they neither ask for nor desire consolation, but they even beg Him not to give it them during this life: this is a fact. Fifthly, we should but labour in vain: this water does not flow through aqueducts, like that we first spoke of, and if the spring does not afford it, in vain shall we toil to obtain it. I mean, that though we may meditate and try our hardest, and though we shed

[p. 104]

tears to gain it, we cannot make this water flow. God alone gives it to whom He chooses, and often when the soul is least thinking of it. We are His, sisters, let Him do what He will with us, and lead us where He will. If we are really humble and annihilate ourselves, not only in our imagination (which often deceives us), but if we truly detach ourselves from all things, our Lord will not only grant us these favours but many others that we do not know even how to desire. May He be for ever praised and blessed! Amen.

Footnotes

^98:1 'A clear description of an attack of hysteria with the significant remark that she herself had never experienced anything of the kind'. (Dr. Goix, quoted by P. Gregoire, La pretendue hysterie de Sainte Therese, Lyon, Vitte, 1895, p. 53.)

^99:2 Way of Perf. ch. xix. 5; also St. John of the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. ii, ch. xiv, 2, and xxi. 3.

^100:3 Life, ch. x. 2.

^100:4 Ps. cxviii. 32. Life, ch. xvii. 14,

^101:5 Life, ch. xiv. 9. Way of Perf. ch. xxviii. 11.

^101:6 Life, ch. xiv. 3: 'The faculties are not lost, neither are they asleep; the will alone is occupied in such a way that without knowing how it has become a captive it gives a simple consent to become the prisoner [p. 102] of God.' Ibid.  section 4: 'The other two faculties help the will that it may render itself capable of the fruition of so great a good; nevertheless, it occasionally happens even when the will is in union that they hinder it very much.' See also Way of Perf. ch. xxxi. 8.

^102:7 Way of Perf. ch. xvi. i. Life, ch. xxii. 16.

^103:8 Philippus a SS. Trinitate, l.c. art. 3.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III.

OF THE PRAYER OF RECOLLECTION WHICH GOD GENERALLY GIVES THE SOUL BEFORE GRANTING IT THAT LAST DESCRIBED. ITS EFFECTS: ALSO THOSE OF THE PRAYER OF DIVINE CONSOLATIONS DESCRIBED IN THE LAST CHAPTER.

1. The Prayer of recollection compared to the inhabitants of the castle. 2. The Shepherd recalls His flock into the castle. 3. This recollection supernatural. 4. It prepares us for higher favours. 5. The mind must act until God calls it to recollection by love. 6. The soul should here abandon itself into God's hands. 7. The prayer of recollection, and distractions in Prayer. 8. Liberty of spirit gained by consolations. 9. The soul must be watchful. 10. The devil specially tempts such souls. 11. False trances and raptures. 12. How to treat those deluded in this way. 13. Risks of delusion in this mansion.

1. THE effects of divine consolations are very numerous: before describing them, I will speak of another kind of prayer which usually precedes them. I need not say much on this subject, having written about it elsewhere. [*1] This is a kind of recollection which, I believe, is supernatural. There is

[p. 105]

no occasion to retire nor to shut the eyes, nor does it depend on anything exterior; involuntarily the eyes suddenly close and solitude is found. Without any labour of one's own, the temple of which I spoke is reared for the soul in which to pray: the senses and exterior surroundings appear to lose their hold, while the spirit gradually regains its lost sovereignty. Some say the soul enters into itself; others, that it rises above itself. [*2] I can say nothing about these terms, but had better speak of the subject as I understand it. You will probably grasp my

[p. 106]

meaning, although, perhaps, I may be the only person who understands it. Let us imagine that the senses and powers of the soul (which I compared in my allegory to the inhabitants of the castle) have fled and joined the enemy outside. After long days and years of absence, perceiving how great has been their loss, they return to the neighbourhood of the castle, but cannot manage to re-enter it, for their evil habits are hard to break off; still, they are no longer traitors, and they wander about outside.

2. The King, Who holds His court within it, sees their good will, and out of His great mercy desires them to return to Him. Like a good Shepherd, He plays so sweetly on His pipe, that although scarcely hearing it they recognize His call and no longer wander, but return, like lost sheep, to the mansions. So strong is this Pastor's power over His flock, that they abandon the worldly cares which misled them and re-enter the castle.

3. I think I never put this matter so clearly before. To seek God within ourselves avails us far more than to look for Him amongst creatures; Saint Augustine tells us how he found the Almighty within his own soul, after having long sought for Him elsewhere. [*3] This recollection helps us greatly

[p. 107]

when God bestows it upon us. But do not fancy you can gain it by thinking of God dwelling within you, or by imagining Him as present in your soul: this is a good practice and an excellent kind of meditation, for it is founded on the fact that God resides within us; [*4] it is not, however, the prayer of recollection, for by the divine assistance every one can practise it, but what I mean is quite a different thing. Sometimes, before they have begun to think of God, the powers of the soul find themselves within the castle. I know not by what means they entered, nor how they heard the Shepherd's pipe; the ears perceived no sound but the soul is keenly conscious of a delicious sense of recollection experienced by those who enjoy this favour, which I cannot describe more clearly.

4. I think I read somewhere [*5] that the soul is then like a tortoise or sea-urchin, which retreats into it-

[p. 108]

self. Those who said this no doubt understood what they were talking about; but these creatures can withdraw into themselves at will, while here it is not in our power to retire into ourselves, unless God gives us the grace. In my opinion, His Majesty only bestows this favour on those who have renounced the world, in desire at least, if their state of life does not permit their doing so in fact. He thus specially calls them to devote themselves to spiritual things; if they allow Him power to at freely He will bestow still greater graces on those whom He thus begins calling to a higher life. Those who enjoy this recollection should thank God fervently: it is of the highest importance for them to realize the value of this favour, gratitude for which would prepare them to receive still more signal graces. Some books advise that as a preparation for hearing what our Lord may say to us we should keep our minds at rest, waiting to see what He will work in our souls. [*6] But unless His Majesty has begun to suspend our faculties, I cannot understand how we are to stop thinking, without doing ourselves more harm than good. This point has been much debated by those learned in spiritual matters; I confess my want of humility in having been unable to yield to their opinion. [*7]

5. Some one told me of a certain book written on the subject by the saintly Friar Peter of Alcantara (as I think I may justly call him); I should have submitted to his decision, knowing that he was competent to judge, but on reading it I found he

[p. 109]

agreed with me that the mind must act until called to recollection by love, although he stated it in other words. [*8] Possibly I may be mistaken, but I rely on these reasons. Firstly, he who reasons less and tries to do least, does most in spiritual matters. We

[p. 110]

should make our petitions like beggars before a powerful and rich Emperor; then, with downcast eyes, humbly wait. When He secretly shows us He hears our prayers, it is well to be silent, as He has drawn us into His presence; there would then be no harm in trying to keep our minds at rest (that is to say, if we can). If, however, the King makes no sign of listening or of seeing us, there is no need to stand inert, like a dolt, which the soul would

[p. 111]

resemble if it continued inactive. In this case its dryness would greatly increase, and the imagination would be made more restless than before by its very effort to think of nothing. Our Lord wishes us at such a time to offer Him our petitions and to place ourselves in His presence; He knows what is best for us.

6. I believe that human efforts avail nothing in these matters, which His Majesty appears to reserve to Himself, setting this limit to our powers. In many other things, such as penances, good works, and prayers, with His aid we can help ourselves as far as human weakness will allow. The second reason is, that these interior operations being sweet and peaceful, [*9] any painful effort does us more harm than good. By 'painful effort' I mean any forcible restraint we place on ourselves, such as holding our breath. [*10] We should rather abandon our souls into the hands of God, leaving Him to do as He chooses with us, as far as possible forgetting all self-interest and resigning ourselves entirely to His will. The third reason is, that the very effort to think of nothing excites our imagination the more. The fourth is, because we render God the most true and acceptable service by caring only for His honour and glory and forgetting ourselves, our advantages, comfort and happiness. How can we be self-oblivious, while keeping ourselves under such strict control that we are afraid to move, or even to think, or to leave our minds enough liberty to desire God's greater glory and to rejoice in the

[p. 112]

glory which He possesses? When His Majesty wishes the mind to rest from working He employs it in another manner, giving it a light and knowledge far above any obtainable by its own efforts and absorbing it entirely into Himself. Then, though it knows not how, it is filled with wisdom such as it could never gain for itself by striving to suspend the thoughts. God gave us faculties for our use; each of them will receive its proper reward. Then do not let us try to charm them to sleep, but permit them to do their work until divinely called to something higher. [*11]

7. In my opinion, when God chooses to place the soul in this mansion it is best for it to do as I advised, and then endeavour, without force or disturbance, to keep free from wandering thoughts. No effort, however, should be made to suspend the imagination entirely from arming, for it is well to remember God's presence and to consider Who He is. If transported out of itself by its feelings, well and good; but let it not try to understand what is passing within it, for this favour is bestowed on the will which should be left to enjoy it in peace,

[p. 113]

only making loving aspirations occasionally. Although, in this kind of prayer, the soul makes no effort towards it, yet often, for a very short time, the mind ceases to think at all. I explained elsewhere why this occurs during this spiritual state. [*12] On first speaking of the fourth mansions, I told you I had mentioned divine consolations before the prayer of recollection. The latter should have come first, as it is far inferior to consolations, of which it is the commencement. Recollection does not require us to give up meditation, nor to cease using our intellect. In the prayer of quiet, when the water flows from the spring itself and not through conduits, the mind ceases to act; it is forced to do so, although it does not understand what is happening, and so wanders hither and thither in bewilderment, finding no place for rest. Meanwhile the will, entirely united to. God, is much disturbed by the tumult of the thoughts: no notice, however, should be taken of them, or they would cause the loss of a great part of the favour the soul is enjoying. Let the spirit ignore these distractions and abandon itself in the arms of divine love: His Majesty will teach it how best to act, which chiefly consists in its recognizing its unworthiness of so great a good and occupying itself in thanking Him for it.

8. In order to treat of the prayer of recollection, I passed over in silence the effects and symptoms to be found in souls thus favoured by God. Divine consolations evidently cause a dilation or enlargement of the soul that may be compared to water

[p. 114]

flowing from a spring into a basin which has no outlet, but is so constructed as to increase in size and proportion to the quantity poured into it. God seems to work the same effect by this prayer, besides giving many other marvellous graces, so preparing and disposing the soul to contain all He intends to give it. After interior sweetness and dilation the soul is not so restrained as formerly in God's service, but possesses much more liberty of spirit. It is no longer distressed by the terror of hell, for though more anxious than ever not to offend God, it has lost servile fear and feels sure that one day it will possess its Lord. It does not dread the loss of health by austerities; [*13] believing that there is nothing it could not do by His grace, it is more desirous than before of doing penance. Greater indifference is felt for sufferings because faith being stronger, it trusts that if borne for God He will give the grace to endure them patiently. Indeed, such a one at times even longs for trials, having a most ardent desire to do something for His sake. As the soul better understands the Divine Majesty, it realizes more vividly its own baseness. Divine consolation shows it how vile are earthly pleasures; by gradually withdrawing from them, it gains greater self-mastery. In short, its virtues are increased and it will not cease to advance in perfection, unless it turns back and offends God. Should it act thus, it would lose everything, however high the state it may have reached.

9. It is not to be supposed that all these effects are produced merely by God's having shown these

[p. 115]

favours once or twice. They must be received continually, for it is on their frequent reception that the whole welfare of the soul depends. I strongly urge those who have reached this state to avoid most carefully all occasions of offending God. [*14] The soul is not yet fully established in virtue, but is like a new-born babe first feeding at its mother's breast: [*15] if it leaves her, what can it do but die? I greatly fear that when a soul to whom God has granted this favour discontinues prayer, except under urgent necessity, it will, unless it returns to the practice at once, go from bad to worse.

10. I realize the danger of such a case, having had the grief of witnessing the fall of persons I knew through their withdrawal from Him Who sought, with so much love, to make Himself their friend, as He proved by His treatment of them. I urgently warn such persons not to run the risk of sinning, for the devil would rather gain one of these souls than many to whom our Lord does not grant such graces, [*16] as the former may cause him severe loss by leading others to follow their example, and may even render great service to the Church of God. Were there no other reason except that he saw the special love His Majesty bears these people, it would suffice to make Satan frantic to destroy God's work in them, so that they might be lost eternally. Therefore they suffer grievous temptations, and if they fall, they fall lower than others.

[p. 116]

11. You, my sisters, are free from such dangers, as far as we can tell: God keep you from pride and vainglory! The devil sometimes offers counterfeits of the graces I have mentioned: this can easily be detected--the effects being exactly contrary to those of the genuine ones. [*17] Although I have spoken of it elsewhere, [*18] I wish to warn you here of a special danger to which those who practise prayer are subject, particularly women, whose weakness of constitution makes them more liable to such mistakes. On account of their penances, prayers, and vigils, or even merely because of debility of health, some persons cannot receive spiritual consolation without being overcome by it. On feeling any interior joy, their bodies being languid and weak, they fall into a slumber--they call it spiritual sleep--which is a more advanced stage of what I have described; they think the soul shares in it as well as the body, and abandon themselves to a sort of intoxication. The more they lose self-control, the more do their feelings get possession of them, because the frame becomes more feeble. They fancy this is a trance and call it one, but I call it nonsense; it does nothing but waste their time and injure their health.

12. This state lasted with a certain person for eight hours, during which time she was neither insensible, nor had she any thought of God. [*19] She was cured by being made to eat and sleep well and to leave off some of her penances. Her recovery

[p. 117]

was owing to some one who understood her case; hitherto she had unintentionally deceived both her confessor and other people, as well as herself. I feel quite sure the devil had been at work here to serve his own ends and he was beginning to gain a great deal from it. It should be known that when God bestows such favours on the soul, although there may be languor both of mind and body, it is not shared by the soul, which feels great delight at seeing itself so near God, nor does this state ever continue for more than a very short time. [*20] Although the soul may become absorbed again, yet, as I said, unless already feeble, the body suffers neither exhaustion nor pain. I advise any of you who experience the latter to tell the Prioress, and to divert your thoughts as much as possible from such matters. The Superior should prevent such a nun from spending more than a very few hours in prayer, and should make her eat and sleep well until her usual strength is restored, if she has lost it in this way. [*21] If the nun's constitution is so delicate that this does not suffice, let her believe me when I tell her that God only calls her to the active life. There must be such people in monasteries: employ her in the various offices and be careful that she is never left very long alone, otherwise she will entirely lose her health. This treatment will be a great mortification to her: our Lord tests her love for Him by the way in which she bears His absence. He may be pleased, after a time, to restore her strength; if not, she will make as

[p. 118]

much progress, and earn as great a reward by vocal prayer and obedience as she would have done by contemplation, and perhaps more.

13. There are people, some of whom I have known, whose minds and imaginations are so active as to fancy they see whatever they think about, which is very dangerous. [*22] Perhaps I may treat of this later on, but cannot do so now. I have dwelt at length on this mansion, as I believe it to be the one most souls enter. As the natural is combined with the supernatural, the devil can do more harm here than later on, when God does not leave him so many opportunities. May God be for ever praised! Amen.

Footnotes

^104:1 Life, ch. xiv. 2. The Saint says in the second chapter of this mansion,  section 5, and also in letters dated Dec. 7, 1577 (Vol. II) and Jan. 14, 1580, that when writing the Interior Castle she had more experience in [p. 105] spiritual things than when she composed her former works. This is fully borne out by the present chapter. In the corresponding part of her Life she practically confounded the prayer of recollection with the prayer of quiet (the second state of the soul). Likewise, in the Way of Perfection, ch. xxviii., she speaks of but one kind of prayer of recollection and then passes on to the prayer of quiet. Here, however, she mentions a second form of the prayer of recollection. See Philippus a SS. Trinitate, pars iii. tract. i, disc. iii. art. 1, 'De oratione recollectionis' (page 81 of the third vol. of the edition of 1874); 'de secundo modo recollectionis' (ibid. p. 82.); and art. 2: 'De oratione quietis' (ibid. p. 84.) Antonius a Spiritu Sancto, Direct. Mystic. tract. iv. n. 78: 'Duo sunt hujus recollectionis modi, primus quidem activus [reference to the Way of Perfection, l.c.], secundus autem passivus, [reference to this chapter of the Fourth Mansion].' The former is not supernatural, in the sense that with special grace from above it can be acquired; the second is altogether supernatural and more like gratuitous grace (ibid. no. 80 and 81). On the meaning of 'Solitude,' 'Silence,' etc., see Anton. a Sp. S. l.c., tract. i, n. 78-82.

^105:2 The edition of Burgos (vol. iv, P. 59) refers appropriately to the following passage in the Tercer Abecedario (See Life, ch. iv, 8) by the Franciscan friar Francisco de Osuna, a work which exercised a profound influence on St. Teresa: 'Entering within oneself; and rising above oneself, are the two principal points in this exercise, those which, above all others, one ought to strive after, and which give the highest satisfaction to the soul. There is less labour in entering within oneself than in rising above oneself and therefore it appears to me that when the soul is ready and fit for either, you ought to do the former, because the other will follow without any effort, and will be all the more pure and spiritual; however, follow what course your soul prefers as this will bring you more grace and benefit,' (Tr. ix, ch, viii).

^106:3 Some editors of the Interior Castle think that St. Teresa refers to the following passage taken from the Confessions of St. Augustine: 'Too late have I loved Thee, O Beauty, ever ancient yet ever new! too late have I loved Thee! And behold, Thou wert within me and I abroad, and there I searched for Thee, and, deformed as I was, I pursued the beauties that Thou hast made. Thou wert with me, but I was not with Thee. Those things kept me far from Thee, which, unless they were in Thee, could have had no being' (St. Augustine's Confessions, bk. x, ch. xxvii.). The Confessions of St. Augustine were first translated [p. 107] into Spanish by Sebastian Toscano, a Portuguese Augustinian. This edition, which was published at Salamanca in 1554, was the one used by St. Teresa. However, it is more probable that here and elsewhere (Life, ch. xli. 10; Way of Perf. ch. xxviii. 2) St. Teresa quotes a passage which occurs in a pious book entitled Soliloquia, and erroneously attributed to St. Augustine: 'I have gone about the streets and the broad ways of the city of this world seeking Thee, but have not found Thee for I was wrong in seeking without for what was within.' (ch. xxxi.) This treatise which is also quoted by St. John of the Cross, Spiritual Canticle, stanza i. 7, Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. i. ch. v. 1, appeared in a Spanish translation at Valladolid in 1515, at Medina del Campo in 1553, and at Toledo in 1565.

^107:4 Life, ch. xiv. 7, 8; 20.

^107:5 St. Teresa read this in the Tercer Abecedario of Francisco de Osuna (tr. vi, ch, iv): 'This exercise concentrates the senses of man in the interior of the heart where dwells 'the daughter of the king'; that is, the Catholic soul; thus recollected, man may well be compared to the tortoise or sea-urchin which rolls itself up and withdraws within itself, disregarding everything outside.'

^108:6 Life. ch, xii. 8.

^108:7 Life, ch. xiv, 10.

^109:8 A Golden Treatise of Mental Prayer by St. Peter of Alcantara, translated by Rev. G. F. Bullock M.A. and edited by Rev. George Seymour Hollings S.S.J.E. London, Mowbray, 1905, p. 117.

Eighth Counsel. Let the last and chiefest counsel be that in this holy exercise we should endeavour to unite Meditation with Contemplation making of the one a ladder for attaining to the other. For this we must know that (p. 118) the very office of Meditation is to consider Divine things with studiousness and attention passing from one to another, to move our hearts to some affection and deep feeling for them, which is as though one should strike a flint to draw from it the spark.

For Contemplation is to have drawn forth this spark: I mean to have now found this affection and feeling which were sought for, and to be in peace and silence enjoying them; not with many discursive and intellectual speculations but with simple gaze upon the truth.

Wherefore, says a holy teacher, Meditation goes its way and brings forth fruit, with labour, but Contemplation bears fruit without labour. The one seeketh, the other findeth; the one consumeth the food, the other enjoys it; the one discourseth, and maketh reflections, the other is contented with a simple gaze upon the things, for it hath in possession their love and joy. Lastly, the one is as the means, the other as the end; the one as the road and journeying along it, the other as the end of the road and of the journeying.

From this is to be inferred a very common thing, which all masters of the spiritual life teach, although it is little (p. 119) understood of those who learn it; which is this, that, as the means cease when the end has been attained, as the voyaging is over when the port has been touched, so when, through the working out of our Meditation, we have come to the repose and sweet savour of Contemplation, we ought then to cease from that pious and laborious searching; and being satisfied with the simple gaze upon, and thought of, God--as though we had Him there present before us--we should rest in the enjoyment of that affection then given, whether it be of love, or of admiration, or joy, or other like sentiment.

The reason why this counsel is given is this, that as the aim of this devotion is love and the affections of the will rather than the speculations of the understanding, when the will has been caught and taken [p. 110] by this affection, we should put away all those discursive and intellectual speculations, so far as we can, in order that our soul with all its forces may be fastened upon this affection without being diverted by the action of other influences. A learned teacher, therefore, counsels us that as soon as anyone feels himself fired by the love of God, he should first put aside (p. 120.) all these considerations and thoughts--however exalted they may seem--not because they are really not good in themselves, but because they are then hindrances to what is better. and more important. For this is nothing else than that, having come to the end and purpose of our work, we should stay therein, and leave Meditation for the love of Contemplation. This may especially be done at the end of any exercise, that is, after the petition for the Divine love of which we have spoken, for one reason, because then it is supposed that the labour of the exercise we have just gone through has produced some divine devotion and feeling, since, saith the wise man, 'Better is the end of prayer than the beginning': and for another reason, that, after the work of Prayer and Meditation, it is well that one should give his mind a little rest, and allow it to repose in the arms of Contemplation. At this point, then, we should put away all other thoughts that may present themselves, and, quieting the mind and stilling the memory, fix all upon our Lord; and remembering that we are then in His presence, no longer dwell upon the details of divine things.

Ibidem p. 121. And not only at the end of the exercise but in the midst of it, and at whatever part of it, this spiritual swoon should come upon us, when the intellect is laid to sleep, we should make this pause, and enjoy the blessing bestowed; and then, when we have finished the digestion of it, turn to the matter we have in hand, as the gardener does, when he waters his garden-bed; who, after giving it (p. 122) a sufficiency of water, holds back the stream, and lets it soak and spread itself through the depths of the earth; and then when this hath somewhat dried up, he turns down upon it again the flow of water that it may receive still more, and be well irrigated.'

^111:9 Sap. viii. i: 'Disponit omnia suaviter.'

^111:10 Life, ch. xv. i.

^112:11 'The whole of the time in which our Lord communicates the simple, loving general attention of which I made mention before, or when the soul, assisted by grace, is established in that state, we must contrive to keep the understanding in repose, undisturbed by the intrusion of forms, figures, or particular knowledge, unless it were slightly and for an instant, and that with sweetness of love, to enkindle our souls the more. At other times, however, in all our acts of devotion and good works, we must make use of good recollections and meditations, so that we may feel an increase of profit and devotion; most especially applying ourselves to the life, passion, and death of Jesus Christ, our Lord, that our life and conduct may be an imitation of His.' (St. John of the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xxxii. 7.)

^113:12 Life, ch. xv. 2.

^114:13 Life, ch. xxiv. 2.

^115:14 Way of Perf. ch. xvi. 5. Castle, M. v. ch. i, 2, 3; ii. 4, 5; iii. 2, 6, 12.

^115:15 Way of Perf. ch. xxxi. 7. Concept. ch. iv. 6.

^115:16 Way of Perf. ch. xl. 3.

^116:17 Life, ch. xx. 31.

^116:18 Found. ch. vi.

^116:19 Found. ch. vi. 15.

^117:20 Life ch. xviii. 16, 17.

^117:21 Letter of Oct. 23, 1 376. Vol. II.

^118:22 Found. ch. viii. 7-8.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 119]

  

THE FIFTH MANSIONS

  

CHAPTER I.

BEGINS TO TREAT OF THE UNION OF THE SOUL WITH GOD IN PRAYER. HOW TO BE SURE THAT WE ARE NOT DECEIVED IN THIS MATTER.

1. Graces of the fifth mansions. 2. Contemplation to be striven for. 3. Physical effects of the Prayer of union. 4. Amazement of the intellect. 5. The Prayer of union and of quiet contrasted. 6. Divine and earthly union. 7. Competent directors in these matters. 8. Proof of union. 9. Assurance left in the soul. 10. Divine union beyond our Power to obtain.

1. OH, my sisters, how shall I describe the riches, treasures, and joys contained in the fifth mansions! Would it not be better to say nothing about them? They are impossible to depict, nor can the mind conceive, nor any comparisons portray them, all earthly things being too vile to serve the purpose. Send me, O my Lord, light from heaven that I may give some to these Thy servants, some of whom by Thy good will often enjoy these delights, lest the devil in the guise of an angel of light should deceive those whose only desire is to please Thee.

2. I said 'some,' but in reality there are very few [*1] who never enter this mansion: some more and some less, but most of them may be said at least

[p. 120]

to gain admittance into these rooms. I think that certain graces I am about to describe are bestowed on only a few of the nuns, but if the rest only arrive at the portal they receive a great boon from God, for 'many are called, but few are chosen.' [*2] All we who wear the holy habit of the Carmelites are called to prayer and contemplation. This was the object of our Order, [*3] to this lineage we belong. Our holy Fathers of Mount Carmel sought in perfect solitude and utter contempt of the world for this treasure, this precious pearl, [*4] of which we speak, and we are their descendants. How little do most of us care to prepare our souls, that our Lord may reveal this jewel to us! Outwardly we may appear to practise the requisite virtues, but we have far more to do than this before it is possible to attain to contemplation, to gain which we should neglect no means, either small or great. Rouse yourselves, my sisters, and since some foretaste of heaven may be had on earth, beg our Lord to give us grace not to miss it through our own fault. Ask Him to show us where to find it--ask Him to give us strength of soul to dig until we find this hidden treasure, which lies buried within our hearts, as I wish to show you if it please God to enable me. I said 'strength of soul,' that you might understand that strength of body is not indispensable when our Lord God chooses to withhold it. He makes it impossible for no one to gain these riches,

[p. 121]

but is content that each should do his best. Blessed be so just a God!

3. But, daughters, if you would purchase this treasure of which we are speaking, God would have you keep back nothing from Him, little or great. He will have it all; [*5] in proportion to what you know you have given will your reward be great or small. There is no more certain sign whether or not we have reached the prayer of union. Do not imagine that this state of prayer is, like the one preceding it, a sort of drowsiness (I call it 'drowsiness' because the soul seems to slumber, being neither quite asleep nor wholly awake). In the prayer of union the soul is asleep, fast asleep, as regards the world and itself: in fact, during the short time this state lasts it is deprived of all feeling whatever, being unable to think on any subject, even if it wished. No effort is needed here to suspend the thoughts: if the soul can love it knows not how, nor whom it loves, nor what it desires. In fact, it has died entirely to this world, to live more truly than ever in God. This is a delicious death, for the soul is deprived of the faculties it exercised while in the body: [*6] delicious because, (although not really the case), it seems to have left its mortal covering to abide more entirely in God. So completely does this take place, that I know not whether the body retains sufficient life to continue breathing; on

[p. 122]

consideration, I believe it does not; at any rate, if it still breathes, it does so unconsciously.

4. The mind entirely concentrates itself on trying to understand what is happening, which is beyond its power; it is so astounded that, if consciousness is not completely lost, at least no movement is possible: the person may be compared to one who falls into a dead faint with dismay. [*7]

5. Oh, mighty secrets of God! Never should I weary of trying to explain them if I thought it possible to succeed! I would write a thousand foolish things that one might be to the point, if only it might make us praise God more. I said this prayer produced no drowsiness in the mind; on the other hand, in the prayer (of quiet) described in the last mansion, until the soul has gained much experience it doubts what really happened to it. 'Was it nothing but fancy, or was it a sleep? Did it come from God or from the devil, disguised as an angel of light?' The mind feels a thousand misgivings, and well for it that it should, because, at I said, nature may sometimes deceive us in this case. Although there is little chance of the poisonous reptiles entering here, yet agile little lizards will try to slip in, though they can do no harm, especially if they remain unnoticed. These, as I said, are trivial fancies of the imagination, which are often very troublesome. However active these small lizards may be, they cannot enter the fifth mansion, for neither the imagination, the understanding, nor the memory has power to hinder the graces bestowed on it.

[p. 123]

6. I dare venture to assert that, if this is genuine union with God, the devil cannot interfere nor do any harm, for His Majesty is so joined and united with the essence of the soul, that the evil one dare not approach, nor can he even understand this mystery. This is certain, for it is said that the devil does not know our thoughts, much less can he penetrate a secret so profound that God does not reveal it even to us. [*8] Oh, blessed state, in which this cursed one cannot injure us! What riches we receive while God so works in us that neither we ourselves nor any one else can impede Him! What will He not bestow, Who is so eager to give, and Who can give us all He desires! You may perhaps have been puzzled at my saying 'if this is genuine union with God,' as if there might be other unions. There are indeed--not with God, but with vanities--when the devil transports the soul passionately addicted to them, but the union differs from that which is divine and the mind misses the delight and satisfaction, peace and happiness of divine union. These heavenly consolations are above all earthly joys, pleasure, and satisfaction. As great a difference exists between their origin and that of worldly pleasures as between their opposite effects, as you know by experience.

7. I said somewhere [*9] that the one seems only to touch the surface of the body, while the other penetrates to the very marrow: I believe this is

[p. 124]

correct, and I cannot express myself better. I fancy that you are not yet satisfied on this question, but are afraid of deception, for spiritual matters are very hard to explain. Enough, however, has been said for those who have received this grace, as the difference between divine union and any other is very striking. However, I will give you a clear proof which cannot mislead you, nor leave any doubt whether the favour comes from God or no. His Majesty brought it back to my memory this very day; it appears to me to be an unmistakable sign. In difficult questions, although I think I understand them and am speaking the truth, I always say 'it appears to me'; for, in case my opinion is wrong, I am most willing to submit to the judgment of theologians. Although they may not have had personal experience in such matters, yet in some way I do not understand, God Who sets them to give light to His Church enables them to recognize the truth when it is put before them. If they are not thoughtless and indevout, but servants of God, they are never dismayed at His mighty works, knowing perfectly well that it is in His power to perform far greater wonders. If some of the marvels told are new to them, yet they have read of others of the same kind, showing the former to be possible. I have had great experience as to this and have also met with timid, half-instructed people whose ignorance has cost me very dear. [*10] I am convinced that those who refuse to believe that God can do far more than this, and that He is pleased now, as in the past, to communicate

[p. 125]

[paragraph continues] Himself to His creatures, shut fast their hearts against receiving such favours themselves. Do not imitate them, sisters: be convinced that it is possible for God to perform still greater wonders. Do not concern yourselves as to whether those who receive these graces are good or wicked; as I said, He knows best and it is no business of yours: you should serve Him with a single heart and with humility, and should praise Him for His works and wonders. [*11]

8. Let us now speak of the sign which proves the prayer of union to have been genuine. As you have seen, God then deprives the soul of all its senses that He may the better imprint in it true wisdom: it neither sees, hears, nor understands anything while this state lasts, which is never more than a very brief time; [*12] it appears to the soul to be much shorter than it really is. God visits the soul in a manner which prevents its doubting, on returning to itself, that it dwelt in Him and that He was within it, and so firmly is it convinced of this truth that, although years may pass before this favour recurs, the soul can never forget it nor doubt the fact, [*13] setting aside the effects left by this prayer, to which I will refer later on. The conviction felt by the soul is the main point.

9. But, you may ask, how can a person who is incapable of sight and hearing see [*14] or know these

[p. 126]

things? I do not say that she saw it at the time, but that she perceives it clearly afterwards, not by any vision but by a certitude which remains in the heart which God alone could give. I know of some one who was unaware of God's being in all things by presence, power and essence, yet was firmly convinced of it by a divine favour of this sort. [*15] She asked an ill-instructed priest of the kind I mentioned to tell her in what way God dwelt within us: he was as ignorant on the subject as she had been before our Lord revealed to her the truth, and answered that the Almighty was only present in us by grace. [*16] Yet so strong was her

[p. 127]

conviction of the truth learnt during her prayer that she did not believe him and questioned other spiritual persons on the subject, who confirmed her in the true doctrine, much to her joy. Do not mistake and imagine that this certainty of God's having visited the soul concerns any corporal presence such as that of our Lord Jesus Christ Who dwells in the Blessed Sacrament, although we do not see Him: it relates solely to the Divinity. If we did not see it, how can we feel so sure of it? That I do not know: it is the work of the Almighty and I am certain that what I say is the fact. I maintain that a soul which does not feel this assurance has not been united to God entirely, but only by one of its powers, or has received one of the many other favours God is accustomed to bestow on men. In all such matters we must not seek to know how things happened: our understanding could not grasp them, therefore why trouble ourselves on the subject? It is enough to know that it is He, the all-powerful God, Who has performed the work. We can do nothing on our own part to gain this favour; it comes from God alone; therefore let us not strive to understand it.

10. Concerning my words: 'We can do nothing on our own part,' I was struck by the words of the Bride in the Canticles, which you will remember to have heard: 'The King brought me into the cellar of wine,' [*17] (or 'placed me' I think she says): she does not say she went of her own accord,

[p. 128]

although telling us how she wandered up and down seeking her Beloved. [*18] I think the prayer of union is the 'cellar' in which our Lord places us when and how He chooses, but we cannot enter it through any effort of our own. His Majesty alone can bring us there and come into the centre of our souls. In order to declare His wondrous works more clearly, He will leave us no share in them except complete conformity of our wills to His and abandonment of all things: He does not require the faculties or senses to open the door to Him; they are all asleep. He enters the innermost depths of our souls without a door, as He entered the room where the disciples sat, saying 'Pax vobis,' [*19] and as He emerged from the sepulchre without removing the stone that closed the entrance. You will see farther on, in the seventh mansion, far better than here, how God makes the soul enjoy His presence in its very centre. O daughters, what wonders shall we see, if we keep ever before our eyes our own baseness and frailty and recognize how unworthy we are to be the handmaids of so great a Lord, Whose marvels are beyond our comprehension! May He be for ever praised! Amen.

Footnotes

^119:1 Found. ch. iv. 8.

^120:2 St. Matt. xx. 16: 'Multi enim sunt vocati, pauci vero electi.'

^120:3 Maneant singuli in cellulis suis, vel juxta eas, die ac nocte in lege Domini meditantes et in orationibus vigilantes.' (Carmelite Rule).

^120:4 St. Matt, xiii. 46.

^121:5 'The reason why there are so few contemplatives is that there are so few persons who wholly withdraw themselves from transitory and created things' (Imitation, bk. iii. ch. xxxi. 1). See also Way of Perf. ch. xvi. 5. Life, ch. xi. 2-4; xxii. 18, 19.

^121:6 Way of Perf. ch. xxv. 1. Life, ch. xvi. Rel. I. i; viii. 7.

^122:7 Life, ch. xvii. 2.

^123:8 According to St. Thomas, angels--whether good or bad--do not know the thoughts of man unless they become manifest by some exterior sign. S. Theol. I. q. lvii. art. 4. See also St. John of the Cross, Dark Night, bk. II, ch. xxiii. 2, 5.

^123:9 Mansion iv. ch. i, 5.

^124:10 Life, ch. viii. 15.

^125:11 Life, ch. xviii. 16.

^125:12 Life, ch. xx. 13, 24.

^125:13 Philippus a SS. Trinitate, l.c., pars iii. tr. i. disc. iv. art, 2, where he adds some further signs. Anton. a Sp. S., l.c., tract. i. no. 116 and 117.

^125:14 'The soul does not see the good Master who teaches it, although [p. 126] clearly conscious of His presence.' (Concept. ch. iv. 3.)

^126:15 'There are three ways in which God is present in the soul. The first is His presence in essence, not in holy souls only, but in wretched and sinful souls as well, and also in all created things; for it is by this presence that He gives life and being, and were it withdrawn at once all things would return to nothing. This presence never fails in the soul. The second is His presence by grace, whereby He dwells in the soul, pleased and satisfied with it. This presence is not in all souls; for those who fall into mortal sin lose it, and no soul can know in a natural way whether it has it or not. The third is His presence by spiritual affection. God is wont to show His presence in many devout souls in divers ways, in refreshment, joy and gladness.' (St. John of the Cross, Spiritual Canticle, stanza xi. 2.)

'In every soul, even that of the greatest sinner in the world, God dwells and is substantially present. This way of union or presence of God, in the order of nature, subsists between Him and all His creatures; by this He preserves them in being, and if He withdraws it they immediately perish and cease to be. And so, when I speak of the union of the soul with God, I do not mean this substantial presence which is in every creature, but that union and transformation of the soul in God by love which is only then accomplished when there subsists the likeness which love begets.' (St. John of the Cross, Ascent, bk. ii. ch. v. 3.)

Fr. Gracian, Peregrinacion de Anastasio (Burgos, 1905), p. 171.

^126:16 Life, ch. xviii. 20. Rel. ix. 17; xi. 8. St. Teresa was so deeply impressed by the ignorance of this priest that she very frequently referred to it.

^127:17 Cant. i. 3: 'Introduxit me rex in cellaria sua.' Castle, M. v. ch. i. Way of Perf. ch. xviii. I. Concep. ch. iv. 4-8; v. 5; vi. 7; vii. 2-5. Life, ch. xviii. 17.

^128:18 Cant. iii. 2: 'Per vicos et plateas quaeram quem diligit anima mea.'

^128:19 St. John, xx. 19.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 129]

  

CHAPTER II.

CONTINUES THE SAME SUBJECT: EXPLAINS THE PRAYER OF UNION BY A DELICATE COMPARISON AND SPEAKS OF THE EFFECTS IT LEAVES UPON THE SOUL. THIS CHAPTER SHOULD RECEIVE GREAT ATTENTION.

1. The soul compared to a butterfly. 2. The grandeurs of creation. 3. Symbol of the soul and the silkworm. 4. Preparation of the soul for God's indwelling. 5. Mystic death of the silkworm. 6. Effects of divine union. 7. Increase of fervour and detachment. 8. Trials succeeding the prayer of union. 9. Longing for death and zeal for God's honour. 10. This zeal supernatural. 11. God alone works this grace. 12. The same zeal as that felt by our Lord on earth. 13. Christ's keenest suffering.

1. You may imagine that there is no more left to be described of the contents of this mansion, but a great deal remains to be told, for as I said, it contains favours of various degrees. I think there is nothing to add about the prayer of union, but when the soul on which God bestows this grace disposes itself for their reception, I could tell you much about the marvels our Lord works in it. I will describe some of them in my own way, also the state in which they leave the soul, and will use a suitable comparison to elucidate the matter, explaining that though we can take no active part in this work of God within us, [*1] yet we may do much to prepare ourselves to receive this grace. You have heard how wonderfully silk is made--in a way such as God alone could plan--how it all comes from an egg resembling a tiny pepper-corn. Not having seen it myself, I only know of it by hearsay, so if the facts are inaccurate the fault will not be mine. When, in the warm weather, the mulberry trees

[p. 130]

come into leaf, the little egg which was lifeless before its food was ready, begins to live. The caterpillar nourishes itself upon the mulberry leaves until, when it has grown large, people place near it small twigs upon which, of its own accord, it spins silk from its tiny mouth until it has made a narrow little cocoon in which it buries itself. Then this large and ugly worm leaves the cocoon as a lovely little white butterfly.

2. If we had not seen this but had only heard of it as an old legend, who could believe it? Could we persuade ourselves that insects so utterly without the use of reason as a silkworm or a bee would work with such industry and skill in our service that the poor little silkworm loses its life over the task? This would suffice for a short meditation, sisters, without my adding more, for you may learn from it the wonders and the wisdom of God. How if we knew the properties of all things? It is most profitable to ponder over the grandeurs of creation and to exult in being the brides of such a wise and mighty King.

3. Let us return to our subject. The silkworm symbolizes the soul which begins to live when, kindled by the Holy Spirit, it commences using the ordinary aids given by God to all, and applies the remedies left by Him in His Church, such as regular confession, religious hooks, and sermons; these are the cure for a soul dead in its negligence and sins and liable to fall into temptation. Then it comes to life and continues nourishing itself on this food and on devout meditation until it has attained full vigour, which is the essential point,

[p. 131]

for I attach no importance to the rest. When the silkworm is full-grown as I told you in the first part of this chapter, it begins to spin silk and to build the house wherein it must die. By this house, when speaking of the soul, I mean Christ. I think I read or heard somewhere, either that our life is hid in Christ, or in God (which means the same thing) or that Christ is our life. [*2] It makes little difference to my meaning which of these quotations is correct.

4. This shows, my daughters, how much, by God's grace, we can do, by preparing this home for ourselves, towards making Him our dwelling-place as He is in the prayer of union. You will suppose that I mean we can take away from or add something to God when I say that He is our home, and that we can make this home and dwell in it by our own power. Indeed we can: though we can neither deprive God of anything nor add aught to Him, yet we can take away from and add to ourselves, like the silkworms. The little we can do will hardly have been accomplished when this insignificant work of ours, which amounts to nothing at all, will be united by God to His greatness and thus enhanced with such immense value that our Lord Himself will be the reward of our toil. Although He has had the greatest share in it, He will join our trifling pains to the bitter sufferings He endured for us and make them one.

5. Forward then, my daughters! hasten over your work and build the little cocoon. Let us renounce

[p. 132]

self-love and self-will, [*3] care for nothing earthly, do penance, pray, mortify ourselves, be obedient, and perform all the other good works of which you know. Act up to your light; you have been taught your duties. Die! die as the silkworm does when it has fulfilled the office of its creation, and you will see God and be immersed in His greatness, as the little silkworm is enveloped in its cocoon. Understand that when I say 'you will see God,' I mean in the manner described, in which He manifests Himself in this kind of union.

6. Now let us see what becomes of the 'silkworm,' for all I have been saying leads to this. As soon as, by means of this prayer, the soul has become entirely dead to the world, it comes forth like a lovely little white butterfly! [*4] Oh, how great God is! How beautiful is the soul after having been immersed in God's grandeur and united closely to Him for but a short time! Indeed, I do not think it is ever as long as half an hour. [*5] Truly, the spirit does not recognize itself, being as different from what it was as is the white butterfly from the repulsive caterpillar. It does not know how it can have merited so great a good, or rather, whence this grace came [*6] which it well knows it merits not. The soul desires to praise our Lord God and longs to sacrifice itself and die a thousand deaths for Him. It feels an unconquerable desire for great

[p. 133]

crosses and would like to perform the most severe penances; it sighs for solitude and would have all men know God, while it is bitterly grieved at seeing them offend Him. These matters will be described more fully in the next mansion; there they are of the same nature, yet in a more advanced state the effects are far stronger, because, as I told you, if; after the soul has received these favours, it strives to make still farther progress, it will experience great things. Oh, to see the restlessness of this charming little butterfly, although never in its life has it been more tranquil and at peace! May God be praised! It knows not where to stay nor take its rest; everything on earth disgusts it after what it has experienced, particularly when God has often given it this wine which leaves fresh graces behind it at every draught.

7. It despises the work it did while yet a caterpillar--the slow weaving of its cocoon thread by thread--its wings have grown and it can fly; could it be content to crawl? All that it can do for God seems nothing to the soul compared with its desire. It no longer wonders at what the saints bore for Him, knowing by experience how our Lord aids and transforms the soul until it no longer seems the same in character and appearance. Formerly it feared penance, now it is strong: it wanted courage to forsake relations, friends, or possessions: neither its actions, its resolutions, nor separation from those it loved could detach the soul, but rather seemed to increase its fondness. Now it finds even their rightful claims a burden, [*7] fearing contact with

[p. 134]

them lest it should offend God. It wearies of everything, realizing that no true rest can be found in creatures.

8. I seem to have enlarged on this subject, yet far more might be said about it; those who have received this favour will think I have treated it too briefly. No wonder this pretty butterfly, estranged from earthly things, seeks repose elsewhere. Where can the poor little creature go? It cannot return to whence it came, for as I told you, that is not in the soul's power, do what it will, but depends upon God's pleasure. Alas, what fresh trials begin to afflict the mind! Who would expect this after such a sublime grace? [*8] In fact in one way or another we must carry the cross all our lives. If people told me that ever since attaining to the prayer of union they had enjoyed constant peace and consolation, I should reply that they could never have reached that state, but that, at the most, if they had arrived as far as the last mansion, their emotion must have been some spiritual satisfaction joined to physical debility. It might even have been a false sweetness caused by the devil, who gives peace for a time only to wage far fiercer war later on. I do not mean that those who reach this stage possess no peace; they do so in a very high degree, for their sorrows, though extremely severe, are so beneficial and proceed from so good a source as to procure both peace and happiness.

9. Discontent with this world gives such a painful longing to quit it that, if the heart finds comfort,

[p. 135]

it is solely from the thought that God wishes it to remain here in banishment. Even this is not enough to reconcile it to fate, for after all the gifts received, it is not yet so entirely surrendered to the will of God as it afterwards becomes. Here, although conformed to His will, the soul feels an unconquerable reluctance to submit, for our Lord has not given it higher grace. During prayer this grief breaks forth in floods of tears, probably from the great pain felt at seeing God offended and at thinking how many souls, both heretics and heathens, are lost eternally, and keenest grief of all, Christians also! The soul realizes the greatness of God's mercy and knows that however wicked men are, they may still repent and be saved; yet it fears that many precipitate themselves into hell.

10. Oh, infinite greatness of God! A few years ago--indeed, perhaps but a few days--this soul thought of nothing but itself. Who has made it feel such tormenting cares? If we tried for many years to obtain such sorrow by means of meditation, we could not succeed.

11. God help me! If for long days and years I considered how great a wrong it is that God should be offended, and that lost souls are His children and my brethren; if I pondered over the dangers of this world and how blessed it would be to leave this wretched life, would not that suffice? No, daughters, the pain would not be the same. for this, by the help of God, we can obtain by such meditation; but it does not seem to penetrate the very depths of our being like the other which

[p. 136]

appears to cut the soul to pieces and grind it to powder through no action--even sometimes with no wish--of its own. What is this sorrow, then? Whence does it come? I will tell you. Have you not heard (I quoted the words to you just now, but did not apply to them this meaning) [*9] how the Bride says that God 'brought her into the cellar of wine and set in order charity in her'? [*10] This is what happens here. The soul has so entirely yielded itself into His hands and is so subdued by love for Him that it knows or cares for nothing but that God should dispose of it according to His will. I believe that He only bestows this grace on those He takes entirely for His own. He desires that, without knowing how, the spirit should come forth stamped with His seal for indeed it does no more than does the wax when impressed with the signet. It does not mould itself but need only be in a fit condition--soft and pliable; even then it does not soften itself but must merely remain still and submit to the impression.

12. How good Thou art, O God! All is done for us by Thee, Who dost but ask us to give our wills to Thee that we may be plastic as wax in Thy hands. You see, sisters, what God does to this soul so that it may know that it is His. He gives it something of His own--that which His Son possessed when living on earth--He could bestow on greater gift on us. Who could ever have longed more eagerly to leave this life than did Christ?

[p. 137]

[paragraph continues] As He said at the Last Supper: 'With desire have I desired' [*11] this. O Lord! does not that bitter death Thou art to undergo present itself before Thine eyes in all its pain and horror? 'No, for My ardent love and My desire to save souls are immeasurably stronger than the torments. This deeper sorrow I have suffered and still suffer while living here on earth, makes other pain seem as nothing in comparison.'

13. I have often meditated on this and I know that the torture a friend of mine [*12] has felt, and still feels, at seeing our Lord sinned against is so unbearable that she would far rather die than continue in such anguish. Then I thought that if a soul whose charity is so weak compared to that of Christ--indeed, in comparison with His this charity might be said not to exist--experiences this insufferable grief, what must have been the feelings of our Lord Jesus Christ and what must His life have been? for all things were present before His eyes and He was the constant witness of the great offences committed against His Father. I believe without doubt that this pained Him far more than His most sacred Passion. There, at least, He found the end of all His trials, while His agony was allayed by the consolation of gaining our salvation through His death and of proving how He loved His Father by suffering for Him. Thus, people who, urged by fervent love, perform great penances

[p. 138]

hardly feel them but want to do still more and count even that as little. What, then, must His Majesty have felt at thus publicly manifesting His perfect obedience to His Father and His love for His brethren? What joy to suffer in doing God's will! Yet I think the constant sight of the many sins committed against God and of the numberless souls on their way to hell must have caused Him such anguish that, had He not been more than man, one day of such torment would have destroyed not only His life but many more lives, had they been His.

Footnotes

^129:1 Way of Perf. ch. xxv. 3.

^131:2 Col. iii. 3: 'Vita vestra est abscondita cum Christo in Deo.' Gal. ii. w: 'Vivo autem, jam on ego; vivit vero in me Christus.'

^132:3 Way of Perf. ch. xxxi. i 1.

^132:4 St. Teresa must have been thinking of this simile when she chose 'butterflies' as the pseudonym for her nuns in her letters at the time when she was obliged to be cautious on account of the troubles of the Reform.

^132:5 Life, ch. xviii. 16. 

^132:6 Life, ch. xviii. 5-7.

^133:7 Rel. ix, 11.

^134:8 Way of Perf. ch. xviii. 1-4. Castle, M. vi ch. i. 3, sqq. M. vii. ch. iv. 7.

^136:9 Fifth Mansions, ch. i. 10.

^136:10 Cant. ii. 4. 'Introduxit me in cellam vinariam, ordinavit in me caritatem.'

^137:11 St. Luke xxii. 15: 'Desiderio desideravi hoc pascha manducare vobiscum, antequam patiar.'

^137:12 This friend is, of course, St. Teresa herself. See Life, ch. xiii. 14; xxxii. 9. Way of Perf. ch. i. 3. Castle, M. vii. ch. i. 5, 6. Excl. x. 9.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III.

THIS CHAPTER CONTINUES THE SAME SUBJECT AND SPEAKS OF ANOTHER KIND OF UNION WHICH THE SOUL CAN OBTAIN WITH THE HELP OF GOD. THE IMPORTANCE OF LOVE OF OUR NEIGHBOUR IN THIS MATTER. THIS IS VERY USEFUL TO READ.

1. Zeal for souls left by divine union. 2. The soul may fall from such a state. 3. How divine union may always be obtained. 4. Union with the will of God the basis of all supernatural union. 5. Advantage of union gained by self-mortification. 6. Defects which hinder this union. 7. Divine union obtained by perfect love of God and our neighbour. 8. Love for God and our neighbour are proportionate. 9. Real and imaginary virtues. 10. Illusionary good resolutions. 11. Works, not feelings, procure union. 12. Fraternal charity will certainly gain this union.

1. LET us now return to our little dove and see what graces God gives it in this state. This implies that the soul endeavours to advance in the service of our Lord and in self-knowledge. If it receives the grace of union and then does no more, thinking itself safe, and so leads a careless life, wandering off the road to heaven (that is, the keeping of the

[p. 139]

commandments) it will share the fate of the butterfly that comes from the silkworm, which lays some eggs that produce more of its kind and then dies for ever. I say it leaves some eggs, for I believe God will not allow so great a favour to be lost but that if the recipient does not profit by it, others will. For while it keeps to the right path, this soul, with its ardent desires and great virtues, helps others and kindles their fervour with its own. Yet even after having lost this it may still long to benefit others and delight to make known the mercies shown by God to those who love and serve Him. [*1]

2. I knew a person to whom this happened. Although greatly erring, she longed that others should profit by the favours God had bestowed on her and taught the way of prayer to people ignorant of it, thus helping them immensely. God afterwards bestowed fresh light upon her; indeed the prayer of union had not hitherto produced the above effects in her. How many people there must be to whom our Lord communicates Himself, who, like Judas, are called to the Apostleship and made kings by Him, as was Saul, yet who afterwards lose everything by their own fault! We should learn from this, sisters, that if we would merit fresh favours and avoid losing those we already possess, our only safety lies in obedience and in following the law of God. This I say, both to those who have received these graces and to those who have not. [*2]

3. In spite of all I have written, there still seems some difficulty in understanding this mansion. The

[p. 140]

advantage of entering is so great, that it is well that none should despair of doing so because God does not give them the supernatural gifts described above. With the help of divine grace true union can always be attained by forcing ourselves to renounce our own will and by following the will of God in all things. [*3]

4. Oh, how many of us affirm that we do this, and believe we seek nothing else--indeed we would die for the truth of what we say! If this be the case I can only declare, as I fancy I did before, and I shall again and again, that we have already obtained this grace from God. Therefore we need not wish for that other delightful union described above, for its chief value lies in the resignation of our will to that of God without which it could not be reached. [*4] Oh, how desirable is this union! The happy soul which has attained it will live in this world and in the next without care of any sort. No earthly events can trouble it, unless it should see itself in danger of losing God or should witness any offence offered Him. Neither sickness, poverty, nor the loss of any one by death affect it, except that of persons useful to the Church of God, for the soul realizes thoroughly that God's disposal is wiser than its own desires.

5. You must know that there are different kinds

[p. 141]

of sorrow: there are both griefs and joys rising from an impulse of nature or from a charity which makes us pity our neighbour, like that felt by our Saviour when He raised Lazarus from the dead. [*5] These feelings do not destroy union with the will of God nor do they disturb the soul by a restless, turbulent, and lasting passion. They soon pass away, for as I said of sweetness in prayer, [*6] they do not affect the depths of the soul but only its senses and faculties. They are found in the former mansions, but do not enter the last of all. Is it necessary, in order to attain to this kind of divine union, for the powers of the soul to be suspended? No; God has many ways of enriching the soul and bringing it to these mansions besides what might be called a 'short cut.' But, be sure of this, my daughters: in any case the silkworm must die and it will cost you more in this way. In the former manner this death is facilitated by finding ourselves introduced into a new life; here, on the contrary, we must give ourselves the death-blow. I own that the work will be much harder, but then it will be of higher value so that your reward will be greater if you come forth victorious; [*7] yet there is no doubt it is possible for you to attain this true union with the will of God.

6. This is the union I have longed for all my life and that I beg our Lord to grant me; it is the most certain and the safest. But alas, how few of us ever

[p. 142]

obtain it! Those who are careful not to offend God, and who enter the religious state, think there is nothing more to do. How many maggots remain in hiding until, like the worm which gnawed at Jonas's ivy, [*8] they have destroyed our virtues. These pests are such evils as self-love, self-esteem, rash judgment of others even in small matters, and a want of charity in not loving our neighbour quite as much as ourselves. Although perforce we satisfy our obligations sufficiently to avoid sin, yet we fall far short of what must be done in order to obtain perfect union with the will of God.

7. What do you think, daughters, is His will? That we may become quite perfect and so be made one with Him and with His Father as He prayed we might be. [*9] Observe, then, what is wanting in us to obtain this. I assure you it is most painful for me to write on this subject, for I see how far I am, through my own fault, from having attained perfection. There is no need for us to receive special consolations from God in order to arrive at conformity with His will; He has done enough in giving us His Son to teach the way. This does not mean that we must so submit to the will of God as not to sorrow at such troubles as the death of a father or brother, or that we must bear crosses

[p. 143]

and sickness with joy. [*10] This is well, but it sometimes comes from common sense which, as we cannot help ourselves, makes a virtue of necessity. How often the great wisdom of the heathen philosophers led them to act thus in trials of this kind! Our Lord asks but two things of us: love, for Him and for our neighbour: these are what we must strive to obtain. If we practise both these virtues perfectly we shall be doing His will and so shall be united to Him. But, as I said, we are very far from obeying and serving our great Master perfectly in these two matters: may His Majesty give us the grace to merit union with Him; it is in our power to gain it if we will.

8. I think the most certain sign that we keep these two commandments is that we have a genuine love for others. We cannot know whether we love God although there may be strong reasons for thinking so, but there can be no doubt about whether we love our neighbour or no. [*11] Be sure that in proportion as you advance in fraternal charity, you are increasing in your love of God, [*12] for His Majesty bears so tender an affection for us that I cannot doubt He will repay our love for others by augmenting, in a thousand different ways, that which we bear for Him. We should watch most carefully over ourselves in this matter, for if we are faultless on this point we have done all. I believe human nature is so evil that we could not feel a perfect

[p. 144]

charity for our neighbour unless it were rooted in the love of God.

9. In this most important matter, sisters, we should be most vigilant in little things, taking no notice of the great works we plan during prayer which we imagine that we would perform for other people, even perhaps for the sake of saving a single soul. If our actions afterwards belie these grand schemes, there is no reason to imagine that we should do anything of the sort. I say the same of humility and the other virtues. The devil's wiles are many; he would turn hell upside down a thousand times to make us think ourselves better than we are. He has good reason for it, for such fancies are most injurious; sham virtues springing from this root are always accompanied by a vainglory never found in those of divine origin, which are free from pride.

10. It is amusing to see souls who, while they are at prayer, fancy they are willing to be despised and publicly insulted for the love of God, yet afterwards do all they can to hide their small defects; if any one unjustly accuses them of a fault, God deliver us from their outcries! Let those who cannot bear such things take no notice of the splendid plans they made when alone, which could have been no genuine determination of the will but only some trick of the imagination, or the results would have been very different. The devil assaults and deceives people in this way, often doing great harm to women and others too ignorant to understand the difference between the powers of the soul and the imagination, and a thousand other matters of

[p. 145]

the sort. O sisters! how easy it is to know which of you have attained to a sincere love of your neighbour, and which of you are far from it. If you knew the importance of this virtue, your only care would be to gain it.

11. When I see people very anxious to know what sort of prayer they practise, covering their faces and afraid to move or think lest they should lose any slight tenderness and devotion they feel, I know how little they understand how to attain union with God since they think it consists in such things as these. No, sisters, no; our Lord expects works from us. If you see a sick sister whom you can relieve, [*13] never fear losing your devotion; compassionate her; if she is in pain, feel for it as if it were your own and, when there is need, fast so that she may eat, not so much for her sake as because you know your Lord asks it of you. This is the true union of our will with the will of God. If some one else is well spoken of, be more pleased than if it were yourself; this is easy enough, for if you were really humble it would vex you to be praised. It is a great good to rejoice at your sister's virtues being known and to feel as sorry for the fault you see in her as if it were yours, hiding it from the sight of others.

12. I have often spoken on this subject elsewhere, [*14] because, my sisters, if we fail in this I know that all is lost: please God this may never be our case. If you possess fraternal charity, I assure you that you will certainly obtain the union I have described.

[p. 146]

[paragraph continues] If you are conscious that you are wanting in this charity, although you may feel devotion and sweetness and a short absorption in the prayer of quiet (which makes you think you have attained to union with God), believe me you have not yet reached it. Beg our Lord to grant you perfect love for your neighbour, and leave the rest to Him. He will give you more than you know how to desire if you constrain yourselves and strive with all your power to gain it, forcing your will as far as possible to comply in all things with your sisters' wishes although you may sometimes forfeit your own rights by so doing. Forget your self-interests for theirs, how ever much nature may rebel; when opportunity occurs take some burden upon yourself to ease your neighbour of it. Do not fancy it will cost you nothing and that you will find it all done for you: think what the love He bore for us cost our Spouse, Who to free us from death, Himself suffered the most painful death of all--the death of the Cross.

Footnotes

^139:1 Life, ch. vii. 18. Way of Perf. xli. 8.

^139:2 Life. ch, vii. 21.

^140:3 Found. ch. v. 10. 'These shall not attain to the true liberty of a pure heart, nor to the grace of a delightful familiarity with Me, unless they first resign themselves and offer themselves a daily sacrifice to Me: for without this, divine union neither is nor will be obtained.' (Imitation, book iii. ch. xxxvii. 4.)

^140:4 Philippus a SS. Trinitate, l.c., p. iii. tr. i, disc. ii. art. 4.

^141:5 St. John xi. 35, 36: 'Et lacrymatus est Jesus. Dixerunt ergo Judaei: Ecce quomodo amabat cum.'

^141:6 Fourth Mansions, ch. i. 5. Fifth Mansions, ch. i. 7.

^141:7 Way of Perf. ch. xvii. 2.

^142:8 Jonas iv. 6, 7: 'And the Lord God prepared an ivy, and it came up over the head of Jonas, to be a shadow over his head, and to cover him, for he was fatigued; and Jonas was exceeding glad of the ivy. But God prepared a worm, when the morning arose on the following day: and it struck the ivy and it withered.'

^142:9 St. John xvii. 22, 23: 'Ut sint unum, sicut et nos unum sumus. Ego in eis, et tu in me: ut sint consummati in unum.' Way of Perf. ch. xxxii. 6.

^143:10 Way of Perf. ch. ix. i, 2.

^143:11 1 St. John iv. 20: 'Qui enim non diligit fratrem suum quem videt, Deum quem non videt quomodo potest diligere?'

^143:12 Way of Perf. ch. xviii. 5.

^145:13 Way of Perf. ch. vii. 4.

^145:14 Way of Perf. ch. iv. 3; vii. 4.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 147]

  

CHAPTER IV.

FURTHER EXPLANATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT; EXPLAINS THIS PRAYER. THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING ON ONE'S GUARD, AS THE DEVIL EAGERLY DESIRES TO TURN SOULS BACK FROM THE RIGHT PATH.

1. The spiritual espousals. 2. The prayer of union resembles a betrothal. 3. Before the spiritual nuptials temptations are dangerous. 4. The great good done by souls faithful to these graces. 5. Religious subject to the devil's deceptions. 6. Satan's strata-gems. 7. Why they are . 8. Prayer and watchfulness our safeguards. 9. God's watchfulness over such souls. 10. Progress in virtue. 11. Insignificance of our actions compared with their reward. 12. St. Teresa's motives for writing on prayer.

1. You appear anxious to know what has become of the little dove and where she obtains rest, since obviously she can find it neither in spiritual consolations nor in earthly pleasures but takes a higher flight. I cannot tell you until we come to the last mansion: God grant I may remember or have leisure to write it. It is nearly five months since I began this work, and as my head is too weak to read it again, no doubt it will be very disconnected and full of repetitions: however, as it is only for my sisters, that will matter little. Yet I should like to express myself more fully about the prayer of union and will make use, to the best of my scanty wits, of a comparison. Later on we will speak of the little butterfly, which is never still, for it can find no true repose, yet always fertile, doing good both to itself and others. [*1] You have often heard that God spiritually espouses souls: may He be

[p. 148]

praised for His mercy in thus humbling Himself so utterly. Though but a homely comparison, yet I can find nothing better to express my meaning than the Sacrament of Matrimony although the two things are very different. In divine union everything is spiritual and far removed from anything corporal, all the joys our Lord gives and the mutual delight felt in it being celestial and very unlike human marriage, which it excels a thousand times. Here all is love united to love; its operations are more pure, refined, and sweet than can be described, though our Lord knows how to make the soul sensible of them.

2. I think this union does not attain as far as the spiritual espousals but resembles the preliminaries that take place when two people are contemplating a betrothal. Their suitability and willingness for the alliance are first discussed; then they may be allowed to see one another sometimes so as to come to a decision. Thus it is in the spiritual espousals: when the preliminary agreement has been made and the soul thoroughly understands what great advantages she will gain, having resolved to fulfil the will of her Spouse in all things and to do all she can to please Him, His Majesty Who knows well whether this is so in reality, wishes in return to gratify His bride. He therefore bestows this favour upon her, visits her and draws her into His presence, as He wishes her to know Him better. We might compare the prayer of union to a visit, for it lasts but a very little while. [*2] There is no longer any

[p. 149]

question of deliberation, but the soul in a secret manner sees to what a Bridegroom it is betrothed; the senses and faculties could not, in a thousand years, gain the knowledge thus imparted in a very short time. The Spouse, being Who He is, leaves the soul far more deserving of completing the espousals, as we may call them; the enamoured soul in its love for Him makes every effort to prevent their being frustrated. Should it grow neglectful and set its affections on anything except our Lord, it will forfeit everything: this loss is as great as are the favours the soul has continually received, which are precious beyond description. [*3]

3. O Christian souls! you whom God has brought thus far! I implore you for His dear sake not to grow careless, but to avoid all occasions of sin; you are not strong enough yet to undergo temptation, as you will be after the espousals which take place in the next mansion. Here the betrothed are, as they say, only acquainted by sight, [*4] and the devil will spare no pains to oppose and prevent their nuptials. Afterwards, when he sees the Bride is wholly given to her Bridegroom, he is afraid to interfere, having learnt by experience that if he molests her, while he loses much, she will gain greatly in merit.

4. I can assure you, my daughters, [*5] that I have known people far advanced in the spiritual life who had reached this state of prayer yet whom the devil reclaimed by his subtlety and wiles: as I

[p. 150]

have often said, all hell leagues together against such souls because the loss of one of them entails the perdition of many more, as Satan is well aware. If we considered how many men God draws to Himself by means of one, we should praise Him fervently. Think of the multitudes converted by the martyrs or by one young maiden like St. Ursula! Again, of how many victims the evil one was deprived by St. Dominic, St. Francis, and other founders of religious orders. How many more he loses, even now, through Father Ignatius [Loyola], who founded the Company [of Jesus]! As we read their lives, we learn that they received such graces from God. How was this great good done except by their efforts not to forfeit, through any fault of theirs, these divine espousals? Oh, my daughters, how willing our Lord is to grant us the same graces! In fact, there is even more urgent need now for persons to prepare for such favours, since there are fewer who care for His honour. We love ourselves too much and are too prudent to give up any of our rights. What a deception! May God in His mercy give us light, lest we sink into such darkness.

5. You may question or be in doubt on two points. Firstly: if the soul is entirely united with the will of God, as I have stated, how can it be deceived, since it ever seeks to follow His pleasure? Secondly, how can the devil enter and work such havoc as to destroy your soul while you are so utterly withdrawn from the world and constantly frequent the Sacraments? [*6] At the same time you enjoy the society

[p. 151]

of angels (as we might call them) and by the mercy of God you desire nothing but to serve and please Him in all things? [*7] It is not surprising that people in the world should run such risks. I admit you have the right to say this, for God has shown us signal mercy; but, as I said above, knowing as I do that Judas was amongst the Apostles and that he held constant intercourse with God Himself, to Whose words he listened, I learn that the state of religion does not make us safe.

6. To your first question I reply that doubtless if such a soul is always faithful to the will of God, it cannot be lost; the evil one, however, comes with his keen subtlety and, under the pretext of good, leads it astray in some trivial matter and causes it to commit small defects which he makes it believe are harmless. Thus, little by little, the reason is obscured and the will is weakened while the devil fosters his victim's self-love, until, by degrees, he succeeds in withdrawing it from union with the will of God and makes it follow its own will.

7. The answer to your first inquiry will serve for the second. No enclosure can be too strict for Satan to enter nor any desert too remote for him to visit. Besides, God may permit him to tempt the soul to prove its virtue; for as He intends it to enlighten others, it is better for it to fail in the beginning than when it might do them great harm.

8. We must beg God constantly in our prayers to uphold us by His hand; we should keep ever in our minds the truth that if He leaves us, most

[p. 152]

certainly we shall fall at once into the abyss, for we must never be so foolish as to trust in ourselves. After this I think the greatest safeguard is to be very careful and to watch how we advance in virtue; we must notice whether we are making progress or falling back in it, especially as regards the love of our neighbour, the desire to be thought the least of all and how we perform our ordinary, everyday duties. If we attend to this and beg Our Lord to enlighten us, we shall at once perceive our gain or loss.

9. Do not suppose that after advancing the soul to such a state God abandons it so easily that it is light work for the devil to regain it. When His Majesty sees it leaving Him, He feels the loss so keenly that He gives it in many a way a thousand secret warnings which reveal to it the hidden danger. [*8]

10. In conclusion, let us strive to make constant progress: we ought to feel great alarm if we do not find ourselves advancing, for without doubt the evil one must be planning to injure us in some way; it is impossible for a soul that has come to this state not to go still farther, for love is never idle. Therefore it is a very bad sign when one comes to a stand-still in virtue. She who aspires to become the spouse of God Himself, and has treated with His Majesty and come to such an understanding with Him, must not leave off and go to sleep. [*9]

11. To show you, my daughters, how Christ treats the souls He takes for His brides, I will now speak

[p. 153]

of the sixth mansions. You will then see how little in comparison is all that we can do or suffer in His service to prepare ourselves for the reception of such immense favours. Perhaps our Lord decreed that I should write this in order that the knowledge of the great reward to come, and of His infinite mercy in seeking to give and to manifest Himself to such worms as we are, might make us forget our wretched, petty, earthly pleasures and run on our way with eyes fixed on His grandeur, inflamed with love for Him.

12. May He enable me to explain some of these difficult matters; if our Lord and the Holy Ghost do not guide my pen, I know the task will prove impossible. 1 beg Him to prevent my saying anything unless it will profit you. His Majesty knows that, as far as I can judge, I have no other wish but that His Name may be glorified and that we may strive to serve a Lord Who thus recompenses our efforts even in this world. What, then, will be our joy in heaven where it will be continuous, without the interruptions, labours, and dangers of this tempestuous sea of life? Were it not for the fear of losing or offending Him, we should wish to live until the end of the world [*10] in order to work for so great a God--our Lord and our Spouse. May His Majesty enable us to render Him some service free from the many faults we always commit, even in good works! Amen.

Footnotes

^147:1 Compare: 'habebit fructum in respectione animarum sanctarum' (Breviar. Rom. Ant. ad Laudes de Com. Virg.); 'quasi apis argumentosa Domino deservisti' (Ibid. Feast of St. Caecilia.)

^148:2 Life, ch. xviii.

^149:3 Way of Perf. ch. xxxi. 10.

^149:4 Phil. a SS. Trinit. l.c. p. iii. tract. i. disc. ii. art. 2.

^149:5 Contrast with this paragraph what the Saint says in her Life, ch. xix.  section 8.

^150:6 Life, ch, xxxvi. 26; xxxix. 14. Found. ch. i. 1-4.

^151:7 Way of Perf. ch. i, 2; xiii. 3. Found. ch. i. 3.

^152:8 Life, ch. xix. 9.

^152:9 Life, ch. xix. 7.

^153:10 Rel. ix. 19.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 154]

  

THE SIXTH MANSIONS

  

CHAPTER I.

THIS CHAPTER SHOWS HOW, WHEN GOD BESTOWS GREATER FAVOURS ON THE SOUL, IT SUFFERS MORE SEVERE AFFLICTIONS. SOME OF THE LATTER ARE DESCRIBED AND DIRECTIONS HOW TO BEAR THEM GIVEN TO THE DWELLERS IN THIS MANSION. THIS CHAPTER IS USEFUL FOR THOSE SUFFERING INTERIOR TRIALS.

1. Love kindled by divine favours. 2. Our Lord excites the soul's longings. 3. Courage needed to reach the last mansions. 4. Trials accompanying divine favours. 5. Outcry raised against souls striving for perfection. 6. St. Teresa's personal experience of this. 7. Praise distasteful to an enlightened soul. 8. This changes to indifference. 9. Humility of such souls. 10. Their zeal for God's glory. 11. Perfect and final indifference to praise or blame. 12. Love of enemies. 13. Bodily sufferings. 14. St. Teresa's physical ills. 15. A timorous confessor. 16. Anxiety on account of past sins. 17. Fears and aridity. 18. Scruples and fears raised by the devil. 19. Bewilderment of the soul. 20. God alone relieves these troubles. 21. Human weakness. 22. Earthly consolations are of no avail. 23. Prayer gives no comfort at such a time. 24. Remedies for these interior trials. 25. Trials caused by the devil. 26. Other afflictions. 27. Preparatory to entering the seventh mansions.

1. BY the aid of the Holy Ghost I am now about to treat of the sixth mansions, where the soul, wounded with love for its Spouse, sighs more than ever for solitude, withdrawing as far as the duties of its state permit from all that can interrupt it,

[p. 155]

[paragraph continues] The sight it has enjoyed of Him is so deeply imprinted on the spirit that its only desire is to behold Him again. I have already said that, [*1] even by the imagination, nothing is seen in this prayer that can be called sight. I speak of it as 'sight' because of the comparison I used.

2. The soul is now determined to take no other Bridegroom than our Lord, but He disregards its desires for its speedy espousals, wishing that these longings should become still more vehement and that this good, which far excels all other benefits, should be purchased at some cost to itself. And although for so great a gain all that we must endure is but a poor price to pay, I assure you, daughters, that this pledge of what is in store for us is needed to inspire us with courage to bear our crosses.

3. O My God, how many troubles both interior and exterior must one suffer before entering the seventh mansions! Sometimes, while pondering over this I fear that, were they known beforehand, human infirmity could scarcely bear the thought nor resolve to encounter them, however great might appear the gain. If, however, the soul has already reached the seventh mansions, it fears nothing: boldly undertaking to suffer all things for God, [*2] it gathers strength from its almost uninterrupted union with Him.

4. I think it would be well to tell you of some of the trials certain to occur in this state. Possibly all souls may not be led in this way, but I think that those who sometimes enjoy such truly heavenly

[p. 156]

favours cannot be altogether free from some sort of earthly troubles. Therefore, although at first I did not intend to speak on this subject, yet afterwards I thought that it might greatly comfort a soul in this condition if it knew what usually happens to those on whom God bestows graces of this kind, for at the time they really seem to have lost everything.

5. I shall not enumerate these trials in their proper order, but will describe them as they come to my memory, beginning with the least severe. This is an outcry raised against such a person by those amongst whom she lives, and even from others she has nothing to do with but who fancy that at some time in her life they recollect having seen her. They say she wants to pass for a saint, that she goes to extremes in piety to deceive the world and to depreciate people who are better Christians than herself without making such a parade of it. But notice that she does nothing except endeavour to carry out the duties of her state more perfectly. Persons she thought were her friends desert her, making the most bitter remarks of all. They take it much to heart that her soul is ruined--she is manifestly deluded--it is all the devil's work--she will share the fate of so-and-so who was lost through him, and she is leading virtue astray. They cry out that she is deceiving her confessors, and tell them so, citing examples of others who came to ruin in the same way and make a thousand scoffing remarks of the same sort. [*3]

[p. 157]

6. I know some one who feared she would be unable to find any priest who would hear her confession, to such a pass did things come; but as it is a long story, I will not stop to tell it now. The worst of it is, these troubles do not blow over but last all her life, for one person warns the other to have nothing to do with people of her kind. You will say that, on the other hand, some speak in her favour. O my daughters, how few think well of her in comparison with the many who hate her!

7. Besides this, praise pains such a soul more than blame because it recognizes clearly that any good it possesses is the gift of God and in no wise its own, seeing that but a short time ago it was weak in virtue and involved in grave sins. [*4] Therefore commendation causes it intolerable suffering, at least at first, although later on, for many reasons, the soul is comparatively indifferent to either.

8. The first is that experience has shown the mind that men are as ready to speak well as ill of others, so it attaches no more importance to the one than to the other. Secondly, our Lord having granted it greater light, it perceives that no good thing in it is its own but is His gift, and becomes oblivious of self, praising God for His graces as if they were found in a third person.

9. The third reason is that, realizing the benefit reaped by others from witnessing graces given it by God, such a one thinks that it is for their profit He causes them to discover in her virtues that do not exist.

[p. 158]

10. Fourthly, souls seeking God's honour and glory more than their own are cured of the temptation (which usually besets beginners) of thinking that human praise will cause them the injury they have seen it do to others. Nor do these souls care much for men's contempt if only, by their means, any one should praise God at least once--come what may afterwards.

11. These and other reasons to a certain extent allay the great distress formerly given by human praise which, however, still causes some discomfort unless the soul has become utterly regardless of men's tongues. It is infinitely more grieved at being undeservedly esteemed by the world than by any calumny; and when at last it becomes almost indifferent to praise, it cares still less for censure, which even pleases it and sounds like harmonious music to the ears.

12. This is perfectly true; the soul is rather strengthened than depressed by its trials, experience having taught it the great advantages derived from them. It does not think men offend God by persecuting it, but that He permits them to do so for its greater gain. [*5] So strong is this belief that such a person bears a special affection for these people, holding them as truer friends and greater benefactors than those who speak well of her. [*6]

13. Our Lord now usually sends severe bodily infirmity. This is a far heavier cross, especially if acute pain is felt: if this is violent, I think it is the

[p. 159]

hardest of earthly trials. I speak of exterior trials; but corporal pains if of the worst kind enter the interior of our being also, affecting both spirit and body, so that the soul in its anguish knows not what to do with itself and would far rather meet death at once by some quick martyrdom than suffer thus. However, these paroxysms do not last long, for God never sends us more than we can bear and always gives us patience first.

14. Now to speak of other trials and illnesses of many kinds which generally occur to people in this state. I knew some one who, from the time when, forty years ago, [*7] our Lord began to bestow on her the favour described, could not affirm with any truth that she had been a single day without pain and other kinds of suffering: I am speaking of physical infirmities besides heavy crosses sent her. [*8] True, she had led a wicked life and therefore held these troubles very light in comparison with the hell she had deserved. [*9] Our Lord leads those who have offended Him less by some other way, but I should always choose the way of suffering, if only for the sake of imitating our Lord Jesus Christ; though, in fact, it profits us in many other manners. Yet, oh! the rest would seem trifling in comparison could I relate the interior torments met with here, but they are impossible to describe.

15. Let us first speak of the trial of meeting with so timorous and inexperienced a confessor that

[p. 160]

nothing seems safe to him; he dreads and suspects everything but the commonplace, especially in a soul in which he deters any imperfection, for he thinks people on whom God bestows such favours must be angels, which is impossible while we live in our bodies. [*10] He at once ascribes everything to the devil or melancholy. As to the latter, I am not surprised; there is so much of it in the world and the evil one works such harm in this way that confessors have the strongest reasons for anxiety and watchfulness about it.

16. The poor soul, beset by the same fears, seeks its confessor as judge, and feels a torture and dismay at his condemnation that can only be realized by those who have experienced it themselves. [*11] For one of the severe trials of these souls, especially if they have lived wicked lives, is their belief that God permits them to be deceived in punishment for their sins. While actually receiving these graces they feel secure and cannot but suppose that these favours proceed from the Spirit of God; but this state lasts a very short time, while the remembrance of their misdeeds is ever before them, so that when, as is sure to happen, they discover any faults in themselves, these torturing thoughts return. [*12]

17. The soul is quieted for a time when the confessor reassures it although it returns later on to its former apprehensions, but when he augments its fears they become almost unbearable. Especially is this the case when such spiritual dryness ensues

[p. 161]

that the mind feels as if it never had thought of God nor ever will be able to do so. When men speak of Him, they seem to be talking of some person heard of long ago.

18. All this is nothing without the further pain of thinking we cannot make our confessors understand the case and are deceiving them. [*13] Although such a person may examine her conscience with the greatest care, and may know that she reveals even the first movement of her mind to her director, it does not help her. Her understanding being too obscure to discern the truth, she believes all that the imagination, which now has the upper hand, puts before her mind, besides crediting the falsehoods suggested to her by the devil, whom doubtless our Lord gives leave to tempt her. The evil spirit even tries to make her think God has rejected her. Many are the trials which assault this soul, causing an internal anguish so painful and so intolerable that I can compare it to nothing save that suffered by the lost in hell, for no comfort can be found in this tempest of trouble. [*14]

19. If the soul seeks for consolation from its confessor, all the demons appear to help him to torment it more. A confessor who dealt with a person suffering in this manner thought that her state must be very dangerous as so many things were troubling her; therefore, after she had recovered from her trials, he bade her tell him whenever they

[p. 162]

recurred: however, he found this made matters worse than ever. She lost all control over herself: although she had learnt to read, yet she could no more understand a book in the vulgar tongue than if she had not known the alphabet, for her mind was incapable of acting. [*15]

20. In short, there is no other remedy in such a tempest except to wait for the mercy of God Who, unexpectedly, by some casual word or unforeseen circumstance, suddenly dispels all these sorrows; then every cloud of trouble disappears and the mind is left full of light and far happier than before. [*16] It praises our Lord God like one who has come out victorious from a dangerous battle, for it was He Who won the victory. The soul is fully conscious that the conquest was not its own as all weapons of self-defence appeared to be in the enemies' hands. Thus it realizes its weakness and how little man can help himself if God forsake him.

21. This truth now needs no demonstration, for past experience has taught the soul its utter incapacity; it realizes the nothingness of human nature and what miserable creatures we are. Although in a state of grace from which it has not fallen--for, in spite of these torments, it has not offended God, nor would it do so for any earthly thing [*17]--yet so hidden is this grace, that the sufferer believes that neither now, nor in the past, has she ever possessed the faintest spark of love for God. [*18] If at any time she has done good, or if His Majesty ever bestowed

[p. 163]

any favours on her, they seem to have been but a dream or a fancy, while her sins stand clearly before her.

22. O Jesus! how sad it is to see a soul thus forsaken, and how little, as I said, can any earthly comfort avail! Do not imagine, sisters, if you are ever brought to such a state, that rich and independent people have more resources than yourselves in these troubles. No, no! to offer such consolations would be like setting all the joys of the world before people condemned to death: far from mitigating, it would increase their torture. So with the souls I spoke of: their comfort must come from above--nothing earthly can help them. This great God wishes us to acknowledge His sovereignty and our own misery--an important point for those who are to advance still farther.

23. What can the poor soul do if such a trial lasts for many days? Prayer makes no difference as far as comforting the heart, which no consolation can enter, nor can the mind even grasp the meaning of the words of vocal prayer: mental prayer is out of the question at such a time, since the faculties are unequal to it. Solitude harms the soul, yet society or conversation is a fresh torment. Strive as the sufferer may to hide it, she is so wearied and out of sorts with all around that she cannot but manifest her condition.

24. How can the soul possibly tell what ails it? Its pains are indescribable; it is wrung with nameless anguish and spiritual suffering. The best remedy for these crosses (I do not mean for gaining deliverance

[p. 164]

from them, for I know of nothing that will do that, but for enabling one to bear them) is to perform external works of charity and to trust in the mercy of God, which never fails those who hope in Him. [*19] May He be for ever blessed! Amen

25. The devils also bring about exterior trials which being more unusual need not be mentioned. They are far less painful, for whatever the demons may do, I believe they never succeed in paralysing the faculties or disturbing the soul in the former manner. In fact, the reason is able to discern that the evil spirits can do no more harm than God permits; and while the mind has not lost its powers, all sufferings are comparatively insignificant.

26. I shall treat of other internal afflictions met with in this mansion when describing the different kinds of prayer and favours bestowed here by our Lord. Although some of these latter pains are harder to endure, as appears by their bodily effects, yet they do not deserve the name of crosses, nor have we the right to call them so. Indeed, they are great graces from God as the soul recognizes amidst its pangs, realizing how far it is from meriting such graces.

27. This severe torture felt by souls just at the entrance of the seventh mansion is accompanied by many other sufferings, some of which I will mention: to speak of them all would be impossible, nor could I portray them because they come from another and far higher source than the rest. If I have succeeded so ill in writing of trials of a lower kind, much less could I treat of the others. May

[p. 165]

[paragraph continues] God assist me in all things, through the merits of His Son! Amen.

Footnotes

^155:1 Castle, M. v. ch. i. 9. Life, ch. xxviii. 5.

^155:2 Life, ch. xl. 28. sqq.

^156:3 The Saint went through all this herself; every detail is taken from her own experience. See Life, ch. xxv. 20; xxviii. 20-24; xxx. 6; xxiii. 2. Anton. a Sp. S. l.c. tract, ii. n. 268.

^157:4 Life, ch. xxviii. 19.

^158:5 Rel. ii. 4.

^158:6 Anton. a Sp. S. l.c. ii. n. 272. Way of Perf. ch. xv. i; xvii. 4. Found. ch. xxvii. 19, 20. Life, ch. xix. 12; xxxi. 13-17, 25.

^159:7 'Forty years ago.' The Saint seems to refer to her first experience in the mystical life, which took place during her illness in the winter of 1537-38. See Life, ch. iv. 9.

^159:8 Life, ch. iv. 6; v; vi; vii. 18; xi. 23; XXX. 9.

^159:9 Ibid. ch. iii. 6, 7.

^160:10 Life, ch. xiii. 21-27. Way of Perf. ch. v. 1, 2.

^160:11 Ibid, ch. xxx. 15.

^160:12 Ibid, ch. xxxviii. 21. Rel. ii. 15.

^161:13 Life, ch. xxviii. 20 sqq.

^161:14 Anton. a Sp. S. l.c. tr. ii. n. 313. On this subject which is commonly called the passive purgation of the intellect, it would be advisable to consult some good author such as Philippus a SS. Trinitate, l.c. part. i. tr. iii. disc. iii.-v., especially disc. iv. art. 5, 6.

^162:15 Life, ch. xxv. 21.

^162:16 Ibid. ch. xxv. 23.

^162:17 Ibid. ch. xxiv. 3. Way of Perf. ch. xli. 5. Castle, M. vii. ch. iv. 1.

^162:18 Excl. xvi. 4.

^164:19 Life, ch. xxxi. 27.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II.

TREATS OF SEVERAL WAYS WHEREBY OUR LORD QUICKENS THE SOUL; THERE APPEARS NO CAUSE FOR ALARM IN THEM ALTHOUGH THEY ARE SIGNAL FAVOURS OF A VERY EXALTED NATURE.

1. Our Lord excites the love of His spouse. 2. The wound of love. 3. The pain it causes. 4. The call of the Bridegroom. 5. Effect on the soul. 6. A spark of the fire of love. 7. The spark dies out. 8. This grace evidently divine. 9. One such wound repays many trials. 10. First reason of immunity from deception. 11. Second and third reasons. 12. The imagination not concerned in it. 13. St. Teresa never alarmed at this prayer. 14. 'The odour of Thine ointment.' 15. No reason to fear deception here.

1. IT seems as if we had deserted the little dove for a long time, but this is not the case, for these past trials cause her to take a far higher flight. I will now describe the way in which the Spouse treats her before uniting her entirely to Himself. He increases her longing for Him by devices so delicate that the soul itself cannot discern them; nor do I think I could explain them except to people who have personally experienced them. These desires are delicate and subtle impulses springing from the inmost depths of the soul; I know of nothing to which they can be compared.

2. These graces differ entirely from anything we ourselves can gain, and even from the spiritual consolation before described. [*1] In the present case, even when the mind is not recollected or even thinking of God, although no sound is heard, His

[p. 166]

[paragraph continues] Majesty arouses it suddenly as if by a swiftly flashing comet or by a clap of thunder. [*2] Yet the soul thus called by God hears Him well enough--so well, indeed, that sometimes, especially at first, it trembles and even cries out, although it feels no pain. It is conscious of having received a delicious wound but cannot discover how, nor who gave it, yet recognizes it as a most precious grace and hopes the hurt will never heal.

3. The soul makes amorous complaints to its Bridegroom, even uttering them aloud; nor can it control itself, knowing that though He is present He will not manifest Himself so that it may enjoy Him. This causes a pain, keen although sweet and delicious from which the soul could not escape even if it wished; but this it never desires. [*3] This favour is more delightful than the pleasing absorption of the faculties in the prayer of quiet which is unaccompanied by suffering. [*4]

4. I am at my wits' end, sisters, as to how to make you understand this operation of love: I know not how to do so. It seems contradictory to say that the Beloved clearly shows He dwells in the soul and calls by so unmistakable a sign and a summons so penetrating, that the spirit cannot choose but hear it, while He appears to reside in the seventh mansion. He speaks in this manner, which is not a set form of speech, and the inhabitants of the other

[p. 167]

mansions, the senses, the imagination and the faculties, dare not stir. [*5]

5. O Almighty God! how profound are Thy  and how different are spiritual matters from anything that can be seen or heard in this world! I can find nothing to which to liken these graces, insignificant as they are compared with many others Thou dost bestow on souls. This favour acts so strongly upon the spirit that it is consumed by desires yet knows not what to ask, for it realizes clearly that its God is with it. You may inquire, if it realizes this so clearly, what more does it desire and why is it pained? What greater good can it seek? I cannot tell: I know that this suffering seems to pierce the very heart, and when He Who wounded it draws out the dart He seems to draw the heart out too, so deep is the love it feels. [*6]

6. I have been thinking that God might be likened to a burning furnace [*7] from which a small spark flies into the soul that feels the heat of this great fire, which, however, is insufficient to consume it. The sensation is so delightful that the spirit lingers in the pain produced by its contact. This seems to me the best comparison I can find, for the pain is delicious and is not really pain at all, nor does it always continue in the same degree; sometimes it lasts for a long time; on other occasions it passes quickly. This is as God chooses, for no human means can obtain it; and though felt at times for a long while, yet it is intermittent.

[p. 168]

7. In fact it is never permanent and therefore does not wholly inflame the spirit; but when the soul is ready to take fire, the little spark suddenly dies out, leaving the heart longing to suffer anew its loving pangs. No grounds exist for thinking this comes from any natural cause or from melancholy, or that it is an illusion of the devil or the imagination. Undoubtedly this movement of the heart comes from God Who is unchangeable; nor do its effects is resemble those of other devotions in which the strong absorption of delight makes us doubt their reality.

8. There is no suspension here of the senses or other faculties: they wonder at what is happening, without impeding it. Nor do I think that they can either increase or dispel this delightful pain. Any one who has received this favour from our Lord will understand my meaning on reading this: let her thank Him fervently: there is no need to fear deception but far more fear of not being sufficiently grateful for so signal a grace. Let her endeavour to serve Him and to amend her life in every respect; then she will see what will follow and how she will obtain still higher and higher gifts.

9. A person on whom this grace was bestowed passed several years without receiving any other favour, yet was perfectly satisfied, for even had she served God for very many years in the midst of severe trials, she would have felt abundantly repaid. May He be for ever blessed! Amen.

10. Perhaps you wonder why we may feel more secure against deception concerning this favour

[p. 169]

than in other cases. I think it is for these reasons. Firstly, because the devil cannot give such delicious pain: he may cause pleasure or delight which appears spiritual but is unable to add suffering, especially suffering of so keen a sort, united to peace and joy of soul. His power is limited to what is external; suffering produced by him is never accompanied with peace, but with anxieties and struggles.

11. Secondly, because this welcome storm comes from no region over which Satan has control. Thirdly, because of the great benefits left in the soul which, as a rule, is resolute to suffer for God and longs to bear many crosses. It is also far more determined than before to withdraw from worldly pleasures and intercourse and other things of the same sort.

12. It is very clear that this is no fiction: the imagination may counterfeit some favours but not this, which is too manifest to leave room for doubt. Should any one still remain uncertain, let her know that hers were not genuine impulses; [*8] that is, if she is dubious as to whether or no she experienced them, for they are as certainly perceived by the soul as is a loud voice by the ears. It is impossible for these experiences to proceed from melancholy whose whims arise and exist only in the imagination, whereas this emotion comes from the interior of the soul.

13. I may be mistaken, but I shall not change my opinion until I hear reasons to the contrary from

[p. 170]

those who understand these matters. I know some one who has always greatly dreaded such deceptions, yet could never bring herself to feel any alarm about this state of prayer. [*9]

14. Our Lord also uses other means of rousing the soul; for instance--when reciting vocal prayer without seeking to penetrate the sense, a person may be seized with a delightful fervour [*10] as if suddenly encompassed with a fragrance powerful enough to diffuse itself through all the senses. I do not assert that there really is any perfume but use this comparison because it somewhat resembles the manner by which the Spouse makes His presence understood, moving the soul to a delicious desire of enjoying Him and thus disposing it to heroic acts, and causing it to render Him fervent praise.

15. This favour springs from the same source as the former, but causes no suffering here, nor are the soul's longings to enjoy God painful: this is what is more usually experienced by the soul. For the reasons already given there appears no cause here for fear, but rather for receiving it with thanksgiving.

Footnotes

^165:1 Mansion iv. ch. i. Life, ch. xxix. 10-15. Rel. ch. viii. 15.

^166:2 The saint first wrote 'relampago,' flash of lightning, but afterwards altered it to 'trueno,' clap of thunder.

^166:3 Rel. viii. 16. St. John of the Cross, Spiritual Cant. st. i. 22 sqq. Poems 7, 8.

^166:4 Life, ch. xxix. 18.

^167:5 Life, ch. xv. 1.

^167:6 Ibid. ch. xxix. 17, 18.

^167:7 Ibid. ch. xv, 6; xviii. 4.; xxi. 9.

^169:8 Life, ch. xv. 15, 16.

^170:9 Life, ch. xxix. 6-10.

^170:10 Ibid. ch. xv. 12. On the matter treated by St. Teresa in this chapter, compare St. John of the Cross, Spiritual Canticle, stanza i. (circa finem), stanza ix.; The Living Flame of Love, stanza ii.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 171]

  

INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO CHAPTER III.

  

BY THE EDITOR

THE readers, especially those not well acquainted with Scholastic philosophy, will, perhaps, be glad to find here a short explanation of the various kinds. of Vision and Locution, Corporal, Imaginary, and Intellectual. The senses of Taste, Touch, and Smell are not so often affected by mystical phenomena, but what we are about to say in respect of Sight and Hearing applies, mutatis mutandis, to these also.

1. A CORPORAL VISION is when one sees a bodily object. A Corporal Locution is when one hears words uttered by a human tongue. In both cases the respective senses are exercising their normal function, and the phenomenon differs from ordinary seeing or hearing merely by the fact that in the latter the object seen is a real body, the words perceived come from a real tongue, whereas in the Vision or Locution the object is either only apparent or at any rate is not such as it seems to be. Thus, when young Tobias set out on a journey, his companion, Azarias, was not a real human being, but an archangel in human form. Tobias did really see and hear him, and felt the grip of his hand; Sara and her parents, as well as Tobias's parents, saw and heard him too, but all the time the archangel made himself visible and audible by means of an assumed body, or perhaps of an apparent body. It would be more correct to describe such a phenomenon as an APPARITION than as a Vision, and in fact the apparitions of our Risen Lord to the holy women and the apostles belong to this category. For, though His was a real body, it was glorified and therefore no longer subject to the same laws which govern purely human things. (St. Thomas, Summa theol. III., qu. 54, art. I-3).

St. Teresa tells us more than once that she never

[p. 172]

beheld a Corporal Vision, nor heard a Corporal Locution.

II. AN IMAGINARY VISION OR LOCUTION is one where nothing is seen or heard by the senses of seeing or hearing, but where the same impression is received that would be produced upon the imagination by the senses if some real object were perceived by them. For, according to the Scholastics, the Imagination stands half-way between the senses and the intellect, receiving impressions from the former and transmitting them to the latter. This is the reason why imaginary Visions and Locutions are so dangerous that, according to St. Teresa, St. John of the Cross, and other spiritual writers, they should not only never be sought for, but as much as possible shunned and under all circumstances discountenanced. For the Imagination is closely connected with the Memory, so that it is frequently impossible to ascertain whether a Vision, etc., is not perhaps a semi-conscious or unconscious reproduction of scenes witnessed. It is here also that deception, wilful or unwilful, self-deception or deception by a higher agency, is to be feared. Hence the general rule that such Visions or Locutions should only be trusted upon the strongest grounds. According to St. Thomas Aquinas, (Summa theol. IIa IIae, gu. 175, art. 3 ad q.) the visions of Isaias, St. John in the Apocalypse etc., were Imaginary.

As an example of Imaginary Visions we may mention St. Stephen, who saw 'the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God'; or St. Peter, who saw 'the heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending, as it were a great linen sheet, let down by the four corners from heaven to the earth . . . and there came a voice to him: Arise, Peter, kill and eat.' (Acts, vii. 55; X. 11-13).

These Visions, Locutions, etc., are not hallucinations. The latter are due to physical disorder which affects the memory and causes it to represent impressions formerly received by it, in a disorderly and often grotesque manner. The Imaginary Vision takes place independently of a

[p. 173]

morbid state, is caused by an extraneous power, good or evil, and has for its object things of which the memory neither has nor ever has had cognizance.

III. AN INTELLECTUAL VISION OR LOCUTION is one where nothing is seen or heard by the eyes and ears, and where no sensation is received by the imagination. But the impression which would be delivered by the imagination to the intellect, had it come through the senses and been handed on to the imagination, is directly imprinted upon the intellect. To understand this it is necessary to bear in mind that the impressions we receive through the senses must undergo a transformation--must be spiritualized--before they reach the intellect. This is one of the most difficult problems of psychology; none of the solutions offered by various schools of philosophy seem to render it entirely free from obscurity. According to St. Thomas Aquinas, the impression received by the eye (Species sensibilis) is spiritualized by a faculty called Intellectus agens by means of abstraction (Species impressa), and is treasured up in the memory, like lantern slides, available at demand. The mind, identifying itself with the Species impressa, produces the 'Word of the mind' (Verbum mentis), wherein consists the act of Understanding or Mental Conception. In the Intellectual Vision or Locution, God, without co-operation on the part of the senses, the imagination, or the memory, produces directly on the mind the Species impressa. As this is supernatural with regard to its origin, and often also with respect to its object, it stands to reason that it is too exalted for the memory to receive it, so that such Visions and Locutions are frequently only imperfectly remembered and sometimes altogether forgotten, as St. Teresa tells us. On the other hand they are far less dangerous than Corporal or Imaginary Visions and Locutions, because the senses and imagination have nothing to do with them, whilst evil spirits are unable to act directly upon the mind, and self-deception is altogether excluded for the reasons stated by St. Teresa.

[p. 174]

An instance of such a vision is mentioned by St. Paul: 'I know a man in Christ above fourteen years ago (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not: God knoweth), such an one rapt even to the third heaven. And I know such a man (whether in the body or out of the body, I know not: God knoweth): that he was caught up into paradise, and heard secret words, which it is not granted to man to utter' (2 Cor. xii. 2-4).

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III.

TREATS OF THE SAME SUBJECT AND OF THE WAY GOD IS SOMETIMES PLEASED TO SPEAK TO THE SOUL. HOW WE SHOULD BEHAVE IN SUCH A CASE, IN WHICH WE MUST NOT FOLLOW OUR OWN OPINION. GIVES SIGNS TO SHOW HOW TO DISCOVER WHETHER THIS FAVOUR IS A DECEPTION OR NOT: THIS IS VERY NOTEWORTHY.

1. Locutions. 2. Sometimes caused by melancholia. 3. Caution needed at first. 4. Locutions frequently occur during prayer. 5. Resist those containing false doctrine. 6. First sign of genuine locutions. 7. Effect of the words: 'Be not troubled.' 8. 'It is I, be not afraid.' 9. 'Be at Peace.' 10. Second sign. 11. Third sign. 12. The devil suggests doubts about true locutions. 13. Confidence of the soul rewarded. 14. Its joy at seeing God's words verified. 15. Its zeal for God's honour. 16. Locutions coining from the fancy. 17. Imaginary answers given to prayer. 18. A confessor should be consulted about locutions. 19. Interior locutions. 20. First sign of genuine interior locutions. 21. Second sign. 22. Third sign. 23. Fourth sign. 24. Fifth sign. 25. Results of true locutions. 26. They should remove alarm. 27. Answer to an objection.

1. GOD arouses the soul in another manner which, though in some ways apparently a greater favour than the above mentioned, yet may prove more dangerous, therefore I will give some particulars about it. He does this by means of words addressed to the soul in many different ways; sometimes they appear to come from without; at other times

[p. 175]

from the inner depths of the soul; or again, from its superior part; while other speeches are so exterior as to be heard by the ears like a real voice.

2. At times, indeed very often, this may be only a fancy; especially with persons of a lively imagination or who are afflicted with melancholy to any marked extent. I think that no attention should be paid to either class of people when they say they see, hear, or learn anything supernaturally. Do not disturb them by saying that it comes from the devil, [*1] but listen to them as if they were sick persons. Let the prioress or confessor to whom they tell their story bid them think no more of it as such matters are not essential in the service of God: the devil has deceived many Christians thus, although perhaps it is not so in their case; therefore they need not trouble themselves about it. Thus we must accomodate ourselves to their humour: if we tell them their fancies proceed from melancholia, there will be no end to the matter, for they will persist in maintaining they have seen and heard these things, for so it seems to them.

3. The truth is, care should be taken to keep such people from too much prayer and to persuade them, as far as possible, to take no notice of their fancies: the devil makes use of these weak souls to injure others, even if they themselves escape unhurt. There is need for caution both with feeble and strong souls at first, until it is certain from what spirit these things proceed. I maintain that, in the beginning, it is always wiser to resist these

[p. 176]

communications; if they come from God this is the best way to receive more, for they increase when discouraged. At the same time the soul should not be too strictly controlled or disquieted, for it cannot help itself in the matter.

4. To return to discuss the words addressed to the soul: any kind I mentioned may come either from God, the devil, or the imagination. By the help of God I will endeavour to describe the signs distinguishing the one from the other, and when these locutions are dangerous, for they occur to many persons who praise prayer. I do not wish you to think, sisters, that there is any harm either in believing or in disregarding them. When they only console you, or warn you of your faults, it matters not whence they come or whether they are only fancies.

5. I caution you on one point--although they may come from God, you must not esteem yourself more highly, for He often spoke to the Pharisees [*2]--all the good consists in profiting by His words. Take no more notice of any speeches you hear which disagree with the Holy Scriptures than if you heard them from Satan himself. Though they may only rise from your vivid imagination, look upon them as a temptation against the faith. Always resist them; then they will leave you, and cease, for they have little strength of their own. [*3]

6. Now let us return to the first point--whether these communications come from the inferior or

[p. 177]

the superior part of the soul, or from without, does not affect their originating from God.

7. In my opinion these are the most certain signs of their being divine. The first and truest is the power and authority they carry with them, for these words are operative. [*4] For example: a soul is suffering all the sorrow and disquiet I have described: the mind is darkened and dry; but it is set at peace, freed from all trouble and filled with light merely by hearing the words: 'Be not troubled.' These deliver it from all its pains, although it felt as though, if the whole world and all its theologians had united in trying to persuade it there was no cause for grief, it could not, in spite of all their efforts, have been delivered from its affliction. [*5]

8. Again, a person is troubled and greatly terrified at being told by her confessor and other people that her soul is under the influence of the evil one: she hears a single sentence which says, 'It is I, be not afraid,' [*6] and is at once freed from all fears and filled with consolation; indeed, she believes it would be impossible for any one to disturb her confidence. [*7]

9. Again, when exceedingly anxious about important business, not knowing whether or not it will be successful, on hearing words bidding her

[p. 178]

[paragraph continues] 'Be at peace; all will go well,' she feels reassured and free from all care in the matter. [*8] Many other instances of the same sort could be mentioned.

10. The second sign is a great calm and a devout and peaceful recollection which dwell in the soul together with a desire to praise God. They say that communications, at any rate in this mansion, are not uttered direly by God but are transmitted by an angel. [*9] Then, O my God, if a word sent to us by Thee through Thy messenger has such force, what effects wilt Thou not leave in the soul united to Thee in a mutual bond of love? [*10]

11. The third proof is that these words do not pass from the memory but remain there for a very long time; sometimes they are never forgotten. This is not the case with what men may utter, which, however grave and learned they may be, is not thus impressed on our memory. Neither, if they prophesy of things to come, do we believe them as we do these divine locutions which leave us so convinced of their truth that, although their fulfilment sometimes seems utterly impossible and we vacillate and doubt about them, there still

[p. 179]

remains in the soul a certainty of their verity which cannot be destroyed. Perhaps everything may seem to militate against what was heard and years pass by, yet the spirit never loses its belief that God will make use of means unknown to men for the purpose and that finally what was foretold must surely happen; as indeed it does. [*11]

12. Still, as I said, the soul is troubled at seeing many obstacles in the way of the accomplishment of the prophecy. The words, their effects, and the assurance they carry with them convinced the soul at the moment that they came from God. Afterwards, however, doubts arise as to whether the locutions came from the devil or from the imagination, although while hearing them the person would have died to defend their truth. [*12] But, as I said, these misgivings must be suggested by the evil one to afflict and intimidate her, especially if by carrying out a command thus given great good will result to souls and some work be done conducing notably to the honour and service of God, concerning which great difficulties have to be overcome. In such cases, where will Satan stop short? At least, he weakens faith, and it is a terrible evil to doubt that God has power to work in a way far beyond our understanding.

13. Despite all these difficulties and although the confessors consulted on these matters say the words were but fancies, while events take such an unfavourable turn as to make the realization of these predictions seem impossible, yet there remains so

[p. 180]

lively a spark of certainty in the mind (I know not whence it comes) that, although all other hopes die out, it cannot, if it would, quench this ardent spark of confidence. At last, as I said, our Lord's words are accomplished, at which the soul is so satisfied and joyful that it can do nothing but praise His Majesty--more because it sees His words prove true than on account of the thing itself, even though it may be of consequence to the person concerned.

14. I know not why the soul attaches such importance to these communications being verified. I think that if the person herself were detected in telling falsehoods, she would not be so grieved as at these locutions proving untrue--as if she could do anything in the matter beyond repeating what has been said to her! A certain person was frequently reminded in such a case of the Prophet Jonas, when he found Ninive was not to be destroyed. [*13]

15. In fact, as these words come from the Spirit of God, it is right thus to trust them and to desire that He Who is supreme truth should not be thought a deceiver. Justly, therefore, does their hearer rejoice when, after a thousand delays and enormous difficulties, they are accomplished. Although this success may entail great suffering on herself, she prefers it to the nonfulfilment of what she knows our Lord most certainly foretold. Possibly every one is not so weak as this, if indeed it

[p. 181]

is a weakness, though I cannot myself condemn it as an evil.

16. If these locutions proceed from the imagination [*14] they show no such signs, bringing neither conviction, peace, nor interior joy with them. But in some cases I have come across, on account of a very weak constitution or vivid imagination or of other causes I do not know, persons while absorbed in the prayer of quiet and in spiritual slumber are so entirely carried out of themselves by their deep state of recollection as to be unconscious of anything external. All their senses being thus dormant, as if asleep--as indeed, at times they really are--they thus, in a sort of dream, fancy they are spoken to or see things they imagine come from God, but which leave no more effect than dreams.

17. Again, one who very lovingly asks something of our Lord may fancy that an answer comes from Him. [*15] This often occurs, but I think that no one accustomed to receive divine communications could be deceived on this point by the imagination.

18. The devil's deceptions are more dangerous; but if the foregoing signs are present, we may feel fairly confident that these locutions are from God, though not so certain but that, if they refer to some weighty matter in which we are called upon to act or if they concern a third person, we should consult some confessor who is both learned and a servant of God, before attempting or thinking of acting on them, although we may have heard them repeated several times and are convinced of their

[p. 182]

truth and divine origin. [*16] His Majesty wishes us to take this course; it is not disobedience to His commands, for He has bidden us hold our confessor as His representative even where there is no doubt that the communications come from Him: thus we shall gain courage if the matter is a very difficult one. Our Lord will reassure our confessor, whom, when He so chooses, He will inspire with faith that these locutions are from the Holy Ghost. [*17] If not, we are freed from all further obligations in the matter. I think it would be very dangerous to act against our confessor's advice and to prefer our own opinions in such a matter. Therefore, sisters, I admonish you in the name of our Lord, never to do anything of the sort.

19. God speaks to the soul in another way by a certain intellectual vision which I think undoubtedly proceeds from Him; it will be described later on. [*18]8 It takes place far within the innermost depths of the soul which appears to hear distinctly in a most mysterious manner, with its spiritual hearing, the words spoken to it by our Lord Himself. The way in which the spirit perceives these words and the results produced by them, convince us that they cannot in any way come from the devil. Their powerful aftereffects force us to admit this and plainly show they do not spring from the imagination. [*19] Careful consideration will assure us of this for the following reasons;--

20. Firstly, the clearness of the language varies

[p. 183]

in the different kinds of locutions. Those that are divine are so distinct that the hearer remembers if there were a syllable missing, and what words were made use of even though a whole sentence was spoken. But if the speech were only a freak of fancy, it would not be so audible nor would the words be so distinct but would be only half articulated. [*20]

21. The second reason is that often the person was not thinking of what is heard; sometimes the locution even comes unexpectedly during conversation, though at times it refers to some thought that passed quickly through the mind or to a subject it was before engaged upon. Frequently it concerns things of whose existence the hearer knew nothing nor even imagined such events could ever come to pass; therefore it is impossible for the imagination to have framed such speeches and deceived the mind by fancies about what it had never wished, nor sought for, nor even thought about. [*21]

22. The third reason is that in a genuine case the soul seems to listen to the words, whereas when the imagination is at work, little by little it composes what the person wishes to hear. [*22]

23. The fourth reason is because divine locutions differ immensely from others, a single word comprising a depth of meaning which our understanding could not thus quickly condense into one phrase. [*23]

24. Fifthly because, in a manner I cannot explain, these communications, without any further explanations, frequently give us to understand far

[p. 184]

more than is implied by the words themselves. I shall speak farther on of this way of understanding hidden things which is very subtle and a favour for which we should thank God. Some people are exceedingly suspicious about these and other communications of the same kind. I speak particularly of some one [*24] who experienced them herself, though there may be others who cannot understand them. I know that she has considered the subject very carefully, God having often bestowed this grace on her. Her principal difficulty was to discover whether the locutions were merely fancied. It is easier to know when they come from the devil although being so wily, he can with facility imitate the spirit of light. However, he would do this in a form of words pronounced so distinctly that there would be no more doubt as to their reality than if they came from the spirit of truth, while those coming from the imagination leave us uncertain whether we heard the words or not. But Satan could never counterfeit the effects I spoke of; [*25] he leaves neither peace nor light in the soul, only anxiety and confusion. In any case, he can do little or no harm to one who is humble and who, as I advised, does not act on what is heard.

25. If the soul receives favours and caresses from our Lord, let it examine carefully whether it rates itself more highly in consequence; unless self-abasement increases with God's expressions of love,

[p. 185]

they do not come from the Holy Spirit. Inevitably, when they are divine, the greater the favours, the less the soul esteems itself and the more keenly it remembers its sins. [*26] It becomes more oblivious of self-interest: the will and memory grow more fervent in seeking solely God's honour with no thought of self. It also becomes unceasingly careful not to deviate deliberately from the will of God and feels a keener conviction that instead of meriting such favours, it deserves hell.

26. When these results follow, no graces or gifts received during prayer need alarm the soul which should rather trust in the mercy of God, Who is faithful and will not allow the devil to deceive it; but it is always well to be on one's guard.

27. Those our Lord does not lead by this path may suppose that the soul can avoid listening to these locutions and that even if they are interior it is at least possible to distract the attention from them so as not to hear them and thus escape danger. This cannot be done: I am not speaking of freaks of fancy which may be prevented by ceasing to desire certain things or by paying no attention to its inventions. This is not feasible when these communications come from the Holy Ghost Who, when He speaks, stops all other thoughts and compels the mind to listen. [*27] Mark this: that I believe it would be easier for a person with very keen ears to avoid hearing a loud voice, for he could occupy

[p. 186]

his thoughts and mind in other things. Not so here; the soul can do nothing, nor has it ears to stop, nor power to think of aught but what is said to it. For He Who could stay the sun on its course (at the prayer of Josue, [*28] I believe) can so quiet the faculties and the interior of the spirit as to make it perceive that another and a stronger Lord than itself governs this castle; it is thus affected with profound devotion and humility, seeing that it cannot but listen. May the divine Majesty vouchsafe that, forgetting ourselves, our only aim may be to please Him, as I said. Amen. God grant I have succeeded in explaining what I wished and that it may be some guide to those who may experience such favours.

Footnotes

^175:1 Life, ch. xxiii. 114.

^176:2 Antonius a Sp. S. l.c. tr. iii. n. 323. St. John of the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xxvii.

^176:3 Life, ch. xxv. 13, 18.

^177:4 Ps. cxlviii. 5: 'Ipse dixit et facta sunt.' Life, ch. xxv. 5. Anton. a Sp. S. l.c. tr. iii. n. 353. St. John of the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xxxi. calls these 'substantial words.'

^177:5 Life, ch. xxvi. 6; xxx. 17. Rel. i. 26.

^177:6 St. Luke xxiv. 36.

^177:7 Life, ch. xxv. 22; xxxiii. 10. Rel. vii. 22. St. John of the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xxxi. 1.

^178:8 Life, ch. xxxv. 7. Rel. ix. 6. St. John of the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. iii. ch. ii. 7.

^178:9 Rel. v. 14.

^178:10 Life, ch. xxv. 23-25. See also Schram, Instit. theol. myst. 528 schol.; 529 schol. ii. and iii.; 5 3 I schol. ii.; 5 32 schol. ii. Exterior locutions may proceed direct from God, but generally are due to the ministry of angels; the same holds good with regard to the imaginary ones. Intellectual locutions, in which the words are merely impressed upon the substance of the soul without intervention of the imagination, can only proceed from God, Who alone is able to act upon the substance of the soul. See also Life, ch. xxvii. 7 (end), 8, 9, and 10, and the corresponding chapters in St. John's Ascent of Mount Carmel.

^179:11 Life, ch. xxv. 3, 10. Rel. ii. 17.

^179:12 Ibid, ch. xxv. 10.

^180:13 Jonas iv. 1: 'Et afflictus est Jonas afflictione magna et iratus est; et oravit ad Dominum et dixit: Obsecro, Domine, numquid non hoc est verbum meum cum adhuc essem in terra mea?'

^181:14 Life, ch. xxv. 4 (end) and 5 (beginning).

^181:15 Ibid. ch. xxv. 4 (beginning).

^182:16 Way of Perf. ch. xxxix. 6. Life, ch. xxvi. 4, 5. St. John of the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xxii. 14-18.

^182:17 Rel. vii. 15.

^182:18 Infra, ch. viii.

^182:19 Life, ch. xxvii, 8.

^183:20 Life, ch. xxv. 6 and 10 (end).

^183:21 Ibid. ch. xxv. 9, 16.

^183:22 Ibid. ch. xxv. 4, 6.

^183:23 Ibid, ch. xxv. 12 (beginning).

^184:24 The whole of this chapter as well as chapter xxv. of the Life prove clearly that the Saint speaks about herself and that she investigated the subject with the greatest care.

^184:25 Life, ch. xxv. 15.

^185:26 Life, ch. xii. 5: 'The nearer we draw unto God the more this virtue (humility) should grow'; xv. 16; xix. 2; xx. 38. Rel. ii. 15; vii. 17; viii. 7, 9. Way of Perf. ch. xvii. 3.

^185:27 Life, ch. xxv. 21.

^186:28 Josue x. 12. 13: 'Tunc locutus est Josue: . . . sol contra Gabaon ne movearis; steteruntque sol et luna.'

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 187]

  

CHAPTER IV.

TREATS OF HOW GOD SUSPENDS THE SOUL IN PRAYER BY A TRANCE, ECSTASY OR RAPTURE, WHICH I BELIEVE ARE ALL THE SAME THING. GREAT COURAGE REQUIRED TO RECEIVE EXTRAORDINARY FAVOURS FROM HIS MAJESTY.

1. Courage required by the soul for the divine espousals. 2. Raptures. 3. Rapture caused by the spark of love. 4. The powers and senses absorbed. 5. Mysteries revealed during ecstasies. 6. These mysteries are unspeakable. 7. Moses and the burning bush. 8. Simile of the museum. 9. St. Teresa's visit to the Duchess of Alva. 10. Joy of the soul during raptures. 11. No imaginary vision. 12. True and false raptures. 13. Revelations of future bliss. 14. The soul's preparation. 15. The soul blinded by its faults. 16. God ready to give these graces to all. 17. Faculties lost during ecstasy. 18. Spiritual inebriation. 19. Fervour and love of suffering left in the soul. 20. Scandal caused to spectators by such favours. 21. Our Lord's  for such a soul. 22. Illusionary raptures.

1. WHAT rest can the poor little butterfly find, with all the trials I have told you of and many more? They serve to make her desire the Bride-groom more ardently. His Majesty, well aware of our weakness, fortifies her by these and other means in order that she may obtain courage for union with a Lord so great and may take Him for her Spouse. Perhaps you will laugh and think I am talking foolishly: there can be no call for courage here; there is no woman, however low her class, who would not dare to wed a king. So I think, were he an earthly monarch, but there is need of more fortitude than you suppose in order to espouse the King of heaven. [*1] Our nature appears too timid and base for anything so high; without doubt, unless God gave us the grace it would be

[p. 188]

impossible for us, however much we might appreciate its benefits. You will learn how His Majesty ratifies these espousals; probably this is done when He ravishes the soul by ecstasies, thus depriving it of its faculties; if the use of these were retained, I think the sight of its close vicinity to so mighty a Sovereign would probably deprive the body of life. I am speaking of genuine raptures, not fancies that come from women's weakness--which so often occur nowadays--making them imagine everything to be a rapture or an ecstasy. As I think I said, some are so feebly constituted as to die of a single prayer of quiet. [*2]

2. I should like to describe here several kinds of raptures of which I have learnt from spiritual persons with whom I have discussed the subject, but I am not sure whether I shall succeed in explaining them as I did elsewhere. [*3] It has been decided that it will not be amiss to repeat what was said about these and other things that happen in this state, if only that I may treat of all the mansions contain in proper order.

3. In one sort of rapture the soul, although perhaps not engaged in prayer at the time, is struck by some word of God which it either remembers or hears. [*4] His Majesty, touched with pity by what He has seen it suffer for so long past in its longing for Him, appears to increase the spark I described in the interior of the spirit until it entirely inflames the soul which rises with new life like a phoenix from the flames. Such a one may piously believe

[p. 189]

her sins are now forgiven, [*5] supposing that she is in the disposition and has made use of the means required by the Church. The soul being thus purified, God unites it to Himself in a way known only to Him and the spirit, nor does even the latter so understand what happens as to be able to explain it to others afterwards. Yet the mind had not lost the use of its faculties, for this ecstasy does not resemble a swoon or a fit in which nothing either interior or exterior is felt.

4. What I do understand is that the soul has never been more alive to spiritual things nor so full of light and of knowledge of His Majesty as it is now. This might seem impossible; if the powers and senses were so absorbed that we might call them dead, how does the soul understand this mystery? I cannot tell; perhaps no one but the Creator Himself can say what passes in these places--I mean this and the following mansions which may be treated as one, the door leading from one to the other being wide open. However, as some things in the last rooms are only shown to those who get thus far, I thought it better to treat the mansions separately.

5. While the soul is in this suspension, our Lord favours it by discovering to it secrets such as heavenly mysteries and imaginary visions, which admit of description afterwards because they remain so imprinted on the memory that it never forgets them. But when the visions are intellectual they are not thus easily related, some of those received at such

[p. 190]

a time being so sublime that it is not fitting for man, while living in this world, to understand them in a way that can be told, although when the use of the faculties returns much can be described  what was seen in intellectual vision. Possibly you do not know what a vision is, especially an intellectual one. Since I have been bidden by one who has authority, I will tell you at the proper time. Although seemingly superfluous, it may prove useful to certain people.

6. 'But,' you will ask me, 'if the very sublime favours our Lord bestows in this mansion cannot afterwards be remembered, what profit do they bring?' [*6] O daughters! their value cannot be overrated; for though the recipient is incapable of describing them, they are deeply imprinted in the centre of the soul and are never forgotten. 'How can they be remembered if no image is seen and the powers of the soul do not comprehend them?' I, too, do not understand this, but I know that certain truths of the greatness of God remain so impressed on the spirit by this favour that, did not faith teach Who He is and that it is bound to believe He is God, the soul would henceforth worship Him as such, as did Jacob when he saw the ladder. [*7] Doubtless the Patriarch learnt other secrets he was unable to reveal, for unless he had received more interior light he could never have discovered such sublime mysteries merely by watching angels ascending and descending the steps. I am not certain whether this quotation is correct;

[p. 191]

although I have heard the passage, I cannot feel sure of recalling it exactly.

7. Neither was Moses able to relate more than God willed of what he had seen in the burning bush; [*8] but unless the Almighty had clearly revealed certain mysteries to his soul, causing it to see and know its God was present, the lawgiver could never have undertaken so many and such great labours. Such sublime revelations were shown him amidst the thorns of the bush as to give him the needful courage for his great deeds on behalf of the Children of Israel. We must not, sisters, search out reasons for understanding the hidden things of God, but, believing Him to be Almighty, we should be convinced that such worms as ourselves, with our limited power of intelligence, are unable to comprehend His wonders. Let us praise Him fervently for allowing us to understand something of them.

8. I wish I could find some simile for my subject: none seem to suit the purpose, but I will make use of the following. Imagine that you are in an apartment--I fancy it is termed camarin (or private museum)--belonging to a king or a great nobleman, in which are placed numberless kinds of articles of glass, porcelain, and other things, so arranged that most of them are at once seen on entering the room.

9. While on a visit to the house of the Duchess of Alva (where at her request I was bidden by obedience to stay during a journey) [*9] I was taken

[p. 192]

into such a room. I stood amazed on entering it and wondered what could be the use of such a jumble of knick-knacks; then I thought that the sight of so many different things should lead one to praise God. It is fortunate I saw them, for they offer me a suitable comparison in this case. Although I was in the room some time, there were so many objects in it that I forgot what I had seen and could no more remember each object, nor of what it was made, than if I had never seen it, though I recalled the sight of the whole collection.

10. Something of this sort occurs when the spirit is very closely united to God. It is introduced into this mansion of the empyrean heaven which must be in the centre of our souls for since God resides in them, He must own one of the mansions. While the soul is in ecstasy, our Lord does not appear to wish it to apprehend these mysteries and its inebriation of joy in Him suffices it. But sometimes He is pleased to withdraw it from this rapture when it at once perceives what the mansion contains. On returning to itself, the mind can recall what has been seen but is unable to describe it, nor can it, by its natural abilities, attain to see more of the supernatural than God has chosen to show it.

11. Do I seem to own that the soul really sees something and that this is an imaginary vision? I mean nothing of the sort: I am speaking of an intellectual vision, but being so ignorant and dull I can explain nothing and am well aware that if anything

[p. 193]

is rightly stated, it does not come from myself.

12. I think that if the soul learns no mysteries at any time during raptures, they are no true raptures but some natural weakness that may occur to people of delicate constitutions, such as women, when by its strenuous efforts the spirit overpowers physical nature, and produces stupor, as I think I said in connection with the prayer of quiet. [*10]

13. This is not so in genuine raptures, for then I believe God ravishes the soul wholly to Himself, as being His very own and His bride, and shows her some small part of the kingdom she has thus won. However little this may be, all is great that is in this great God. He will allow of no obstacle from the powers or the senses but bids that the doors of all the mansions should be closed at once, only leaving open the one He is in, so that we may enter it. Blessed be such mercy--well may men be accursed who do not seek to profit by it, but who forfeit it!

14. O, my sisters! what nothingness is all we have given up, or that we do, or ever could do for a God who thus wills to communicate Himself to a worm! If we hope to enjoy this favour even during our mortal life, what are we doing? Why do we delay? What can repay the loss of the time of a 'Memento' [*11] in searching for this Lord, like the

[p. 194]

bride through the streets and squares. [*12] Oh, what a mockery is everything in this world that does not lead towards and help us to attain to this state! Even though all the earthly pleasures, riches, and happiness that can be imagined could last for eternity, they would be disappointing and base contrasted with the treasures which are to be enjoyed for ever--and yet even these are nothing compared with the possession for our own of the Lord of all treasures in heaven and earth.

15. Oh, human blindness! When, oh, when shall this dust be taken from our eyes? Although we think it insufficient to blind us, yet I see some little motes or grains of dust which, if left to spread, will suffice to harm us greatly. At least, for the love of God, my sisters, let these faults convince us of our misery, serving to clear our sight as did the clay the eyes of the blind man who was cured by the Spouse. [*13] Then, realizing our imperfections, we shall beg Him more fervently to let us benefit by our defers so as to please Him in all things.

16. I have unconsciously wandered far from my subject: forgive me, sisters. Believe me, when I come to these wonders of God's greatness (I mean when I come to speak of them) I cannot but feel keenly grieved at seeing what we lose by our own fault. It is true that His Majesty grants such favours to whom He chooses; yet if we sought Him as He seeks us, He would give them to us all. He only longs for souls on whom He may bestow them, for His gifts do not diminish His riches.

[p. 195]

17. To return to what I was describing. By the commands of the Bridegroom, the doors of the mansions and even those of the keep and of the whole castle are closed; for when He intends ravishing the soul He takes away the power of speech, and although occasionally the other faculties are retained rather longer, no word can be uttered. [*14] Sometimes the person is at once deprived of all the senses, the hands and body becoming as cold as if the soul had fled; occasionally no breathing can be detected. [*15] This condition lasts but a short while; I mean in the same degree, [*16] for when this profound suspension diminishes the body seems to come to itself and gain strength to return again to this death which gives more vigorous life to the soul.

18. This supreme state of ecstasy never lasts long, but although it ceases, it leaves the will so inebriated, [*17] and the mind so transported out of itself that for a day, or sometimes for several days, such a person is incapable of attending to anything but what excites the will to the love of God;

[p. 196]

although wide awake enough to this, she seems asleep as regards all earthly matters.

19. Oh, when the soul wholly returns to itself, how abashed does it feel at having received this favour and how passionate are its desires of serving God in any way He asks of it! If the former states of prayer caused the powerful effects described, what will not such a signal grace as this do? Such a person wishes she had a thousand lives [*18] to spend for God; she would have all earthly creatures changed into as many tongues to praise Him on her account. She longs to perform most severe penances, [*19] nor do they cost her much, for the power of her love almost prevents their being felt. She realizes how little the martyrs suffered during their tortures, for pain is easy when our Lord thus aids us: therefore such a soul complains to His Majesty when He gives her no suffering? [*20]

20. She considers it a great favour when God sends her this rapture in secret, for when others see it the shame and confusion she feels are so great as somewhat to diminish her transport. Knowing the malice of the world, she fears her ecstasy will not be attributed to its proper cause but may give rise to rash judgment instead of the praise due for it to God. Although this pain and distress are unavoidable, they seem to me to show a certain want of humility, for if she wished to be despised, what would she care? [*21]

[p. 197]

21. Our Lord once said to some one who was troubled by such thoughts: 'Do not be disturbed; people will either praise Me or condemn thee; in either case thou wilt be the gainer.' [*22] I learnt afterwards that she was greatly encouraged and comforted by this speech; I speak of it in case others may suffer in the same way. Apparently our Lord would have all men know that this soul is His own and that none may molest it, for it is all His. Men are welcome to attack, if they will, the body, the honour, and the possessions of such a person, for glory will accrue to His Majesty from all they do; but the soul they may not assail; unless by a most culpable presumption it withdraws from the protection of its Spouse, He will defend it against the whole world and against all hell besides.

22. I do not know whether I have succeeded in teaching you what a rapture is; to explain it fully would, as I said, be impossible. Still I do not think time has been lost in describing a genuine rapture. The effects in false raptures are very different. I do not call them 'false' because people who experience them intentionally deceive others, but because they are themselves unwittingly deceived. As the signs and effects do not correspond with this great grace,

[p. 198]

the favour itself becomes so discredited that naturally, when our Lord afterwards bestows it on any soul, nobody believes in it. May He be for ever blessed and praised! Amen, Amen!

Footnotes

^187:1 Life, ch. xxxix. 30.

^188:2 Castle, M. iv. ch. iii. 11.

^188:3 Life, ch. xx. passim.

^188:4 Philippus a SS. Trinitate, l.c. tr. i. disc. iii. art. 3.

^189:5 Rel. ix. 4. Way of Perf. ch. xix. 8.

^190:6 Philippus a SS. Trinitate, l.c.

^190:7 Gen. xxviii. 2.

^191:8 Exod. 2.

^191:9 Dona Maria Enriquez, wife of Ferdinand de Toledo, Duke of Alva. This visit took place in February, 1574, and lasted two days [p. 192] the Saint being then on her journey from Salamanca to Alva de Tormes. (Found. ch. xxi.)

^193:10 Castle, M. iv. ch. iii. 2.

^193:11 The Saint wrote here and elsewhere Memento, and not momenta as is commonly printed. It refers, of course, to that short interruption at Mass when the priest makes a Memento of those for whom he intends to pray. Likewise St. Teresa often speaks of the 'space of a Credo or an Ave Maria' always implying a very short duration.

^194:12 Cant. iii. 2: 'Per vicos et plateas quaeram quem diligit anima mea.'

^194:13 St. John ix. 6.

^195:14 Life, ch. xx. 18. 'Like a person who, having a rope around his neck and being strangled, tries to breathe.'

^195:15 Life, ch. xx 23, 29. Way of Perf. ch. xxxii. Rel. viii. 8, 11. 'The first effect of ecstatic prayer concerns the body, which remains as if the soul had departed; it grows cold from a deficiency of natural heat, the eyes close gently, and the other senses are suspended; and yet a weak body recovers health in this prayer.' (Anton. a Spiritu Sancto, Direct. Mystic. tr. iv. d. 2,  section 4, n. 150).

^195:16 'Digo para estar in un ser.'

^195:17

Christusque nobis sit cibus,
 Potusque noster sit fides;
 Laeti bibamus sobriam
 Ebrietatem Spiritus.

Hymn for Lauds, Feria secunda, old version.

(Compare Anton. a Sp. S. l.c. tr. iv. n. 30.)

^196:18 Life, ch. xx. 30.

^196:19 Castle, M. vii. ch. iii. 4. Way of Perf. ch. xxxviii. 1. Excl. xiv. 3. Life, ch. xl. 27.

^196:20 Life, ch. xvi. 6. Rel. i. 4.

^196:21 Ibid. ch. xx. 5, 6.

^197:22 Life, ch. xxxi. 15. St. John of the Cross in stanza xiii. 8. of the Spiritual Canticle, refers to this and the following chapters. 'This,' he says, 'is an appropriate opportunity for discussing the difference between raptures, ecstasies, and other elevations and subtle flights of the spirit, to which spiritual persons are liable; but as my object is to do nothing more than explain this canticle, I leave the subject for those who are better qualified than I am. I do this the more readily because our mother, the blessed Teresa of Jesus, has written admirably on this matter, whose writings I hope to see soon published,'

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER V.

TREATS OF THE SAME SUBJECT AS THE LAST CHAPTER AND DESCRIBES THE FLIGHT OF THE SPIRIT, WHICH IS ANOTHER WAY BY WHICH GOD ELEVATES THE SOUL: THIS REQUIRES GREAT COURAGE IN ONE EXPERIENCING IT. THIS FAVOUR, BY WHICH GOD GREATLY DELIGHTS THE SOUL IS EXPLAINED. THIS CHAPTER IS VERY PROFITABLE.

1. The flight of the spirit. 2. Self-control completely lost. 3. Symbol of the two cisterns. 4. Obligations following these favours. 5. Humility produced by them. 6. How our crucified Lord comforted such a soul. 7. A humble soul fears these favours. 8. Mysteries learnt during the flight of the spirit. 9. Imaginary visions sometimes accompany intellectual ones. 10. How the flight of the spirit takes place. 11. The soul fortified by it. 12. Three great graces left in the soul. 13. The third grace. 14. Fear caused by this favour.

1. THERE is another form of rapture, which, though essentially the same as the last, yet produces very different feelings in the soul. I call it the 'flight of the spirit,' [*1] for the soul suddenly feels so rapid a sense of motion that the spirit appears to hurry it away with a speed which is very alarming, especially at first. Therefore I said that the soul on whom God bestows this favour requires strong courage, besides great faith, trust, and resignation, so that God may do what He chooses with it.

2. Do you suppose a person in perfect possession of her senses feels but little dismay at her soul's being drawn above her, while sometimes, as we

[p. 199]

read, even the body rises with it? [*2] She does not know where the spirit is going, who is raising her, nor how it happens; for at the first instant of this sudden movement one does not feel sure it is caused by God. Can it possibly be resisted? No; resistance only accelerates the motion, as some one told me. God now appears to be teaching the soul, which has so often placed itself absolutely in His hands and offered itself entirely to Him, that it no longer belongs to itself; thus it is snatched away more vehemently in consequence of its opposition. Therefore this person resolved to resist no more than does a straw when attracted by amber (a thing you may have seen); she yielded herself into the hands of Him who is Almighty, seeing it is best to make a virtue of necessity. Speaking of straw, doubtless it is as easy for a stalwart, strapping fellow to lift a straw as for our mighty and powerful Giant to elevate our spirit. [*3]

3. It seems that the cistern of water of which I spoke (but I cannot quite remember where) in the fourth mansion, [*4] was formerly filled gently and

[p. 200]

quietly, without any movement; but now this great God Who restrains the springs and the waters and will not permit the ocean to transgress its bounds, [*5] lets loose the streams, which with a powerful rush flow into the cistern and a mighty wave rises, strong enough to uplift on high the little vessel of our soul. Neither the ship herself nor her pilot and sailors can at their choice control the fury of the sea and stop its carrying the boat where it will: far less can the interior of the soul now stay where it chooses or force its senses or faculties to act more than He Who holds them in His dominion decrees; as for the exterior powers, they are here quite useless.

4. Indeed I am amazed, sisters, while merely writing of this manifestation of the immense power of this great King and Monarch. Then what must be felt by those who actually experience it? I am convinced that if His Majesty were to reveal Himself thus to the greatest sinners on earth, they would never dare to offend Him again--if not through love at least through fear of Him. What obligations bind those taught in so sublime a manner to strive with all their might not to displease such a Master! In His Name I beg of you, sisters, who have received these or the like favours, not to rest content with merely receiving them but to remember that she who owes much has much to pay. [*6]

5. This thought terrifies the soul exceedingly:

[p. 201]

unless the great courage needed was given it by our Lord, it would suffer great and constant grief; for looking first at what His Majesty has done for it and then upon itself, it sees how little good it has performed compared with what it was bound to do, and that the paltry service it has rendered was full of faults, failures and tepidity. To efface the remembrance of the many imperfections of all its good deeds (if indeed it has ever performed any) it thinks best to forget them altogether and to be ever mindful of its sins, casting itself on the mercy of God since it cannot repay its debt to Him and begging for the pity and compassion He ever shows to sinners.

6. Perhaps He will answer as He did to some one who was kneeling before a crucifix in great affliction on this account, for she felt she had never had anything to offer God nor to sacrifice for His sake. The Crucified One consoled her by saying that He gave her for herself all the pains and labours He had borne in His passion, that she might offer them as her own to His Father. [*7] I learnt from her that she at once felt comforted and enriched by these words which she never forgets but recalls whenever she realizes her own wretchedness and feels encouraged and consoled. I could relate several other incidents of the same kind learnt in conversation with many holy people much given to prayer, but I will not recount them lest you might imagine they relate to myself.

7. I think this example is very instructive; it

[p. 202]

shows that we please our Lord by self-knowledge, by the constant recollection of our poverty and miseries, and by realizing that we possess nothing but what we have received from Him. [*8] Therefore courage is needed, sisters, in order to receive this and many other favours which come to a soul elevated to this state by our Lord; I think that if the soul is humble it requires more valour than ever for this last mercy. May God grant us humility for His Name's sake.

8. To return to this sudden rapture of the spirit. The soul really appears to have quitted the body, which however is not lifeless, and though, on the other hand, the person is certainly not dead, yet she herself cannot, for a few seconds, tell whether her spirit remains within her body or not. [*9] She feels that she has been wholly transported into another and a very different region from that in which we live, where a light so unearthly is shown [*10] that, if during her whole lifetime she had been trying to picture it and the wonders seen, she could not possibly have succeeded. In an instant her mind learns so many things at once that if the imagination and intellect spent years in striving to enumerate them, it could not recall a thousandth part of them.

9. This vision is not intellectual but imaginary and is seen by the eyes of the soul more clearly

[p. 203]

than earthly things are seen by our bodily eyes. Although no words are pronounced, the spirit is taught many truths; for instance, if it beholds any of the saints, it knows them at once as well as if intimately acquainted with them for years. [*11] Occasionally, besides what the eyes of the soul perceive in intellectual vision, other things are shown it. In an imaginary vision it usually sees our Lord accompanied by a host of angels; yet neither the bodily eyes nor the eyes of the soul [*12] see anything, for these visions and many other things impossible to describe, are revealed by some wonderful intuition that I cannot explain. Perhaps those who have experienced this favour and possess more ability than myself may be able to describe it, although it seems to me a most difficult task.

10. I cannot tell whether the soul dwells in the body meanwhile or not: I would neither affirm that it does nor that the body is deprived of it. I have often thought that as, though the sun does not leave his place in the heavens yet his rays have power to reach the earth instantaneously, so the soul and the spirit, which make one and the same thing (like the sun and its rays) may, while remaining in its own place, through the strength of the ardour coming to it from the true Sun of Justice, send up some higher part of it above itself. In fact I do not understand what I am talking about, but the truth is that, with the swiftness of a bullet fired

[p. 204]

from a gun, an upward flight takes place in the interior of the soul. (I know no other name for it but 'flight.') Although noiseless, it is too manifest a movement to be any illusion [*13] and the soul is quite outside itself; at least that is the impression made upon it. Great mysteries are revealed to it meanwhile, and when the person returns to consciousness she is so greatly benefited that she holds all this world's goods as filth compared with what she has seen. Henceforth earthly life is grievous to her and what used to please her now remains uncared for and unnoticed. [*14]

11. Those children of Israel who were sent on first to the Land of Promise brought back tokens from it; [*15] so here our Lord seems to seek to show the soul something of the land to which it is travelling, to give it courage to pass through the trials of its painful journey, now that it knows where it must go to find rest. You may fancy that such profit could not thus quickly be obtained, yet only those who have experienced what signal benefits

[p. 205]

this favour leaves in the soul can realize its value.

12. This clearly shows it to be no work of the devil; neither the imagination nor the evil one could represent what leaves such peace, calm, and good fruits in the soul, and particularly the following three graces of a very high order. [*16] The first of these is a perception of the greatness of God which becomes clearer to us as we witness more of it. Secondly, we gain self-knowledge and humility from seeing how creatures so base as ourselves in comparison with the Creator of such wonders have dared to offend Him in the past or venture to gaze on Him now.

13. The third grace is a contempt for all earthly things unless they are consecrated to the service of so great a God. With such jewels the Bridegroom begins to deck His Bride; they are too valuable for her to keep them carelessly. [*17] These visions are so deeply engraved in her memory that I believe she can never forget them until she enjoys them for evermore, for to do so would be the greatest misfortune. [*18] But the Spouse Who gave her these gifts has power to give her grace not to lose them.

14. I told you that courage was required by the soul, for do you think it is a trifling matter for the spirit to feel literally separated from the body, as it does when perceiving that it is losing its senses without understanding the reason? There is need that

[p. 206]

[paragraph continues] He Who gives all the rest should include fortitude. You will say this fright is well rewarded, and so say I. May He Who can bestow such graces be for ever praised and may His Majesty vouchsafe that we may be worthy to serve Him. Amen.

Footnotes

^198:1 Rel. viii. 10, 11. Life, ch. xviii, 8; xx. 3.

^199:2 Life, ch. xx. 9. St. John of the Cross, Spiritual Canticle, stanzas xiv.-xv. 23 sqq. Philippus a SS. Trinit. l.c. p. iii. tr. i. disc. iii. art. 3. 'This prayer of rapture is superior to the preceding grades of prayer, as also to the ordinary prayer of union, and leaves much more excellent effects and operations in many other ways.' St. Catherine of Siena (Dialogue, ch. lxxix. 1) says: 'Wherefore, oftentimes, through the perfect union which the soul has made with Me, she is raised from the earth almost as if the heavy body became light. But this does not mean that the heaviness of the body is taken away, but that the union of the soul with Me is more perfect than the union of the body with the soul; wherefore the strength of the spirit, united with Me, raises the body from the earth.' (Transl. by Algar Thorold.)

^199:3 Life, ch. xxii. 20.

^199:4 Castle, M. iv. ch. ii. 3.

^200:5 Prov. viii. 29.

^200:6 St. Luke xii. 48: 'Cui multum datum est, multum quaeretur ab eo, et cui commendaverunt multum, plus petent ab eo.'

^201:7 Rel. ix. 8. This happened at Seville in 1575 or 1576.

^202:8 1 Cor. iv. 7: 'Quid autem habes quod non accepisti?'

^202:9 2 Cor. xii. 2: 'Sive in corpore nescio, sive extra corpus nescio, Deus scit.'

^202:10 This is called 'lumen prophetiae' and is a transient form of the 'lumen gloriae.' See St. Thomas Aquinas, Sum. theol. 2a 2ae, q. 175, art. 3 ad 2.

^203:11 The same thing is related of some Saints while on earth, e.g. St Paul the first hermit and St. Anthony, who greeted each other by name though neither knew nor had heard of the other.

^203:12 These words, though necessary for the context, were only begun, but not completed by St. Teresa.

^204:13 Life, ch. xx. 32. Castle, M. iv. ch. i. 10.

^204:14 Compare  section section 8-10 with Philippus a SS. Trinitate, l.c. p. iii. tr. i. disc. iii. art. 3.

'Muchas veces he pensado, si como el sol estandose en el cielo, que sus rayos tienen tanta fuerza, que no mudandose el de alli, de presto llegan aca; si el alma y el espiritu (que son una misma cosa, como le es el soly sus rayos) puede, quedandose ella en su puesto, con la fuerza de calor que le viene del verdadero Sol de justicia, alguna parte superior salir sobre si misma. En fin, yo no se lo que digo, lo que es verdad es, que con la presteza que sale la pelota de un arcabuz, cuando le ponen el fuego, se levanta en lo interior un vuelo (que yo no se otro nombre que le poner) que aunque no hace ruido, hace movimento tan claro, que no puede ser antojo en ninguna manera; y muy fuera de si misma, a todo lo que puede entender, se le muestran grandes cosas.'

^204:15 Num. xiii. 24.

^205:16 Life, ch. xx. 31. The same distinctions with respect to divine and diabolical locutions may be found in Life, ch. xxv. 5.

^205:17 'Dexteram meam et collum meum cinxit lapidibus pretiosis; tradidit auribus meis inestimabiles margaritas.' From the Office of St. Agnes.

^205:18 This is undoubtedly the correct rendering of this difficult and obscure passage.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VI.

DESCRIBES AN EFFECT WHICH PROVES THE PRAYER SPOKEN OF IN THE LAST CHAPTER TO BE GENUINE AND NO DECEPTION, TREATS OF ANOTHER FAVOUR OUR LORD BESTOWS ON THE SOUL TO MAKE IT PRAISE HIM FERVENTLY.

1. The soul longs for death. 2. The soul cannot help desiring these favours. 3. St. Teresa bewails her inability to serve God. 3. Fervour resulting from ecstasies. 5. Excessive desires to see God should be restrained. 6. They endanger health. 7. Tears often come from Physical causes. 8. St. Teresa's own experience. 9. Works, not tears, are asked by God. 10. Confide entirely in God. 11. The jubilee of the soul. 12. Impossibility of concealing this joy. 13. The world's judgment of this jubilee. 14. Which is often felt by the nuns of St. Joseph's. 15. The Saint's delight in this jubilee.

1. THESE sublime favours leave the soul so desirous of fully enjoying Him Who has bestowed them that life becomes a painful though delicious torture, and death is ardently longed for. Such a one often implores God with tears to take her from this exile where everything she sees wearies her. [*1] Solitude alone brings great alleviation for a time, but soon her grief returns and yet she cannot bear to be without it. In short, this poor little butterfly can find no lasting rest. So tender is her love that at the slightest provocation it flames forth and the soul takes flight. Thus in this mansion raptures

[p. 207]

occur very frequently, nor can they be resisted even in public. Persecutions and slanders ensue; [*2] however she may try, she cannot keep free from the fears suggested to her by so many people, especially by her confessors.

2. Although in one way she feels great confidence within her soul, especially when alone with God, yet on the other hand, she is greatly troubled by misgivings lest she is deceived by the devil and so should offend Him Whom she deeply loves. She cares little for blame, except when her confessor finds fault with her as if she could help what happens. She asks every one to pray for her [*3] since she has been told to do so, and begs His Majesty to direct her by some other way than this which is so full of danger. Nevertheless, so great are the benefits left by these favours that she cannot but see that they lead her on the way to heaven, [*4] of which she has read and heard and learnt in the law of God. As, strive how she may, she cannot resist desiring to receive these graces, she resigns herself into God's hands. Yet she is grieved at finding herself forced to wish for these favours which appears to be disobedience to her confessor, for she believes that in obedience, and in avoiding any offence against God, lies her safeguard against deception. Thus she feels she would prefer to be cut in pieces rather than wilfully commit a venial sin, yet is greatly grieved at seeing that she cannot avoid unwittingly falling into a great number.

[p. 208]

[paragraph continues] God bestows on such people so intense a desire neither ever to displease Him in however small a matter, nor to commit any avoidable imperfection, that, were there no other reason, they would try to avoid society and they greatly envy those who live in deserts. [*5] On the other hand, they seek to live amidst men in the hopes of helping if but one soul to praise God better. [*6] In the case of a woman, she grieves over the impediment offered by her sex [*7] and envies those who are free to proclaim aloud to all Who is this mighty God of hosts. [*8]

3. O poor little butterfly! chained by so many fetters that stop thee from flying where thou wouldst! Have pity on her, O my God, and so dispose her ways that she may be able to accomplish some of her desires for Thy honour and glory! Take no account of the poverty of her merits, nor of the vileness of her nature, Lord, Thou Who hast the power to compel the vast ocean to retire, and didst force the wide river Jordan to draw back so that the Children of Israel might pass through! [*9] Yet spare her not, for aided by Thy strength she can endure many trials. She is resolved to do so--she desires to suffer them. Stretch forth Thine arm, O Lord, to help her lest she waste her life on trifles! Let Thy greatness appear in this Thy creature, womanish and weak as she is, so that men, seeing the good in her is not her own, may praise Thee

[p. 209]

for it! Let it cost her what it may and as dear as she desires, for she longs to lose a thousand lives to lead one soul to praise Thee but a little better. If as many lives were hers to give, she would count them well spent in such a cause, knowing as a truth most certain that she is unworthy to bear the lightest cross, much less to die for Thee.

4. I cannot tell why I have said this, sisters, nor what made me do so; indeed I never intended it. You must know that these effects are bound to follow from such trances or ecstasies: they are not transient, but permanent desires; when opportunity occurs of acting on them, they prove genuine. How can I say that they are permanent, when at times the soul feels cowardly in the most trivial matters and too timorous to undertake any work for God?

5. I believe it is because our Lord, for its greater good, then leaves the soul to its natural weakness, which at once convinces it so thoroughly that any strength it possessed came from His Majesty as to destroy its self-love, enduing it with a greater knowledge of the mercy and greatness of God which He deigned to show forth in one so vile. However, the soul is usually in the former state. Beware of one thing, sisters; these ardent desires to behold our Lord are sometimes so distressing as to need rather to be checked than to be encouraged--that is, if feasible, for in another kind of prayer of which I shall speak later, it is not possible as you will see.

6. In the state I speak of these longings can sometimes be arrested, for the reason is at liberty

[p. 210]

to conform to the will of God and can quote the words of St. Martin; [*10] should these desires become very oppressive, the thoughts may be turned to some other matter. As such longings are generally found in persons far advanced in perfection, the devil may excite them in order to make us think we are of their number--in any case it is well to be cautious. For my part, I do not believe he could cause the calm and peace given by this pain to the soul, but would disturb it by such uneasiness as we feel when afflicted concerning any worldly matter. A person inexperienced in both kinds of sorrow cannot understand the difference, but thinking such grief an excellent thing, will excite it as much as possible which greatly injures the health, as these longings are incessant or at least very frequent.

7. You must also notice that bodily weakness may cause such pain, especially with people of sensitive characters who cry over every trifling trouble. [*11] Times without number do they imagine they are mourning for God's sake when they are doing no such thing. If for a considerable space of time, whenever such a person hears the least mention of God or thinks of Him at all, these fits of uncontrollable

[p. 211]

weeping occur, [*12] the cause may be an accumulation of humour round the heart, which has a great deal more to do with such tears than has the love of God. Such persons seem as if they would never stop crying: believing that tears are beneficial, they do not try to check them nor to distract their minds from the subject, but encourage them as much as possible. The devil seizes this opportunity of weakening nuns so that they become unable to pray or to keep their Rule.

8. I think you must be puzzling over this and would like to ask what I would have you do, as I see danger in everything. If I am afraid of delusions in so good a thing as tears, perhaps I myself am deluded, and may be I am! But believe me, I do not say this without having witnessed it in other people although not in my own case, for there is nothing tender about me and my heart is so hard as often to grieve me. [*13] However, when the fire burns fiercely within, stony as my heart may be, it distils like an alembic. [*14] It is easy to know when tears come from this source, for they are soothing and gentle rather than stormy and rarely do any harm. This delusion, when it is one, has the advantage, with a humble person, of only injuring the body and not the soul. But if one is not humble, it is well to be ever on one's guard.

9. Let us not fancy that if we cry a great deal we have done all that is needed--rather we must

[p. 212]

work hard and practise the virtues: that is the essential--leaving tears to fall when God sends them, without trying to force ourselves to shed them. Then, if we do not take too much notice of them, they will leave the parched soil of our souls well watered, making it fertile in good fruit; for this is the water which falls from heaven. [*15] However we may tire ourselves in digging to reach it, we shall never get any water like this; indeed, we may often work and search until we are exhausted without finding as much as a pool, much less a springing well!

10. Therefore, sisters, I think it best for us to place ourselves in the presence of God, contemplate His mercy and grandeur and our own vileness and leave Him to give us what He will, whether water or drought, for He knows best what is good for us; thus we enjoy peace and the devil will have less chance to deceive us.

11. Amongst these favours, at once painful and pleasant, Our Lord sometimes causes in the soul a certain jubilation [*16] and a strange and mysterious kind of prayer. If He bestows this grace on you, praise Him fervently for it; I describe it so that you may know that it is something real. I believe that the faculties of the soul are closely united to God but that He leaves them at liberty to rejoice in their happiness together with the senses, although they do not know what they are enjoying nor how they do so. This may sound nonsense but it really

[p. 213]

happens. So excessive is its jubilee that the soul will not enjoy it alone but speaks of it to all around so that they may help it to praise God, which is its one desire. [*17]

12. Oh, what rejoicings would this person utter and what demonstrations would she make, if possible, so that all might know her happiness! She seems to have found herself again and wishes, like the father of the prodigal son, to invite all her friends to feast with her [*18] and to see her soul in its rightful place, because (at least for the time being) she cannot doubt its security. I believe she is right, for the devil could not possibly infuse a joy and peace into the very centre of her being which make her whole delight consist in urging others to praise God. It requires a painful effort to keep silent and to dissemble such impulsive happiness. St. Francis must have experienced this when, as the robbers met him rushing through the fields crying aloud, he told them in answer to their questions that he was the 'herald of the great King.' [*19] So felt other saints who retired into the deserts so that, like St. Francis, they might proclaim the praises of their God.

[p. 214]

13. I knew Fray Peter of Alcantara who used to do this. I believe he was a saint on account of the life he led, yet people often took him for a fool when they heard him. [*20] Oh happy folly, sisters! Would that God might let us all share it! What mercy He has shown you in placing you where, if He gave you this grace and it were perceived by others, it would rather turn to your advantage than bring on you contempt as it would do in the world, where men so rarely hear God praised that it is no wonder they take scandal at it.

14. Oh miserable times and wretched life spent in the world! How blest are those whose happy lot it is to be freed from them! [*21] It often delights me, when in my sisters' company to see how the joy of their hearts is so great that they vie with one another in praising our Lord for placing them in this convent: it is evident that their praises come from the very depths of their souls. I should like you to do this often, sisters, for when one begins she incites the rest to imitate her. How can your tongues be better employed when you are together than in praising God, Who has given us so much cause for it?

15. May His Majesty often grant us this kind of prayer which is most safe and beneficial; we cannot acquire it for ourselves as it is quite supernatural.

[p. 215]

[paragraph continues] Sometimes it lasts for a whole day and the soul is like one inebriated, although not deprived of the senses; [*22] nor like a person afflicted with melancholia, [*23] in which, though the reason is not entirely lost, the imagination continually dwells on some subject which possesses it and from which it cannot be freed. These are coarse comparisons to make in connection with such a precious gift, yet nothing else occurs to my mind. In this state of prayer a person is rendered by this jubilee so forgetful of self and everything else that she can neither think nor speak of anything but praising God, to which her joy prompts her. Let us all of us join her, my daughters, for why should we wish to be wiser than she? What can make us happier? And may all creatures unite their praises with ours for ever and ever. Amen, amen, amen!

Footnotes

^206:1 Excl. ii. See poem 4, 'Cuan triste es, Dios mio'; and the two versions of 'Vivir sin vivir en mi.' (Poems 3 and 4. Minor Works.)

^207:2 Life, ch. xxv. 18.

^207:3 Ibid. ch. xxv. 20. Rel. vii. 7.

^207:4 Ibid. ch. xxvii. 1, 2.

^208:5 Rel. i. 6.

^208:6 Life, ch. xxxii. 14; xxxv. 13. Castle, M. vii. ch. iv. 21 . Found. ch. i. 6, 7.

^208:7 Way of Perf. ch. i.

^208:8 III Reg. xix. 10.

^208:9 Ps. cxiii. 3; Exod. xiv. and Jos. iii.

^210:10 'When St. Martin was dying, his brethren said to him: 'Why, dear Father, will you leave us? Or to whom can you commit us in our desolation? We know, indeed, that you desire to be with Christ, but your reward above is safe and will not be diminished by delay; rather have pity on us whom you are leaving desolate.' Then Martin, always pitiful, moved by these lamentations, is said to have burst into tears. Turning to God, he replied to the mourners around him only by crying: 'O Lord, if I am still necessary to Thy people, I do not shrink from toil; Thy will be done.' (Sulpitius Severus, Life of St. Martin, letter 3.)

^210:11 Way of Perf.. ch. xvii. 4; xix. 6.

^211:12 Life, ch. xxix. 12.

^211:13 Compare with this what we have said in note 1 to the second chapter of the Fourth Mansions. Rel. ii. 12.

^211:14 Life, ch. xix. 1-3.

^212:15 Way of Perf. ch. xix. 6. Life, ch. xviii. 12 sqq.

^212:16 Philippus a SS. Trinit. l.c. p. iii. tr. i. disc. iv. art. 5. Antonius a Sp. S. l.c. tr. iv. n.156.

^213:17 Rel. ii. 12.

^213:18 St. Luke xv. 23.

^213:19 'He plunged into a large forest, and there in a loud voice and in French, he made the echoes resound with the praises of God. Some robbers, attracted by his singing, rushed out upon him. But the sight of so poor a man destroyed their hopes of booty. They questioned him, and Francis gave them no answer beyond saying in allegorical language: 'I am the herald of the great King!' The robbers considered themselves insulted by these words. They threw themselves upon him, beat him severely, and went off after having thrown him into a ditch full of snow. This treatment only added fire to the zeal of Francis. He sang his holy canticles with greater love than before.' (Rev. Father Leon, Lives of the Saints of the Order of St. Francis, vol. 1, ch, i,)

^214:20 'St. Peter of Alcantara, in the jubilation of his soul through the impetuosity of divine love, was occasionally unable to refrain from singing the divine praises aloud in a wonderful manner. To do this more freely, he sometimes went into the woods where the peasants who heard him sing took him for one who was beside himself.' (Rev. Alban Butler, Lives of the Saints.)

^214:21 Way of Perf. ch. ii. 8; iii. i; viii. 1.

^215:22 Compare with this what has been said in the fourth chapter of this Mansion,  section 17, note 17.

^215:23 Melancholia here as elsewhere means hysteria.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 216]

  

CHAPTER VII.

DESCRIBES THE GRIEF FELT ON ACCOUNT OF THEIR SINS BY SOULS ON WHOM GOD HAS BESTOWED THE BEFORE-MENTIONED FAVOURS. SHOWS THAT HOWEVER SPIRITUAL A PERSON MAY BE, IT IS A GREAT ERROR NOT TO KEEP BEFORE OUR MIND THE HUMANITY OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST AND HIS SACRED PASSION AND LIFE, AS ALSO THE GLORIOUS MOTHER OF GOD AND THE SAINTS. THE BENEFITS GAINED BY SUCH A MEDITATION. THIS CHAPTER IS MOST PROFITABLE.

1. Sorrow for sin felt by souls in the Sixth Mansion. 2. How this sorrow is felt. 3. St. Teresa's grief for her past sins. 4. Such souls, centred in God, forget self-interest. 5. The remembrance of divine benefits increases contrition. 6. Meditation on our Lord's Humanity. 7. Warning against discontinuing it. 8. Christ and the saints our models. 9. Meditation of contemplatives. 10. Meditation during aridity. 11. We must search for God when we do not feel His presence. 12. Reasoning and mental prayer. 13. A form of meditation on our Lord's Life and Passion. 14. Simplicity of contemplatives' meditation. 15. Souls in every state of prayer should think of the Passion. 16. Need of the example of Christ and the saints. 17. Faith shows us our Lord as both God and Man. 18. St. Teresa's experience of meditation on the sacred Humanity. 19. Evil of giving up such meditation.

1. IT may seem to you, sisters, that souls to whom God has communicated Himself in such a special manner may feel so sure of enjoying Him for ever as no longer to require to fear or to mourn over their past sins. Those of you will be most apt to hold this opinion who have never received the like favours; souls to whom God has granted these

[p. 217]

graces will understand what I say. This is a great mistake, for sorrow for sin increases in proportion to the divine grace received and I believe will never quit us until we come to the land where nothing can grieve us any more. Doubtless we feel this pain more at one time than at another and it is of a different kind. A soul so advanced as that we speak of does not think of the punishment threatening its offences but of its great ingratitude towards Him to Whom it owes so much [*1] and Who so justly deserves that it should serve Him, for the sublime mysteries revealed have taught it much about the greatness of God.

2. This soul wonders at its former temerity and weeps over its irreverence; its foolishness in the past seems a madness which it never ceases to lament as it remembers for what vile things it forsook so great a Sovereign. The thoughts dwell on this more than on the favours received, which, like those I am about to describe, are so powerful that they seem to rush through the soul at times like a strong, swift river. Yet the sins remain like the mire in the river bed and dwell constantly in the memory, making a heavy cross to bear.

3. I know some one who, though she had ceased to wish for death in order to see God, [*2] yet desired it that she might be freed from her continual regret for her past ingratitude towards Him to Whom she owed, and always would owe, so much. She thought no one's guilt could be compared to her own, for she felt there could be none with whom

[p. 218]

[paragraph continues] God had borne so patiently nor on whom He had bestowed such graces.

4. Souls that have reached the state I speak of have ceased to fear hell. At times, though very rarely, they grieve keenly over the possibility of their losing God; their sole dread is lest He should withdraw His hand, allowing them to offend Him, and so they might return to their former miserable condition. They care nothing for their own pain or glory; if they are anxious not to stay long in Purgatory, it is more on account of its keeping them from the Presence of God than because of its torments. Whatever favours God may have shown a soul, I think it is dangerous for it to forget the unhappy state it was once in; painful as the remembrance may be, it is most beneficial.

5. Perhaps I think so because I have been so wicked and that may be the reason why I never forget my sins; people who have led good lives have no cause for grief; yet we always fall at times whilst living in this mortal body. This pain is not lessened by reflecting that our Lord has already forgiven and forgotten our faults; our grief is rather increased at seeing such kindness and favours bestowed on one who deserves nothing but hell. I think St. Paul and the Magdalen must thus have suffered a cruel martyrdom; [*3] their love was intense, they had received many mercies and realized the greatness and the majesty of God and so must have found it very hard to bear the remembrance

[p. 219]

of their sins, which they must have regretted with a most tender sorrow.

6. You may fancy that one who has enjoyed such high favours need not meditate on the mysteries of the most sacred Humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ but will be wholly absorbed in love. I have written fully about this elsewhere. [*4] I have been contradicted and told that I was wrong and did not understand the matter; that our Lord guides souls in such a way that after having made progress it is best to exercise oneself in matters concerning the Godhead and to avoid what is corporeal; yet nothing will make me admit that this latter is a good way.

7. I may be mistaken; we may all really mean the same thing but I found the devil was trying to lead me astray in this manner. Having been warned by experience in this respell, I have decided to speak again about it here although I have very often done so elsewhere. [*5] Be most cautious on the subject; attend to what I venture to say about it and do not believe any one who tells you the contrary. I will endeavour to explain myself more clearly than I did before. If the person who undertook to write on the matter had treated it more explicitly he would have done well, for it may do much harm to speak of it in general terms to us women, who have scanty wits.

8. Some souls imagine they cannot meditate even on the Passion, still less on the most blessed Virgin or on the saints, the memory of whose lives greatly

[p. 220]

benefits and strengthens us. [*6] I cannot think what such persons are to meditate upon, for to withdraw the thoughts from all corporeal things like the angelic spirits who are always inflamed with love, is not possible for us while in this mortal flesh; we need to study, to meditate upon and to imitate those who, mortals like ourselves, performed such heroic deeds for God. How much less should we wilfully endeavour to abstain from thinking of our only good and remedy, the most sacred Humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ? I cannot believe that any one really does this; they misunderstand their own minds and so harm both themselves and others. Of this at least I can assure them: they will never thus enter the last two mansions of the castle. If they lose their Guide, our good Jesus, they cannot find the way and it will be much if they have stayed safely in the former mansions. Our Lord Himself tells us that He is 'the Way'; He also says that He is 'the Light'; that no man cometh to the Father but by Him; and that 'He that seeth Me, seeth the Father also.' [*7]

[p. 221]

9. Such persons tell us that these words have some other meaning; I know of no other meaning but this, which my soul has ever recognized as the true one and which has always suited me right well. Some people (many of whom have spoken to me on the subject) after our Lord has once raised them to perfect contemplation, wish to enjoy it continually. This is impossible; still, the grace of this state remains in their souls in such a way that they cannot reason as before on the mysteries of the Passion and the Life of Christ. I cannot account for it but it is very usual for the mind thus to remain less apt for meditation. I think it must be because, as the one end of meditation is to seek God, after He has once been found and the soul is accustomed to seek Him again by means of the will, it no longer wearies itself by searching for Him with the intellect.

10. It also appears to me that as the will is already inflamed with love, this generous faculty would, if it could, cease to make use of the reason. This would be well, were it not impossible, especially before the soul has reached the last two mansions. [*8] Time spent in prayer would thus be lost as the will often needs the use of the understanding to rekindle its love. Notice this point, sisters, which as it is important I will explain more fully. Such a soul

[p. 222]

desires to spend all its time in loving God and wishes to do nothing else; but it cannot succeed, for though the will is not dead yet the flame which kindled it is dying out and the spark needs fanning into a glow. Ought the soul to remain quiescent in this aridity, waiting like our father Elias for fire to descend from heaven [*9] to consume the sacrifice which it makes of itself to God? Certainly not; it is not right to expect miracles; God will work them for this soul when He chooses. As I have told you already and shall do again, His Majesty wishes us to hold ourselves unworthy of their being wrought on our account and desires us to help ourselves to the best of our abilities.

11. In my opinion we ought during our whole life, to act in this manner, however sublime our prayer may be. True, those whom our Lord admits into the seventh mansion rarely or never need thus to help their fervour, for the reason I will tell you of; if I recollect it when I come to write of this room where, in a wonderful manner, souls are constantly in the company of Christ our Lord both in His Humanity and His Divinity. [*10] Thus, when the fire in our hearts, of which I spoke does not burn in the will, nor do we feel the presence of God, we must search for Him as He would have us do, like the Bride in the Canticles, [*11] and must ask all creatures 'who it was that made them;' as St. Augustine (either in his Soliloquies or his

[p. 223]

[paragraph continues] Confessions) tells us that he did. [*12] Thus we shall not stand like blockheads, wasting our time in waiting for what we before enjoyed. At first, it may be that our Lord will not renew His gift again for a year or even for many years; His Majesty knows the reason which we should not try to discover since there is no need for us to understand it.

12. As most certainly the way to please God is to keep the commandments and counsels, let us do so diligently, while meditating on His life and death and all we owe Him; then let the rest be as God chooses. Some may answer that their mind refuses to dwell on these subjects; and for the above causes, this to a certain extent is true. You know that it is one thing to reason and another thing for the memory to bring certain truths before the mind. Perhaps you may not understand me; possibly I fail to express myself rightly but I will do my

[p. 224]

best. Using the understanding much in this manner is what I call meditation.

13. Let us begin by considering the mercy God showed us by giving us His only Son; let us not stop here but go on to reflect upon all the mysteries of His glorious life; or let us first turn our thoughts to His prayer in the garden, then allow them to continue the subject until they reach the crucifixion. Or we may take some part of the Passion such as Christ's apprehension and dwell on this mystery, considering in detail the points to be pondered and thought over, such as the treachery of Judas, the flight of the Apostles, and all that followed. This is an admirable and very meritorious kind of prayer. [*13]

14. Souls led by God in supernatural ways and raised to perfect contemplation are right in declaring they cannot practise this kind of meditation. As I said, I know not why, but as a rule they are unable to do so. Yet they would be wrong in saying that they cannot dwell on these mysteries nor frequently think about them, especially when these events are being celebrated by the Catholic Church. Nor is it possible for the soul which has received so much from God to forget these precious proofs of His love which are living sparks to inflame the heart with greater love for our Lord, nor can the mind fail to understand them. Such a soul comprehends these mysteries, which are brought before the mind and stamped on the memory in a more perfect way than with other people, so that the mere sight of our Lord prostrate

[p. 225]

in the garden, covered with His terrible sweat, suffices to engross the thoughts not merely for an hour but for several days. The soul looks with a simple gaze upon Who He is and how ungratefully we treat Him in return for such terrible sufferings. Then the will, although perhaps without sensible tenderness, desires to render Him some service for such sublime mercies and longs to suffer something for Him Who bore so much for us, employing itself in similar considerations in which the memory and understanding also take their part.

15. I think this is why such souls cannot reason connectedly about the Passion and fancy they are unable to mediate on it. Those who do not meditate on this subject had better begin to do so; for I know that it will not impede the most sublime prayer nor is it well to omit praising this often. If God then sees fit to enrapture them, well and good; even if they are reluctant, He will make them cease to meditate. I am certain that this way of king is most helpful to the soul and not the hindrance it would become were great efforts made to use the intellect. This, as I said, I believe cannot be done when a higher state of prayer is attained. It may be otherwise in some cases, for God leads souls in many different ways. Let not those be blamed, however, who are unable to discourse much in prayer, nor should they be judged incapable of enjoying the great graces contained in the mysteries of Jesus Christ, our only Good, which no one, however spiritual he may be, can persuade me it is well to omit contemplating.

[p. 226]

16. There are souls who, having made a beginning, or advanced half-way, when they begin to experience the prayer of quiet and to taste the sweetness and consolations God gives, think it is a great thing to enjoy these spiritual pleasures continually. Let them, as I advised elsewhere, cease to give themselves up so much to this absorption. Life is long and full of crosses and we have need to look on Christ our pattern, to see how He bore His trials, and even to take example by His Apostles and saints if we would bear our own trials perfectly. Our good Jesus and His most blessed Mother are too good company to be left and He is well pleased if we grieve at His pains, even though sometimes at the cost of our own consolations and joys. [*14] Besides, daughters, consolations are not so frequent in prayer that we have no time for this as well. If any one should tell me she continually enjoys them, and that she is one of those who can never meditate on the divine mysteries, I should feel very doubtful about her state. Be convinced of this; keep free from this deception and to the utmost of your power stop yourselves from being constantly immersed in this intoxication. If you cannot do so, tell the Prioress so that she may employ you too busily for you to think of the matter; thus you will be free from this danger which, if it does no more, when it lasts long, greatly injures the health and brain. I have said enough to prove to those who require it that, however spiritual their state, it is an error so to avoid thinking of corporeal things

[p. 227]

as to imagine that meditation on the most sacred Humanity can injure the soul.

17. People allege, in defence, that our Lord told His disciples that it was expedient for them that He should go from them. [*15] This I cannot admit. He did not say so to His blessed Mother, for her faith was firm. She knew He was both God and man; and although she loved Him more dearly than did His disciples, it was in so perfect a way that His bodily presence was a help to her. The faith of the Apostles must have been weaker than it was later on, and than ours has reason to be. I assure you, daughters, that I consider this a most dangerous idea whereby the devil might end by robbing us of our devotion to the most blessed Sacrament.

18. The mistake I formerly made [*16] did not lead me as far as this, but I did not care so much about meditating on our Lord Jesus Christ, preferring to remain absorbed, awaiting spiritual consolations. I recognized clearly that I was going wrong, for as I could not always keep in this state, my thoughts wandered hither and thither and my soul seemed like a bird, ever flying about and finding no place for rest. Thus I lost much time and did not advance in virtue nor make progress in prayer.

19. I did not understand the reason, and as I believed that I was acting wisely I think I should never have learnt it but for the advice of a servant

[p. 228]

of God whom I consulted about my mode of prayer. Then I perceived plainly how mistaken I had been and I have never ceased regretting that there was a time when I did not realize how difficult it would be to gain by so great a loss. Even if I could, I would seek for nothing save by Him through Whom comes all the good we possess. May He be for ever praised! Amen.

Footnotes

^217:1 Life, ch. vi. 7.

^217:2 Excl. vi. 4, 5. Supra, M. v. ch. ii, 5. Poems 2, 3, 4. Minor Works.

^218:3 Life, ch. xxi, 9. All editions have 'Peter'. St. Teresa only wrote 'Po' but the parallel passage proves she meant Pablo, and not Pedro. See also M. i. ch. i. 5.

^219:4 Life, ch. xxii. 9-11.

^219:5 Ibid. ch. xxii. i; xxiii. 18; xxiv. 2.

^220:6 'Deliberate forgetfulness and rejection of all knowledge and of form must never be extended to Christ and His sacred Humanity. Sometimes, indeed, in the height of contemplation and pure intuition of the Divinity the soul does not remember the Sacred Humanity, because God raises the mind to this, as it were, confused and most supernatural knowledge; but for all this, studiously to forget it is by no means right, for the contemplation of the sacred Humanity and loving meditation upon it will help us up to all good, and it is by it we shall ascend most easily to the highest state of union. It is evident at once that, while all visible and bodily things ought to be forgotten, for they are a hindrance in our way, He, Who for our salvation became man, is not to be accounted among them, for He is the truth, the door, and the way, and our guide to all good.' (St. John of the Cross Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. iii. ch. i. 12-14.

^220:7 St. John viii. 12; xiv. 6, 9.

^221:8 Life, ch. xv. 20. St. John of the Cross treats the subject most carefully. He shows how and when meditation becomes impossible: Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xii. (circa finem) ch. xiii. (per totum). Living Flame of Love, stanza iii. 35. Obscure Night, bk. i. ch. x. 8, and bk. ii. ch. viii. That it should be procured whenever possible: Ibid. bk. i. ch. x. (in fine); that it should be resumed; Ascent of Mount Carmel; bk. ii, ch. xv.

^222:9 III Reg. xviii. 30-39.

^222:10 Continual sense of the presence of God: Life, ch. xxvii. 6. Rel. xi. 3: 'The intellectual vision of the Three Persons and of the Sacred Humanity seems ever present.' Castle, M. vii. ch. iv. 15.

^222:11 Cant, iii. 3; 'Num quem diligit anima mea, vidistis?'

^223:12 'I asked the earth, and it answered me: 'I am not He'; and whatsoever it contains confessed the same. I asked the sea and the depths, and the living, creeping things, and they answered: 'We are not thy God, seek above us.' I asked the heavens, I asked the moving air; and the whole air with its inhabitants answered: 'Anaximenes was deceived, I am not God.' I asked the heavens, sun, moon, stars. 'Nor,' say they, 'are we the God Whom thou seekest.' And I replied unto all things which encompass the door of my flesh: 'Ye have told me of my God, that ye are not He; tell me something of Him.' And they cried out with a loud voice: 'He made us.' By my thought of them I questioned them, and their beauty gave their answer.' (St. Augustine's Confessions, bk. x. ch. 6.)

St. Teresa may have read this in St. Augustine's Confessions, (see above, <page 78>), or in the Soliloquies, a collection of extracts from St. Augustine, St. Bernard, St. Anselm, etc., which was printed in Latin at Venice in 1512, translated into Spanish and brought out at Valladolid in 1515, and again at Medina del Campo in 15 53, and at Toledo in 1565. The words quoted by St. Teresa occur in chapter xxxi. See Life, ch. xl. 10.

^224:13 Life, ch. xiii. 17-23.

^226:14 Way of Perf. ch. xxv. 7.

^227:15 St. John xvi. 7: 'Expedit vobis ut ego vadam; si enim non abiero, Paraclitus non veniet ad vos.' Life, ch. xxii. 1, 2 and note.

^227:16 Life, ch. xxii. 11. Although the Saint defends herself against the charge of self-contradiction, there can be no doubt from this avowal that she too was at one time mistaken on this point.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VIII.

SPEAKS OF THE MANNER IN WHICH GOD COMMUNICATES WITH THE SOUL BY INTELLECTUAL VISION AND GIVES ADVICE UPON THE SUBJECT. OF THE EFFECTS PRODUCED BY THIS VISION WHEN GENUINE. SECRECY ABOUT THESE FAVOURS IS ENJOINED.

1. Our Lord's presence accompanying the soul. 2. St. Teresa's experience of this. 3. Confidence and graces resulting from this vision. 4. Its effects . 5. It Produces humility. 6. And prepares the soul for other graces. 7. Consciousness of the presence of the saints. 8. Obligations resulting from this grace. 9. Signs that this favour is genuine. 10. A confessor should be consulted. 11. Our Lord will enlighten our advisers. 12. Cautions about this vision.

1. To prove to you more clearly, sisters, the truth of what I have been saying and to show that the more the soul advances, the closer does this good Jesus bear it company, it would be well for me to tell you how, when He so chooses, it cannot withdraw from His presence. This is clearly shown by the manners and ways in which His Majesty communicates Himself to us, manifesting His love by wonderful apparitions and visions which, if He is pleased to aid me, I will describe to you so that you may not be alarmed if any of these favours are granted you. We ought, even if we do not receive

[p. 229]

them ourselves, to praise Him fervently for thus communing with creatures, seeing how sovereign are His majesty and power.

2. For example, a person who is in no way expecting such a favour nor has ever imagined herself worthy of receiving it, is conscious that Jesus Christ stands by her side although she sees Him neither with the eyes of the body nor of the soul. [*1] This is called an intellectual vision; I cannot tell why. I knew a person to whom God granted both this grace and others I shall describe later on. At first it distressed her, for she could not understand it; she could see nothing, yet so convinced did she feel that Jesus Christ was thus in some way manifesting Himself that she could not doubt that it was some kind of vision, whether it came from God or no. Its powerful effects were a strong argument that it was from Him; still she was alarmed, never having heard of an intellectual vision, nor was she aware that such a thing could be. She however felt certain of our Lord's presence, [*2] and He spoke to her several times in the way that I described. Before she had received this favour, she had heard words spoken but had never known who uttered them.

3. She was frightened by this vision which, unlike an imaginary one, does not pass away quickly but lasts for several days and even sometimes for more than a year. She went, in a state of great anxiety, to her confessor [*3] who asked her how, if she saw

[p. 230]

nothing, she knew that our Lord was near her, and bade her describe His appearance. She said that she was unable to do so, nor could she see His face nor tell more than she had already done, but that she was sure it was the fact that it was He Who spoke to her and it was no trick of her imagination. Although people constantly cautioned her against this vision, as a rule she found it impossible to disbelieve in it, especially when she heard the words: 'It is I, be not afraid' [*4]

4. The effect of this speech was so powerful that for the time being she could not doubt its truth. She felt much encouraged and rejoiced at being in such good company, seeing that this favour greatly helped her to a constant recollection of God and an extreme care not to displease in any way Him Who seemed ever by her side, watching her. Whenever she desired to speak to His Majesty in prayer, or even at other times, He seemed so close that He could not fail to hear her though He did not speak to her whenever she wished, but unexpectedly, when necessity arose. She was conscious of His being at her right hand, although not in the way we know an ordinary person to be beside us but in a more subtle manner which cannot be described. Yet this presence is quite as evident and certain, and indeed far more so, than the ordinary presence of other people about which we may be deceived; not so in this, for it brings with it graces and spiritual effects which could not come from melancholia. Nor could the devil thus fill the soul with peace,

[p. 231]

with a constant desire to please God, and such utter contempt of all that does not lead to Him. As time went on, my friend recognized that this was no work of the evil one, as our Lord showed her more and more clearly.

5. However, I know that she often felt great alarm and was at times overcome with confusion, being unable to account for so high a favour having been granted her. She and I were so very intimate [*5] that I knew all that passed in her soul, hence my account is thoroughly true and reliable. This favour brings with it an overwhelming sense of self-abasement and humility; the reverse would be the case, did it come from Satan. [*6] It is evidently divine; no human effort could produce such feelings nor could any one suppose that such profit came from herself, but must needs recognize it as a gift from the hand of God.

6. Although I believe some of the former favours are more sublime, yet this brings with it a special knowledge of God; a most tender love for Him results from being constantly in His company, while the desires of devoting one's whole being to His service are more fervent than any hitherto described. The conscience is greatly purified by the knowledge of His perpetual and near presence, for although we know that God sees all we do, yet nature inclines us to grow careless and forgetful of it. This is impossible here since our Lord makes the soul conscious that He is close at hand, thus preparing it to receive the other graces mentioned

[p. 232]

by constantly making acts of love to Him Whom it sees or feels at its side. In short, the benefits caused by this grace prove how great and how valuable it is. The soul thanks our Lord for bestowing it on one unworthy of it, but who would refuse to exchange it for any earthly riches or delight.

7. When our Lord chooses to withdraw His presence, the soul in its loneliness makes every possible effort to induce Him to return. This avails but little, for this grace comes at His will and not by our endeavours. At times we may enjoy the company of some saint, [*7] which also brings us great profit. You will ask me, if we see no one, how can we know whether it is Christ, or His most glorious Mother, or a saint? Such a person cannot answer this question or know how she distinguishes them, but the fact remains undoubted. It seems easy to recognize our Lord when He speaks, but it is surprising how the soul can, without hearing a word from him, recognize which saint has been sent by God to be its companion and helper.

8. There are other spiritual matters which cannot be explained. Our inability to grasp them should teach us how incapable is our nature of understanding the sublime mysteries of God. Those on whom these favours are bestowed should marvel at and praise God's mercy for them. As these particular graces are not granted to everybody, any one who receives them should esteem them highly and strive to serve God more zealously, since He has given her such special aid. Therefore such a person does

[p. 233]

not rate herself more highly on this account, but rather thinks she serves Him less than any one else in the world; feeling herself to be under greater obligations to Him than others, any fault she commits pierces her to the heart, as indeed it ought under the circumstances.

9. When the effects described are felt, any of you whom our Lord leads by this way may be certain that it is neither deception nor fancy in her case. I believe it to be impossible for the devil to produce an illusion lasting so long, neither could he benefit the soul so remarkably nor cause such interior peace. It is not his custom, nor, if he would, could such an evil creature bring about so much good; the soul would soon be clouded by self-esteem and the idea that it was better than others. The mind's continual keeping in the presence of God [*8] and the concentration of its thoughts on Him would so enrage the fiend that, although he might try the experiment once, he would not often repeat it. God is too faithful to permit him so much power over one whose sole endeavour is to please His Majesty and to lay down her life for His honour and glory; He would soon unmask the demon's artifices.

10. I contend, as I always shall, that if the soul reaps the effects described from these divine graces, although God may withdraw these special favours, His Majesty will turn all things to its advantage; even should He permit the devil to deceive it at any time, the evil spirit will only reap his own confusion. Therefore, as I told you, daughters,

[p. 234]

none of you who are led by this way need feel alarm. Fear is good and we should be cautious and not overconfident, for if such favours made you careless, it would prove they were not from God as they did not leave the results I described. It would be well at first to tell your case, under the seal of confession, to a thoroughly qualified theologian (for that is the source whence we must obtain light) or to some highly spiritual person. If your confessor is not very spiritual, a good theologian would be preferable; [*9] best of all, one who unites both qualities. [*10] Do not be disturbed if he calls it mere fancy; if it is, it can neither harm nor benefit your soul much. Recommend yourself to the divine Majesty and beg Him not to allow you to be misled.

11. It would be worse should he tell you the devil is deceiving you, although no learned man would say so if he sees in you the effects described. Even should your adviser say this, I know that the same Lord Who is beside you will comfort and reassure you and will go to your counsellor and give him light that he may impart it to you. [*11] If the director, though given to prayer, has not been led by God in this way, he will at once take fright and condemn it. Therefore I advise you to choose

[p. 235]

a qualified theologian and, if possible, one who is also spiritual. The Prioress ought to allow you this, for although she may feel sure that you are safe from delusion because you lead a good life, yet she is bound to permit you to consult some one for your mutual security. When you have conferred with these persons, be at peace; trouble yourself no more about the matter, for sometimes when there is no cause for fear, the demon gives rise to such immoderate scruples that the person cannot be satisfied with consulting her confessor only once on the subject, especially if he is inexperienced and timid or if he bids her consult him again.

12. Thus that which should have been kept strictly private becomes public; [*12] such a person is persecuted and tormented and finds that what she believed to be her own secret has become public property. Hence she suffers many troubles which may even devolve upon the Order in such times as these. Consequently I warn all Prioresses that great caution is required in such matters; also they must not think a nun more virtuous than the rest because such favours are shown her. Our Lord guides every one, in the way He knows to be best. This grace, if made good use of, prepares one receiving it to become a great servant of God, but sometimes our Lord bestows it on the weakest souls; therefore in itself it is neither to be esteemed nor condemned. We must look to the virtues; she who is most mortified, humble and single-minded in serving God is the most holy. However, we can never feel very certain about such matters until the true

[p. 236]

[paragraph continues] Judge rewards each one according to his merits. Then we shall be surprised to find how very different is His judgment from that of this world. May He be for ever praised. Amen.

Footnotes

^229:1 Life, ch. xxvii. 3, 5. Rel. vii. 26.

^229:2 Life, ch. xxvii. 7.

^229:3 Ibid. l.c. 4. Father Juan de Pradanos was then the Saint's confessor.

^230:4 Life, ch. xxv. 22; XXX. 17. Supra, M. vi. ch. iii. 5. Rel. vii. 22. St. John of the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xxxi. 1.

^231:5 In fact, one and the same person.

^231:6 Life, ch. xix. a; xx. 38. Way of Perf. ch. xxxvi. 10.

^232:7 Life, ch. xxix 6.

^233:8 Gen. xvii, 1: 'Ambula coram me et esto perfectus.'

^234:9 'Magni doctores scholastici, si non sint spirituales, vel omni rerum spiritualium experientia careant, non solent esse magistri spirituales idonei--nam theologia scholastica est perfectio intellectus; mystica, perfectio intellectus et voluntatis: unde bonus theologus scholasticus potest esse malus theologus mysticus. In rebus tamen difficilibus, dubiis, spiritualibus, praestat mediocriter spiritualem theologum consulere quam spiritualem idiotam.' (Schram, Theol. Myst.  section 483.)

^234:10 Life, ch. v. 6.

^234:11 Ibid. ch. xxv. 18 sqq. Way of Perf. ch. iv. 11; v. 3.

^235:12 Life, ch. xxiii. 14-15. Rel. vii. 17.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IX.

THIS CHAPTER SPEAKS OF THE MANNER IN WHICH GOD COMMUNICATES WITH THE SOUL BY IMAGINARY VISIONS. STRONG REASONS ARE GIVEN FOR NOT DESIRING TO BE LED IN THIS WAY; THIS IS VERY PROFITABLE READING.

1. The jewel in the locket. 2. The simile explained. 3. The apparition explained. 4. Awe produced by this vision. 5. False and genuine visions. 6. Illusive visions. 7. Effects of a genuine vision. 8. Conviction left by a genuine vision. 9. Its effects upon the after conduct. 10. A confessor should be consulted. 11. How to treat visions. 12. Effects of seeing the face of Christ. 13. Reasons why visions are not to be sought. 14. The second reason. 15. Third reason. 16. Fourth reason. 17. Fifth reason. 18. Sixth reason. 19. Additional reasons. 20. The virtues more meritorious than consolations. 21. Fervent souls desire to serve God for Himself alone.

1. Now we come to treat of imaginary visions, whereby it is held that the devil is more liable to deceive people than by the other visions I have already described. This is probably true. Yet when imaginary visions are divine, they seem, in a certain manner, more profitable for us than the others, as being more suited to our nature--with the exception of the visions sent by our Lord in the seventh mansion which far surpass all others. The presence of our Lord described in the last chapter may thus be symbolized. Let us suppose that we have in our possession a gold locket containing a precious stone of the highest value and powers, which, though we have not seen it, we are certain

[p. 237]

is in the case, and its virtues benefit us when we wear the pendant. Although we have never gazed on it we value it highly, knowing by experience that it has cured us of maladies for which it is remedial. However, we dare not look at it nor open the locket nor could we do so even if we wished, for the owner of the jewel alone knows the secret of unfastening its casket. Although he lent it us for our use, yet he kept the key for himself; he will open the trinket when he chooses to show us its contents and close it again when he sees fit to do so.

2. Our Lord treats us here in this way. Now, suppose the owner of this locket suddenly opened it at times for the benefit of the person to whom he has entrusted it; doubtless the latter would value the diamond more highly through remembering its wonderful lustre. This may be compared to what happens when our Lord is pleased to caress the soul. He shows it in vision His most sacred Humanity under whatever form He chooses; either as He was during His life on earth [*1] or after His resurrection. [*2] The vision passes as quickly as a flash of lightning, yet this most glorious picture makes an impression on the imagination that I believe can never be effaced until the soul at last sees Christ to enjoy Him for ever. Although I call it a 'picture,' you must not imagine that it looks like a painting; Christ appears as a living Person Who sometimes speaks and reveals deep mysteries. You must understand that though the soul sees this for a certain space of time, it is no more possible to continue

[p. 238]

looking at it than to gaze for a very long time on the sun; therefore this vision passes very quickly, although its brightness does not pain the interior sight in the same way as the sun's glare injures our bodily eyes.

3. The image is seen by the interior sight alone; but of bodily apparitions I can say nothing, for the person I know so intimately never having experienced anything of the kind herself could not speak about them with certainty. [*3] The splendour of Him Who is revealed in the vision resembles an infused light like that of the sun covered with a veil as transparent as a diamond, if such a texture could be woven, while His raiment looks like fine linen. The soul to whom God grants this vision almost always falls into an ecstasy, nature being too weak to bear so dread a sight. I say 'dread,' though this apparition is more lovely and delightful than anything that could be imagined even though any one should live a thousand years and spend all that time in trying to picture it, for it far surpasses our limited imagination and understanding; yet the presence of such surpassing majesty inspires the soul with great fear.

4. There is no need to ask how the soul knew Who He was or who declared with absolute certainty that He was the Lord of heaven and earth. This is not so with earthly kings; unless we were told their names or saw their attendant courtiers, they would attract little notice. O Lord, how little do we Christians know Thee! What will that day be in which Thou comest as our Judge, since now,

[p. 239]

when Thou comest as a Friend to Thy spouse, the sight of Thee strikes us with such awe? O daughters! what will it be when He says in wrath: 'Go, accursed of my Father?' [*4]Let this impression be the result of this favour granted by God to the soul and we shall reap no little benefit from it, since St. Jerome, saint as he was, ever kept the thought of the last judgment before his eyes. [*5] Thus we shall care nothing what sufferings we endure from the austerities of our Rule, for long as they may last, the time is but a moment compared to this eternity of pain. I sincerely assure you that, wicked as I am, I have never feared the torments of hell [*6] for they have seemed to me as nothing when I remembered that the lost would see the beautiful, meek and pitiful eyes of our Lord turned on them in wrath. [*7] I have thought all my life that this would be more than my heart could bear.

5. How much more must any one fear this to whom our Lord so revealed Himself in vision here as to overcome her feelings and produce unconsciousness! This must be the reason that the soul remains in a rapture: our Lord strengthens its weakness so as to unite it to His greatness in this sublime communion with God. When any one

[p. 240]

can contemplate this sight of our Lord for a long time, I do not believe it is a vision but rather some overmastering idea which causes the imagination to fancy it sees something; but this illusion is only like a dead image in comparison with the living reality of the other case.

6. As not only three or four, but a large number of people have spoken to me on the subject, I know by experience that there are souls which, either because they possess vivid imaginations or active minds, or for some other reason of which I am ignorant, are so absorbed in their own ideas as to feel certain they see whatever their fancy imagines. If they had ever beheld a genuine vision, they would recognize the deception unmistakably. They themselves fabricate, piece by piece, what they fancy they see: no after effects are produced on the mind, which is less moved to devotion than by the sight of a sacred picture. It is clear that no attention should be paid to such fancies, which pass more quickly than dreams from the memory.

7. In the favour of which I speak, the case is very different. A person is far from thinking of seeing anything, no idea of which has crossed the mind, when suddenly the vision is revealed in its entirety, causing within the powers and senses of the soul a fright and confusion soon changed into a blissful peace. Thus, after St. Paul was thrown to the ground, a great tempest and noise followed from heaven; [*8] so, in the interior world of the soul, there is a violent tumult followed instantly, as I said, by

[p. 241]

perfect calm. Meanwhile certain sublime truths have been so impressed on the mind that it needs no other master, for with no effort of its own, Wisdom Himself has enlightened its former ignorance.

8. The soul for some time afterwards possesses such certainty that this grace comes from God that whatever people may say to the contrary it cannot fear delusion. Later on, when her confessor suggests doubts to her, God may allow such a person to waver in her belief for a time and to feel misgivings lest, in punishment for her sins, she may possibly have been left to go astray. However, she does not give way to these apprehensions, but (as I said in speaking of other matters) [*9] they only affect her in the same way as the temptations of the devil against faith, which may disturb the mind but do not shake the firmness of belief. In fact, the more severe the assault, [*10] the more certain is she that the evil one could never have produced the great benefits she is conscious of having received, because he exercises no such power over the interior of the soul. He may present a false apparition but it does not possess such truth, majesty, and efficacy.

9. As confessors cannot see these effects, which perhaps the person to whom God has shown the vision is unable to explain, they are afraid of deception, as indeed they have good reason to be. Therefore caution is necessary and time should be allowed to see what effects follow. Day by day, the progress of the soul in humility and in the virtues should be watched: if the devil is concerned in the matter, he will soon show signs of himself and will

[p. 242]

be detected in a thousand lies. If the confessor is experienced and has received such favours himself, he will not take long in discovering the truth. In fact, he will know immediately, on being told of the vision, whether it is divine or comes from the imagination or the demon: more especially if he has received the gift of discerning spirits--then, if he is learned, he will understand the matter at once even though he has not personally experienced the like.

10. The great point is, sisters, that you should be perfectly candid and straightforward with your confessor: I do not mean in declaring your sins that is evident enough--but in giving him an account of your prayer. [*11] Unless you do this, I cannot assure you of your safety nor that you are led by God. Our Lord desires that we should be as truthful and open with those who stand in His place as we should with Himself; that we should wish them to know not only our thoughts but especially all relating to our actions, however insignificant. Then you need feel no trouble nor anxiety [*12] because even if your vision were not from God, it could do you no harm if you are humble and possess a good conscience, for His Majesty knows how to glean good from evil. What the devil intended to injure you will benefit you instead: believing that God has granted you such signal favours, you will strive to please Him better and will keep His image ever before your memory.

[p. 243]

11. A great theologian [*13] once said that he should not trouble himself though the devil, who is a clever painter, should present before his eyes the living image of Christ, which would only kindle his devotion and defeat the evil one with his own weapons. However wicked an artist may be, we should reverence his picture if it represents Him Who is our only good. This great scholar held that it was very wrong to advise any one who saw a vision of our Lord to offer it signs of scorn, [*14] because we are bound to show respect to the portrait of our King wherever we see it. I am sure that he was right, for even in the world any one who was on friendly terms with a person would take it as an offence were his portrait treated with contempt. How much more should we always show respect to a crucifix or a picture of our heavenly Sovereign wherever it meets our gaze! Although I have written about this elsewhere, I am glad of the opportunity of saying it now for I know some one who was deeply pained at being bidden to behave in this way. I know not who can have invented such a torture for one who felt bound to obey the counsel given by her confessor, for she would have thought her soul was at stake had she disobeyed him. My advice is, if you are given such an order, that humbly alleging the reasons I have set before you to your confessor, you should not carry it out. I am perfectly satisfied with the motives given for doing so by him who counselled me on this subject.

[p. 244]

12. One great advantage gained by the soul from this favour shown by our Lord is that when thinking of Him or of His life and Passion, the remembrance of His most meek and beautiful face brings with it the greatest consolation. In the same way, we feel happier after having seen a benefactor than if we had never known him personally. I can assure you that the remembrance of the joy caused by this vision gives us the greatest comfort and assistance.

13. Many other advantages result; but as I have written elsewhere [*15] at length about the effect these visions produce, and must do so again later on, I will say no more now lest I weary us both. But I most earnestly advise you, when you know or hear of God's bestowing these graces on others, never to pray nor desire to be led by this way yourself though it may appear to you to be very good; indeed, it ought to be highly esteemed and reverenced, yet no one should seek to go by it for several reasons. Firstly, as it is a want of humility to desire what you have never deserved, I do not think any one who longs for these graces can be really humble: a common labourer never dreams of wishing to be made a king--the thing seems impossible and he is unfit for it; a lowly mind has the same feeling about these divine favours. I do not believe God will ever bestow these gifts on such a person, as before doing so He always gives thorough self-knowledge. How can that soul, while filled with such lofty aspirations, realize the truth that He has shown it great mercy in not casting it into hell?

14. The second reason is that such a one is certain

[p. 245]

to be deceived or at least is in great danger of delusion, for an entrance is thus left open to the devil, who only needs to see the door left ajar to slip in at once and play us a thousand tricks.

15. Thirdly: when people strongly desire a thing, the imagination makes them fancy they see or hear it, just as when a man's mind is set upon a subject all day he dreams of it at night.

16. Fourthly: it would be very presumptuous of me to choose a way for myself without knowing what is good for me. [*16] I should leave our Lord, Who knows my soul, to guide me as is best for me so that His will may be done in all things.

17. Fifthly: do you think people on whom our Lord bestows these favours have little to suffer? No, indeed! their trials are most severe and of many kinds. How can you tell whether you would be able to bear them?

18. Sixthly: perhaps what you think would be your gain might prove your loss, as happened to Saul when he was made king. [*17] In short, sisters, there are other reasons besides these; believe me, it is safer to wish only what God wishes, Who knows us better than we know ourselves and Who loves us. Let us place ourselves entirely in His hands so that His will may be done in us; we can never go astray if our will is ever firmly fixed on this.

19. Know that for having received many favours of this kind, you will not merit more glory but will

[p. 246]

be the more stringently obliged to serve, since you have received more. God does not deprive us of anything by which we merit more, for this remains in our own control. There are many saints who never knew what it was to receive one such favour, while others who have received them are not saints at all. Do not imagine that these gifts are continually bestowed; indeed, for one that is granted, the soul bears many a cross, so that instead of longing to receive more favours, it only strives to use them better.

20. True, such a grace is a most powerful aid towards practising the virtues in their highest perfection, but it is far more meritorious to gain them at the cost of one's own toil. I was acquainted with some one, [*18] indeed with two people (of whom one was a man), on whom our Lord had bestowed some of these gifts. They were both so desirous of serving His Majesty at their own cost without these great consolations and so longed to suffer for His sake, that they remonstrated with Him for giving them these favours, and if it had been possible would have refused to receive them. When I say 'consolations,' I do not mean these visions which greatly benefit the soul and are highly to be esteemed, but the delights given by God during contemplation.

21. I believe that these desires are supernatural and proper to very fervent souls who wish to prove to God that they do not serve Him for pay; so as I said, such people do not urge themselves to work

[p. 247]

harder for Him by the thought of the glory they will gain, but rather labour to satisfy their love, of which the nature is to toil for the Beloved in a thousand ways. Such souls would fain find a way to consume themselves in Him, and were there need that, for the sake of God's greater glory, they should be annihilated for ever, they would count it great gain. May He be for ever praised Who, in abasing Himself to hold converse with us miserable creatures, vouchsafes to manifest His greatness! Amen.

Footnotes

^237:1 Life, ch, vii, 11.

^237:2 Ibid. xxix, 4.

^238:3 Life, ch, vii. 11, 12.

^239:4 St. Matt. xxv. 41: 'Discedite a me, maledicti, in ignem aeternum.'

^239:5 'Whenever I ponder on the Day of Judgment I am overwhelmed by the thought and tremble from head to foot.' (St. Jerome). The following saying is by some attributed to St. Jerome, though not to be found in his works: 'Whether I eat or drink, or whatever else I do, the dreadful trumpet of the last day seems always sounding in my ears: Arise, ye dead, and come to judgment.' (Alban Butler, Life of St. Jerome). The Life of Christ by Ludolf of Saxony gives this quotation with the word vox instead of tuba (part ii. ch. lxxxvii. 9).

^239:6 Life, ch. iii.

^239:7 Excl. xiii, 3.

^240:8 Acts ix. 3, 4.

^241:9 Castle, M. vi. ch. iii. 12.

^241:10 Way of Perf ch, xl. 4.

^242:11 Life, ch. xxvi. 5; xxviii. 21.

^242:12 Way of Perf. ch. xl. 3.

^243:13 This was Father Dominic Banez. Found. ch. viii. 3. Life, ch. xxix. 6, 7 and note.

^243:14 Letters of Blessed John of Avila (translated by the Benedictines of Stanbrook), i. 5, p. 19.

^244:15 Life, ch. xxviii. 13, 4.

^245:16 St. Teresa, when led in this way, always asked to be delivered from favours so dangerous as visions, etc. See Life, ch. xxv. 20; xxvii. 3.

^245:17 I. Reg. xv. 26-28.

^246:18 Life, ch. xl. 27. She herself was one, and the other, no doubt, was St. John of the Cross.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER X.

SPEAKS OF VARIOUS OTHER GRACES GOD BESTOWS ON THE SOUL IN DIFFERENT WAYS, AND OF THE GREAT BENEFITS CONFERRED BY THEM.

1. Reasons for speaking of these supernatural favours. 2. An intellectual vision. 3. God compared to a palace in which His creatures dwell. 4. Forgive as we are forgiven. 5. The vision shows God to be Truth itself. 6. We should imitate God by truthfulness. 7. Why God reveals these truths.

1. OUR Lord communicates with the soul by means of these apparitions on many occasions--sometimes when it is afflicted, at other times when it is about to receive some heavy cross, and again for the sake of the mutual delight of Himself and His beloved. There is no need for me to specify each different case nor do I intend to do so. I only wish to teach you (as far as I am acquainted with them myself) what are the different favours God shows a soul in this state so that you may understand their characteristics and the effects they produce.

[p. 248]

[paragraph continues] Thus you will not mistake every idle fancy for a vision and if you really see one, knowing that such a thing is possible, you will not be disturbed nor unhappy. The devil, who gains greatly by it, is delighted to see a soul troubled and distressed, knowing how this hinders it from employing itself wholly in loving and serving God.

2. His Majesty has far higher ways of communicating Himself to the soul; they are less dangerous for I do not think the evil spirit can imitate them. They are more difficult to explain, being more abstruse; therefore imaginary visions are easier to describe. God is sometimes pleased, while a person is engaged in prayer and in perfect possession of her senses, to suspend them and to discover sublime mysteries to her which she appears to see within God Himself. This is no vision of the most sacred Humanity nor can I rightly say the soul 'sees,' for it sees nothing; this is no imaginary vision but a highly intellectual one, wherein is manifested how all things are beheld in God and how He contains them within Himself. [*1] It is of great value, for although passing in an instant, it remains deeply engraved in the memory, producing a feeling of great shame in the mind which perceives more clearly the malice of offences against God, since these most heinous sins are committed within His very being since we dwell within Him. I will try to explain this truth to you by a comparison, for although it is obvious and has been often told us, we either never reflect upon it or do not wish to

[p. 249]

understand it. If we realized it, we could not possibly behave with such audacity.

3. Let us compare God to a very spacious and magnificent mansion or palace and remember that this edifice is God Himself. Can the sinner withdraw from it in order to carry out his crimes? No, certainly not, for within this very palace, that is, within God Himself, are perpetrated all the abominations, impurities and evil deeds that sinners commit. Oh awful thought, well worthy to be pondered over! What profit it would bring to us, who know so little and understand these truths but partially or how could we possibly be so reckless in our daring? Let us, sisters, meditate on the infinite mercy and patience of God in not casting us down to hell at once and let us render Him hearty thanks. Surely we should be ashamed of resenting anything done or said against us--we who are the scum of the earth--when we see what outrages are offered to God our Creator within His very being, by us His creatures; yet we are wounded whenever we hear of an unkind word having been spoken of us in our absence, although perhaps with no evil intention.

4. Oh misery of mankind! When, daughters, shall we imitate Almighty God in any way? Oh, let us not think we are doing great things if we suffer injuries patiently: rather let us bear them with alacrity; let us love our enemies, since this great God has not ceased to love us in spite of our many sins! This is indeed the chief reason that all should forgive any harm done them. I assure you, daughters, that though this vision passes very quickly,

[p. 250]

our Lord has bestowed signal grace on her to whom He grants it, if she seeks to profit by keeping it constantly in mind.

5. Short as the time lasts, yet, in a manner impossible to describe, God also manifests that in Him there is a verity which makes all truth in creatures seem obscure. He convinces the soul that He alone is that Truth which cannot lie, thus demonstrating the meaning of David's words in the psalm: 'Every man is a liar,' [*2] which could never be thus realized by any other means, however often we might hear that God is truth infallible. As I recall Pilate and how he besought our Lord in His Passion to answer his question: 'What is truth?' [*3] I realize how little mortals know of that sublime veracity.

6. I wish I could explain this better but am unable to do so. Let us learn from it, sisters, that if we would bear any resemblance to our God and our Spouse, we must strive to walk ever in the truth. I do not merely mean that we should not tell falsehoods thank God, I see that in these convents you are most careful never to do so on any account--but I desire that as far as possible we should at with perfect truth before God and man and above all that we should not wish to be thought better than we are; that in all our deeds we should ascribe to God what is His and attribute what is ours to ourselves, and that we should seek for verity in all things. Thus we shall care little for this world, which is but deception and falsehood, and therefore

[p. 251]

cannot last. Once, while I was wondering why our Lord so dearly loves the virtue of humility, the thought suddenly struck me, without previous reflection, that it is because God is the supreme Truth and humility is the truth, for it is most true that we have nothing good of ourselves but only misery and nothingness: whoever ignores this, lives a life of falsehood. They that realize this fact most deeply are the most pleasing to God, the supreme Truth, for they walk in the truth. God grant, sisters, that we may have the grace never to lose this self-knowledge! Amen.

7. Our Lord shows the soul these favours because she is now indeed His bride, resolute to do His will in all things; therefore He wishes to give her some idea how to accomplish it and to manifest to her some of His divine attributes. I need say no more about it, but I believe the two points above mentioned will prove very useful. These favours should cause no fear but lead us to praise God for bestowing these graces. I think neither the devil nor our own imaginations can have much to do with them, therefore the soul may rest in perfect peace.

Footnotes

^248:1 Life, ch. xl. 13-16.

^250:2 Ps. cxv. 11. 'Omnis homo mendax.'

^250:3 St. John xviii. 38: Quid est veritas?

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 252]

  

CHAPTER XI.

TREATS OF HOW GOD INSPIRES THE SOUL WITH SUCH VEHEMENT AND IMPETUOUS DESIRES OF SEEING HIM AS TO ENDANGER LIFE. THE BENEFITS RESULTING FROM THIS DIVINE GRACE.

1. Favours increase the soul's desire for God. 2. The dart of love. 3. Spiritual sufferings produced. 4. Its physical effects. S. Torture of the desire for God. 6. These sufferings are a purgatory. 7. The torments of hell. 8. St. Teresa's painful desire after God. 9. This suffering irresistible. 10. Effects of the dart of love. 11. Two spiritual dangers to life. 12. Courage needed here and given by our Lord.

1. WILL all these graces bestowed by the Spouse upon the soul suffice to content this little dove or butterfly (you see I have not forgotten her after all!) so that she may settle down and rest in the place where she is to die? No indeed: her state is far worse than ever; although she has been receiving these favours for many years past, she still sighs and weeps because each grace augments her pain. She sees herself still far away from God, yet with her increased knowledge of His attributes her longing and her love for Him grow ever stronger as she learns more fully how this great God and Sovereign deserves to be loved. As, year by year her yearning after Him gradually becomes keener, she experiences the bitter suffering I am about to describe. I speak of 'years' because relating what happened to the person I mentioned, though I know well that with God time has no limits and in a single moment He can raise a soul to the most sublime state I have described. His Majesty has the power to do all He wishes and He wishes to do much for us. These longings, tears, sighs, and

[p. 253]

violent and impetuous desires and strong feelings, which seem to proceed from our vehement love, are yet as nothing compared with what I am about to describe and seem but a smouldering fire, the heat of which, though painful, is yet tolerable.

2. While the soul is thus inflamed with love, i t often happens that, from a passing thought or spoken word of how death delays its coming, the heart receives, it knows not how or whence, a blow as from a fiery dart. [*1] I do not say that this actually is a 'dart,' but, whatever it may be, decidedly it does not come from any part of our being. [*2] Neither is it really a 'blow' though I call it one, but it wounds us severely--not, I think, in that part of our nature subject to physical pain but in the very depths and centre of the soul, where this, thunderbolt, in its rapid course, reduces all the earthly part of our nature to powder. At the time we cannot even remember our own existence, for in an instant, the faculties of the soul are so fettered as to be incapable of any action except the power they retain of increasing our torture. Do not think I am exaggerating; indeed I fall short of explaining what happens which cannot be described.

3. This is a trance of the senses and faculties except as regards what helps to make the agony more intense. The understanding realizes acutely what cause there is for grief in separation from God and His Majesty now augments this sorrow by a vivid manifestation of Himself. This increases the anguish to such a degree that the sufferer gives vent

[p. 254]

to loud cries which she cannot stifle, however patient and accustomed to pain she may be, because this torture is not corporal but attacks the innermost recesses of the soul. The person I speak of learnt from this how much more acutely the spirit is capable of suffering than the body; she understood that this resembled the pains of purgatory, where the absence of the flesh does not prevent the torture's being far worse than any we can feel in this world.

4. I saw some one in this condition who I really thought would have died, nor would it have been surprising, for there is great danger of death in this state. Short as is the time it lasts, it leaves the limbs all disjointed and the pulse as feeble as if the soul were on the point of departure, which is indeed the case, for the natural heat fails, while that which is supernatural so burns the frame that were it increased ever so little God would satisfy the soul's desire for death. Not that any pain is felt by the body at the moment, although, as I said, all the joints are dislocated so that for two or three days afterwards the suffering is too severe for the person to have even the strength to hold a pen; [*3] indeed I believe that the health becomes permanently enfeebled in consequence. At the time this is not felt, probably because the spiritual torments are so much more keen that the bodily ones remain unnoticed; just as when there is very

[p. 255]

severe pain in one part, slighter aches elsewhere are hardly perceived, as I know by experience. During this favour there is no physical suffering either great or small, nor do I think the person would feel it were she torn to pieces.

5. Perhaps you will say this is an imperfection, and you may ask why she does not conform herself to the will of God since she has so completely surrendered herself to it. Hitherto she has been able to do so and she consecrated her life to it; but now she cannot because her reason is reduced to such a state that she is no longer mistress of herself; nor can she think of anything but what tends to increase her torment--for why should she seek to live apart from her only Good? She feels a strange loneliness, finding no companionship in any earthly creature; nor could she, I believe, among those who dwell in heaven, since they are not her Beloved: meanwhile all society is a torture to her. She is like one suspended in mid-air, who can neither touch the earth nor mount to heaven; she is unable to reach the water while parched with thirst and this is not a thirst that can be borne, but one which nothing will quench nor would she have it quenched save with that water of which our Lord spoke to the Samaritan woman, but this is not given to her. [*4]

6. Alas, O Lord, to what a state dost Thou bring those who love Thee! Yet these sufferings are as nothing compared with the reward Thou wilt give for them. It is right that great riches should be

[p. 256]

dearly bought. Moreover, her pains purify her soul so that it may enter the seventh mansion, as purgatory cleanses spirits which are to enter heaven: [*5] then indeed these trials will appear like a drop of water compared to the sea. Though this torment and grief could not, I think, be surpassed by any earthly cross (so at least this person said and she had endured much both in body and mind), yet they appeared to her as nothing in comparison with their recompense. The soul realizes that it has not merited anguish which is of such measureless value. This conviction, although bringing no relief; enables the sufferer to bear her trials willingly--for her entire lifetime, if God so wills,--although instead of dying once for all, this would be but a living death, for truly it is nothing else.

7. Let us remember, sisters, how those who are in hell lack this submission to the divine will and the resignation and consolation God gives such a soul and the solace of knowing that their pains benefit them, for the damned will continually suffer more and more; (more and more, I mean in regard to accidental pains [*6]) . The soul feels far more keenly than the body and the torments I have

[p. 257]

just described are incomparably less severe than those endured by the lost, who also know that their anguish will last for ever: what, then, will become of these miserable souls? What can we do or suffer during our short lives which is worth reckoning if it will free us from such terrible and endless torments? I assure you that, unless you have learned by experience, it would be impossible to make you realize how acute are spiritual pangs and how different from physical pain. Our Lord wishes us to understand this, so that we may realize what gratitude we owe Him for having called us to a state where we may hope, by His mercy, to be freed from and forgiven our sins.

8. Let us return to the soul we left in such cruel torment. This agony does not continue for long in its full violence--never, I believe, longer than three or four hours; were it prolonged, the weakness of our nature could not endure it except by a miracle. In one case, where it lasted only a quarter of an hour, the sufferer was left utterly exhausted; indeed, so violent was the attack that she completely lost consciousness. This occurred when she unexpectedly heard some verses to the effete that life seemed unending; she was engaged in conversation at the time, which was on the last day of Easter. All Eastertide she had suffered such aridity as hardly to realize what mystery was being celebrated. [*7]

[p. 258]

9. It is as impossible to resist this suffering as it would be to prevent the flame's having heat enough to burn us if we were thrown into a fire. These feelings cannot be concealed: all who are present recognize the dangerous condition of such a person although they are unable to see what is passing within her. True, she knows her friends are near, but they and all earthly things seem to her but shadows. To show you that, should you ever be in this state, it is possible for your weakness and human nature to be of help to you, I may tell you that at times, when a person seems dying from her desire for death [*8] which so oppresses her soul with grief that it appears on the point of leaving her body, yet her mind, terrified at the thought, tries to still its pain so as to keep death at bay. Evidently this fear arises from human infirmity, for the soul's longings for death do not abate meanwhile nor can its sorrows be stilled or allayed until God brings it comfort. [*9] This He usually does by a deep trance or by some vision whereby the true Comforter consoles and strengthens the heart, which thus becomes resigned to live as long as He wills. [*10]

[p. 259]

10. This favour entails great suffering but leaves most precious graces within the soul, which loses all fear of any crosses it may henceforth meet with, for in comparison with the acute anguish it has gone through all else seems nothing. Seeing what she has gained, the sufferer would gladly endure frequently the same pains [*11] but can do nothing to help herself in the matter. There are no means of reaching that state again until God chooses to decree it, when neither resistance nor escape is possible. The mind feels far deeper contempt for the world than before, realizing that nothing earthly can succour it in its torture; it is also much more detached from creatures, having learnt that no one but its Creator can bring it consolation and strength. It is more anxious and careful not to offend God, seeing that He can torment as well as comfort. [*12]

11. Two things in this spiritual state seem to me to endanger life,--one is that of which I have just spoken which is a real peril and no small one; the other an excessive gladness and a delight so extreme that the soul appears to swoon away and seems on the point of leaving the body, which indeed would bring it no small joy.

[p. 260]

12. Now you see. sisters, whether I had not reason to tell you that courage was needed for these favours and that when any one asks for them from our Lord He may well reply, as He did to the sons of Zebedee: 'Can you drink the chalice that I shall drink?' [*13] I believe, sisters, we should all answer 'Yes'--and we should be perfectly right for His Majesty gives strength when He sees it needed: He ever defends such souls and answers for them when they are persecuted and slandered as He did for the Magdalen--if not in words, at least in deeds. [*14] At last, ah, at last! before they die He repays them for all they have suffered, as you shall now learn. May He be for ever blessed and may all creatures praise Him! Amen.

Footnotes

^253:1 Life, ch. xxix. 17. (Transverberation.)

^253:2 Ibid. ch. xxix. 13, 14. Rel. viii. 16-19.

^254:3 St. John of the Cross, Obscure Night, bk. ii. ch. i. (in fine); Spiritual Canticle, stanza xiii; xiv-xv. (in fine). When this happened to St. Teresa she was unable to write for twelve days. Ribera, Acta SS. p. 555 (in fine). Rel. viii. 13. Life, ch. xx. 16.

^255:4 St. John iv. 15. Life, ch. xxx. 24. Way of Perf. ch. xix. 4 sqq. Concept. ch. vii. 7, 8. Found. ch. xxxi. 42. See note, Life, ch. i. 6.

^256:5 St. John of the Cross, Obscure Night, bk. ii. ch. xii.

^256:6 Marginal note in the Saint's handwriting. The 'substantial' pain of hell consists in the irrevocable loss of God, our last end and supreme Good; this is incurred from the first moment in its fullest intensity and therefore cannot increase. The physical pain with which the bodies will be afflicted when united to the souls after the general resurrection may vary, but will neither increase nor abate. The 'accidental' pain of the damned arises from various causes, for instance from the ever-increasing effects of evil actions, and therefore increases in the same proportion. Thus a heresiarch will suffer keener accidental pain as more and more souls are lost through his false teaching.

^257:7 Rel. iv. 1. Concept. ch. vii. 2. Isabel of Jesus, in her deposition in the Acts of Canonisation (Fuente, Obras, vol. vi. 316) declares that she was the singer. The words were:

Veante mis ojos,
 Dulce Jesus bueno:
 Veante mis ojos,
 Y muerame yo luego.

[paragraph continues] Fuente, l.c. vol. v. 143, note 1. Oeuvres, ii. 231. (Poem 36, English version.) There is a slight difference in the two relations of this occurrence. In Rel. iv. St. Teresa seems to imply that it happened on Easter Sunday evening, but here she says distinctly: 'Pascua de Resurreccion, el postrer dia,' that is, on Easter Tuesday, April 17, 1571, at Salamanca.

^258:8 Compare the words 'Que muero porque no muero' in the Glosa of St. Teresa. Way of Perf. ch. xlii . 2. Castle, M. vii. ch. iii. 14.

^258:9 Way of Perf. ch. xix. 10. Excl. vi.; xii. a.; xiv.

^258:10 See the two versions of the poems written by the Saint on her recovery from the trance into which she was thrown, beginning 'Vivir sin vivir in me' and the poem, 'Cuan triste es, Dios mio' (Poems 2, 3, and 4, English version). See also St. Teresa's poem, 'Ya toda me [p. 259] entregue y di.' (Poem 7, English version).

Struck by the gentle Hunter
    And overthrown,
 Within the arms of Love
    My soul lay prone.
 Raised to new life at last,
 This contract 'tween us passed,
 That the Beloved should be mine own,
    I His alone.

^259:11 Rel. viii. 17.

^259:12 Acta SS. p. 64, n. 229.

^260:13 St. Matt. xx. 22: 'Potestis bibere calicem quem ego bibiturus sum?'

^260:14 St. Matt. xxvi. to: St. Mark xiv. 6; St. John xii. 7. Way of Perf. ch. xvi. 7; xvii. 4. Excl. v. 2-4.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 261]

  

THE SEVENTH MANSIONS

  

CHAPTER I.

TREATS OF THE SUBLIME FAVOURS GOD BESTOWS ON SOULS WHICH HAVE ENTERED THE SEVENTH MANSIONS. THE AUTHOR SHOWS THE DIFFERENCE SHE BELIEVES TO EXIST BETWEEN SOUL AND SPIRIT ALTHOUGH THEY ARE BOTH ONE. THIS CHAPTER CONTAINS SOME NOTEWORTHY THINGS.

1. Sublime mysteries of these mansions. 2. St. Teresa abashed at treating such subjects. 3. Our Lord introduces His bride into His presence chamber. 4. Darkness of a soul in mortal sin. 5. Intercession for sinners. 6. The soul an interior world. 7. The spiritual nuptials. 8. Former favours differ from spiritual nuptials. 9. The Blessed Trinity revealed to the soul. 10. Permanence of Its presence in the soul. 11. The effects. 12. This presence is not always equally realized. 13. It is beyond the soul's control. 14. The centre of the soul remains calm. 15. The soul and the spirit distinct though united. 16. The soul and its faculties not identical.

1. You may think, sisters, that so much has been said of this spiritual journey that nothing remains to be added. That would be a great mistake: God's immensity has no limits, neither have His works; therefore, who can recount His mercies and His greatness? [*1] It is impossible, so do not be amazed at what I write about them which is but a cipher of what remains untold concerning God. He has shown great mercy in communicating these mysteries

[p. 262]

to one who could recount them to us, for as we learn more of His intercourse with creatures, we ought to praise Him more fervently and to esteem more highly the soul in which He so delights. Each of us possesses a soul but we do not realize its value as made in the image of God, therefore we fail to understand the important secrets it contains. May His Majesty be pleased to guide my pen and to teach me to say somewhat of the much there is to tell of His revelations to the souls He leads into this mansion. I have begged Him earnestly to help me, since He sees that my object is to reveal His mercies for the praise and glory of His name. I hope He will grant this favour, if not for my own sake, at least for yours, sisters--so that you may discover how vital it is for you to put no obstacle in the way of the Spiritual Marriage of the Bridegroom with your soul which brings, as you will learn, such signal blessings with it.

2. O great God! surely such a miserable creature as myself should tremble at the thought of speaking on such a subject so far beyond anything I deserve to understand. Indeed I felt abashed and doubted whether it would not be better to finish writing about this Mansion in a few words, lest people might imagine that I am recounting my personal experience. I was overwhelmed with shame for, knowing what I am, it is a terrible undertaking. On the other hand, this fear seemed but a temptation and weakness: even if I should be misjudged, so long as God is but a little better praised and known, let all the world revile me.

[p. 263]

[paragraph continues] Besides, I may be dead before this book is seen; May He Who lives and shall live to all eternity be praised! Amen.

3. When our Lord is pleased to take pity on the sufferings, both past and present, endured through her longing for Him by this soul which He has spiritually taken for His bride, He, before consummating the celestial marriage, brings her into this His mansion or presence chamber. This is the seventh Mansion, for as He has a dwelling-place in heaven, so has He in the soul, where none but He may abide and which may be termed a second heaven.

4. It is important, sisters, that we should not fancy the soul to be in darkness. As we are accustomed to believe there is no light but that which is exterior, we imagine that the soul is wrapt in obscurity. This is indeed the case with a soul out of the state of grace, [*2] not, however, through any defer in the Sun of Justice which remains within it and gives it being, but the soul itself is incapable of receiving the light, as I think I said in speaking of the first Mansion. [*3] A certain person was given to understand that such unfortunate souls are, as it were, imprisoned in a gloomy dungeon, chained hand and foot and unable to perform any meritorious action: they are also both blind and dumb. Well may we pity them when we reflect that we ourselves were once in the same state and that God may show them mercy also.

[p. 264]

5. Let us, then, sisters, be most zealous in interceding for them and never neglect it. To pray for a soul in mortal sin is a far more profitable form of almsgiving than it would be to help a Christian whom we saw with hands strongly fettered behind his back, tied to a post and dying of hunger--not for want of food, because plenty of the choicest delicacies lay near him, but because he was unable to put them into his mouth, although he was extremely exhausted and on the point of dying, and that not a temporal death, but an eternal one. Would it not be extremely cruel of us to stand looking at him, and give him nothing to eat? What if by your prayers you could loose his bonds? Now you understand.

6. For the love of God I implore you constantly to remember in your prayers souls in a like case. We are not speaking now of them but of others who, by the mercy of God, have done penance for their sins and are in a state of grace. You must not think of the soul as insignificant and petty but as an interior world containing the number of beautiful mansions you have seen; as indeed it should, since in the centre of the soul there is a mansion reserved for God Himself.

7. When His Majesty deigns to bestow on the soul the grace of these divine nuptials, He brings it into His presence chamber and does not treat it as before, when He put it into a trance. I believe He then united it to Himself, as also during the prayer of union; but then only the superior part was affected and the soul did not feel called to

[p. 265]

enter its own centre as it does in this mansion. Here it matters little whether it is in the one way or the other.

8. In the former favours our Lord unites the spirit to Himself and makes it both blind and dumb like St. Paul after his conversion, [*4] thus preventing its knowing whence or how it enjoys this grace, for the supreme delight of the spirit is to realize its nearness to God. During the actual moment of divine union the soul feels nothing, all its powers being entirely lost. But now He acts differently: our pitiful God removes the scales from its eyes [*5] letting it see and understand somewhat of the grace received in a strange and wonderful manner in this mansion by means of intellectual vision.

9. By some mysterious manifestation of the truth, the three Persons of the most Blessed Trinity reveal themselves, preceded by an illumination which shines on the spirit like a most dazzling cloud of light. [*6] The three Persons are distinct from one

[p. 266]

another; a sublime knowledge is infused into the soul, imbuing it with a certainty of the truth that the Three are of one substance, power, and knowledge and are one God. Thus that which we hold as a doctrine of faith, the soul now, so to speak, understands by sight, though it beholds the Blessed Trinity neither by the eyes of the body nor of the soul, this being no imaginary vision. All the Three Persons here communicate Themselves to the soul, speak to it and make it understand the words of our Lord in the Gospel that He and the Father and the Holy Ghost will come and make their abode with the soul which loves Him and keeps His commandments. [*7]

10. O my God, how different from merely hearing and believing these words is it to realize their truth in this way! Day by day a growing astonishment takes possession of this soul, for the three Persons of the Blessed Trinity seem never to depart; it sees with certainty, in the way I have described, that They dwell far within its own centre and depths; though for want of learning it cannot describe how, it is conscious of the indwelling of these divine Companions.

11. You may fancy that such a person is beside herself and that her mind is too inebriated to care for anything else. On the contrary, she is far more

[p. 267]

active than before in all that concerns God's service, and when at leisure she enjoys this blessed companionship. Unless she first deserts God, I believe He will never cease to make her clearly sensible of His presence: she feels confident, as indeed she may, that He will never so fail her as to allow her to lose this favour after once bestowing it; at the same time, she is more careful than before to avoid offending Him in any way.

12. This presence is not always so entirely realized, that is, so distinctly manifest, as at first, or as it is at times when God renews this favour, otherwise the recipient could not possibly attend to anything else nor live in society. Although not always seen by so clear a light, yet whenever she reflects on it she feels the companionship of the Blessed Trinity. This is as if, when we were with other people in a very well lighted room, some one were to darken it by closing the shutters; we should feel certain that the others were still there, though we were unable to see them. [*8]

13. You may ask: 'Could she not bring back the light and see them again?' [*9] This is not in her

[p. 268]

power; when our Lord chooses, He will open the shutters of the understanding: He shows her great mercy in never quitting her and in making her realize it so clearly. His divine Majesty seems to be preparing His bride for greater things by this divine companionship which clearly helps perfection in every way and makes her lose the fear she sometimes felt when other graces were granted her.

14. A certain person so favoured found she had improved in all virtues: whatever were her trials or labours, the centre of her soul seemed never moved from its resting-place. Thus in a manner her soul appeared divided: a short time after God had done her this favour, while undergoing great sufferings, she complained of her soul as Martha did of Mary, [*10] reproaching it with enjoying solitary peace while leaving her so full of troubles and occupations that she could not keep it company.

15. This may seem extravagant to you, daughters, yet though the soul is known to be undivided, it is fact and no fancy and often happens. Interior effects show for certain that there is a positive difference between the soul and the spirit, although they are one with each other. [*11] There is an extremely

[p. 269]

subtle distinction between them, so that sometimes they seem to at in a different manner from one another, as does the knowledge given to them by God.

16. It also appears to me that the soul and its faculties are not identical. There are so many and such transcendental mysteries within us, that it would be presumption for me to attempt to explain them. If by God's mercy we enter heaven we shall understand these secrets.

Footnotes

^261:1 Ps. cxliv. 3: 'Magnitudinis ejus non est finis.'

^263:2 See the Saint's description of a soul in the state of sin, Rel, iii. 13. (towards the end).

^263:3 Supra, M. i, ch. ii. 1.

^265:4 Acts ix. 8: 'Surrexit autem Saulus de terra, apertisque oculis nihil videbat.' There is, however, nothing to imply that he was dumb as well as blind.

^265:5 Acts ix. 18: 'Et confestim ceciderunt ab oculis ejus tamquam squamae, et visum recepit.' Way of Perf.. ch. xxviii. 11.

^265:6 Rel. iii. 6; v. 6-8; viii. 20, 21; ix. 12, 17, 19. Deposition by Fr. Giles Gonzalez, S.J., Provincial of Old Castile, afterwards Assistant--General in Rome: 'While the holy Mother lived at the convent of the Incarnation of Avila [as prioress], I often spoke with her, and once I remember she asked me: "What am I to do, Father? Whenever I recollect myself I realize that already in this life the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity may be seen, and that They accompany me and assist me in the management of my affairs."' (Fuente, Obras, vol. vi. p. 280.)

'Dona Maria Enriquez, Duchess of Alva, said that St. Teresa made known to her many revelations she had received from our Lord, and that she (the duchess) held in her possession three paintings of the [p. 266] Blessed Trinity made according to the description of the holy Mother, who, while they were being done, effaced with her own hand those portions which the painter failed to design conformably to the vision she had had.' (Fuente, l.c. p. 297.)

^266:7 St. John xiv. 23: 'Si quis diligit me, sermonem meum servabit, et Pater meus diliget eum, et ad eum veniemus, et mansionem apud eum faciemus.'

^267:8 One of the Saint's favourite comparisons. See Life, ch. xxvii. 7. Castle, M. vi. ch. viii. 3. Rel. vii. 26.

^267:9 'Though the soul be always in the high estate of marriage since God has placed it there, nevertheless, actual union in all its powers is not continuous, though the substantial union is. In this substantial union the powers of the soul are most frequently in union, and drink of His cellar, the understanding by knowledge, the will by love, etc. We are not therefore to suppose that the soul, when saying it went out, has ceased from its substantial or essential union with God, but only from the union of its faculties, which is not, and cannot be, permanent in this life.' (St. John of the Cross, Spiritual Canticle, stanza xxvi. 9. On the words: 'In the inner cellar of my Beloved have I drunk, and when I went forth').

^268:10 St. Luke x. 40. Excl. v. 2, 3. Way of Perf. ch. xv. 4; xxxi. 4. Rel. viii. 6. Concept. ch. vii. 4.

^268:11 Life, ch. xviii. 4. The distinction between soul and spirit, to be found in the Epistle to the Hebrews, iv. 12, according to Cornelius a Lapide (ad loc.) consists in this, that the term soul comprises the faculties, senses, and passions, whereas the term spirit denotes the substance of the soul independently of its powers. In the inferior degrees of the Mystical life God operates through the faculties, while in the Mystical marriage He acts directly on the substance of the soul. St. Teresa is not quite [p. 269] consistent in the use of these terms, which is not surprising, as she owns that she does not quite understand this subtle distinction.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II.

TREATS OF THE SAME SUBJECT: EXPLAINS, BY SOME DELICATELY DRAWN COMPARISONS, THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SPIRITUAL UNION AND SPIRITUAL MARRIAGE.

1. The spiritual nuptials introduced by an imaginary vision. 2. Spiritual betrothal and marriage differ. 3. Spiritual marriage lasting. 4. Not so spiritual betrothal. 5. Spiritual marriage permanent. 6. St. Paul and spiritual marriage. 7. The soul's joy in union. 8. Its conviction of God's indwelling. 9. Its peace. 10. Christ's prayer for the divine union of the soul. 11. Its fulfilment. 12. Unalterable peace of the soul in the seventh Mansion. 13. Unless it offends God. 14. Struggles outside the seventh Mansion. 15. Comparisons explaining this.

1. WE now come to speak of divine and spiritual nuptials, although this sublime favour cannot be received in all its perfection during our present life, for by forsaking God this great good would be lost. The first time God bestows this grace, He, by an imaginary vision of His most sacred Humanity, reveals Himself to the soul so that it may understand and realize the sovereign gift it is

[p. 270]

receiving. He may manifest Himself in a different way to other people; the person I mentioned, after having received Holy Communion beheld our Lord, full of splendour, beauty, and majesty, as He was after His resurrection. [*1] He told her that henceforth she was to care for His affairs as though they were her own and He would care for hers: He spoke other words which she understood better than she can repeat them. This may seem nothing new, for our Lord had thus revealed Himself to her at other times; [*2] yet this was so different that it left her bewildered and amazed, both on account of the vividness of what she saw and of the words heard at the time, also because it took place in the interior of the soul where, with the exception of the one last mentioned, no other vision had been seen.

2. You must understand that between the visions seen in this and in the former mansions there is a vast difference; there is the same distinction between spiritual espousals and spiritual marriage as between people who are only betrothed and others who are united for ever in holy matrimony. I have told you [*3] that though I make this comparison because there is none more suitable, yet this betrothal is no more related to our corporal condition than if the soul were a disembodied spirit. This is even more true of the spiritual marriage, for this secret union takes place in the innermost centre of the soul where God Himself must dwell: I believe that no door is required to enter it. I say, 'no door

[p. 271]

is required,' for all I have hitherto described seems to come through the senses and faculties as must the representation of our Lord's Humanity, but what passes in the union of the spiritual nuptials is very different. Here God appears in the soul's centre, not by an imaginary but by an intellectual vision far more mystic than those seen before, just as He appeared to the Apostles without having entered through the door when He said: 'Pax vobis.' [*4]

3. So mysterious is the secret and so sublime the favour that God thus bestows instantaneously on the soul, that it feels a supreme delight, only to be described by saying that our Lord vouchsafes for the moment to reveal to it His own heavenly glory in a far more subtle way than by any vision or spiritual delight. As far as can be understood, the soul, I mean the spirit of this soul, is made one with God [*5] Who is Himself a spirit, and Who has been pleased to show certain persons how far His love for us extends in order that we may praise His greatness. He has thus deigned to unite Himself to His creature: He has bound Himself to her as firmly as two human beings are joined in wedlock and will never separate Himself from her.

q.. Spiritual betrothal is different and like the grace of union is often dissolved; for though two things are made one by union, separation is still possible and each part then remains a thing by itself. This favour generally passes quickly, and afterwards the soul, as far as it is aware, remains without His company.

[p. 272]

5. This is not so in the spiritual marriage with our Lord, where the soul always remains in its centre with its God. Union may be symbolized by two wax candles, the tips of which touch each other so closely that there is but one light; or again, the wick, the wax, and the light become one, but the one candle can again be separated from the other and the two candles remain distinct; or the wick may be withdrawn from the wax. But spiritual marriage is like rain falling from heaven into a river or stream, becoming one and the same liquid, so that the river and rain water cannot be divided; or it resembles a streamlet flowing into the ocean, which cannot afterwards be disunited from it. This marriage may also be likened to a room into which a bright light enters through two windows--though divided when it enters, the light becomes one and the same.

6. Perhaps when St. Paul said, 'He who is joined to the Lord is one spirit,' [*6] he meant this sovereign marriage, which presupposes His Majesty's having been joined to the soul by union. The same Apostle says: 'To me, to live is Christ and to die is gain.' [*7] This, I think, might here be uttered by the soul, for now the little butterfly of which I spoke dies with supreme joy, for Christ is her life.

7. This becomes more manifest by its effects as time goes on, for the soul learns that it is God Who gives it 'life,' by certain secret intuitions too strong to be misunderstood, and keenly felt, although impossible to describe. These produce such over-

[p. 273]

mastering feelings that the person experiencing them cannot refrain from amorous exclamations, such as: 'O Life of my life, and Power which doth uphold me!' with other aspirations of the same kind. [*8] For from the bosom of the Divinity, where God seems ever to hold this soul fast clasped, issue streams of milk, which solace the servants of the castle. I think He wishes them to share, in some way, the riches the soul enjoys; therefore from the flowing river in which the little streamlet is swallowed up, some drops of water flow every now and then to sustain the bodily powers, the servants of the bride and Bridegroom.

8. A person who was unexpectedly plunged into water could not fail to be aware of it; here the case is the same, but even more evident. A quantity of water could not fall on us unless it came from some source--so the soul feels certain there must be some one within it who lances forth these darts and vivifies its own life, and that there is a Sun whence this brilliant light streams forth from the interior of the spirit to its faculties.

9. The soul itself, as I said, never moves from this centre, nor loses the peace He can give Who gave it to the Apostles when they were assembled together. [*9] I think this salutation of our Lord contains far deeper meaning than the words convey, as

[p. 274]

also His bidding the glorious Magdalen to 'go in peace.' [*10] Our Lord's words act within us, [*11] and in these cases they must have wrought their effect in the souls already disposed to banish from within themselves all that is corporal and to retain only what is spiritual, in order to be joined in this celestial union with the uncreated Spirit. Without doubt, if we empty ourselves of all that belongs to the creature, depriving ourselves of it for the love of God, that same Lord will fill us with Himself.

10. Our Lord Jesus Christ, praying for His Apostles, (I cannot remember the reference),asked that they might be made one with the Father and with Himself; as Jesus Christ our Lord is in the Father and the Father in Him! [*12] I do not know how love could be greater than this! Let none draw back from entering here, for His Majesty also said: 'Not only for them do I pray, but for them also who through their word shall believe in Me'; [*13] and He declared: 'I am in them.' [*14]

11. God help me! how true these words are, and how clearly are they understood by the soul which in this state of prayer finds them fulfilled in itself! So should we all but for our own fault, for the words of Jesus Christ, our King and our Lord, cannot fail. It is we who fail by not disposing ourselves fitly, nor removing all that can obstruct this light,

[p. 275]

so that we do not behold ourselves in this mirror wherein our image is engraved. [*15]

12. To return to what I was saying. God places the soul in His own mansion which is in the very centre of the soul itself. They say the empyreal heavens, in which our Lord dwells, do not revolve with the rest: so the accustomed movements of the faculties and imagination do not appear to take place in any way that can injure the soul or disturb its peace.

13. Do I seem to imply that after God has brought the soul thus far it is certain to be saved and cannot fall into sin again? [*16] I do not mean this: whenever

[p. 276]

[paragraph continues] I say that the soul seems in security, I must be understood to imply for as long as His Majesty thus holds it in His care and it does not offend Him. At any rate I know for certain that though such a person realizes the high state she is in and has remained in it for several years, she does not consider herself safe, but is more careful than ever to avoid committing the least offence against God. As I shall explain later on, she is most anxious to serve Him and feels a constant pain and confusion at seeing how little she can do for Him compared with all she ought.' This is no light cross but a severe mortification, for the harder the penances she can perform, the better is she pleased. Her greatest penance is to be deprived by God of health and strength to perform any. I told you elsewhere what keen pain this caused her, but now it grieves her far more. This must be because she is like a tree grafted on a stock growing near a stream which makes it greener and more fruitful. [*17] Why marvel at the longings of this soul whose spirit has truly become one with the celestial water I described?

14. To return to what I wrote about. It is not intended that the powers, senses and passions should continually enjoy this peace. The soul does so, indeed, but in the other mansions there are still times of struggle, suffering, and fatigue, though as a general rule, peace is not lost by them. This 'centre of the soul' or 'spirit' is so hard to describe

[p. 277]

or even to believe in, that I think, sisters, my inability to explain my meaning saves your being tempted to disbelieve me; it is difficult to understand how there can be crosses and sufferings and yet peace in the soul.

15. Let me give you one or two comparisons--God grant they may be of use; if not, I know that what I say is true. A king resides in his palace; many wars and disasters take place in his kingdom but he remains on his throne. In the same way, though tumults and wild beasts rage with great uproar in the other mansions, yet nothing of this enters the seventh mansions, nor drives the soul from it. Although the mind regrets these troubles, they do not disturb it nor rob it of its peace, for the passions are too subdued to dare to enter here where they would only suffer still further defeat. Though the whole body is in pain, yet the head, if it be sound, does not suffer with it. I smile at these comparisons--they do not please me--but I can find no others. Think what you will about it--I have told you the truth.

Footnotes

^270:1 Rel. iii. 20; ix. 8 and 25.

^270:2 Life, ch. xxxix. 29.

^270:3 Castle, M. v. ch. iv. 1.

^271:4 St. John xx. 19.

^271:5 Rel. xi. 1. sqq.

^272:6 1 Cor. vi. 17: 'Qui adhaeret Domino unus spiritus est.'

^272:7 Philip. i. 21: 'Mihi vivere Christus est, et mori lucrum.'

^273:8 Such exclamations, in considerable number, form the Book of Exclamations published by Fray Luis de Leon. De Fuente thinks it was written in 1569, but as St. Teresa's spiritual betrothal took place on November 18, 1572, it seems, at least in parts, of a later date. The spiritual nuptials must be placed between the aforementioned year and May 1575, but it is not possible to ascertain the exact date. (For the Exclamations, see Minor Works).

^273:9 St. John xx. 19.

^274:10 St. Luke vii. 50.

^274:11 Supra, M. vi. ch. iii. 6. Life, ch. xxv. 5.

^274:12 St. John xvii. 2 I: 'Ut omnes unum sint, sicut tu Pater in me, et ego in te, ut et ipsi in nobis unum sint.'

^274:13 St. John xvii. 20: 'Non pro eis autem rogo tantum, sed et pro eis, qui credituri sunt per verbum eorum in me.'

^274:14 St. John xvii. 2 3: 'Ego in eis.'

^275:15 This idea is expressed in St. Teresa's poem: Alma, buscarte has en Mi' (Poem 10, Minor Works).

Such is the power of love, O soul,
 To paint thee in my heart
 No craftsman with such art
 Whate'er his skill might be, could there
 Thine image thus impart!
 'Twas love that gave thee life--
 Then, fair one, if thou be
 Lost to thyself, thou'lt see
 Thy portrait in my bosom stamped--
 Soul, seek thyself in Me.

^275:16 In a letter dated May 1581, addressed to Don Alonso Velasquez, then bishop of Osma, St. Teresa writes as follows:

'She [herself] has received such an assurance of coming one day to the fruition of God that she almost imagines she has already come into possession of Him, without, however, the joy that will accompany it. She is in the same position as one who by legal contract has received a splendid property which will become his, and whose fruit he will enjoy at a given date. Until then he only holds the title-deeds, without being able to take possession of the property. Nevertheless my soul would not like to come immediately into the possession of God, for it does not believe that it has deserved such a grace. It only desires to continue in His service, even at the cost of terrible sufferings. It would not mind thus serving Him to the end of the world, after having received such a pledge.' St. John of the Cross, in treating of this subject (Spir. [p. 276] Cant. stanza xxii. 3) says: 'I believe that no soul ever attains to this state without being confirmed in grace in it.' See also Ribera, in the Acta Ss. p. 554, circa finem.

^276:17 Ps. i. 3: 'Et erit tamquam lignum quod plantatum est secus decursus aquarum, quod fructum suum dabit in tempore suo.'

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 278]

  

CHAPTER III.

THE GREAT FRUITS PRODUCED BY THE ABOVE-MENTIONED PRAYER. THE WONDERFUL DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THESE EFFECTS AND THOSE FORMERLY DESCRIBED SHOULD BE CAREFULLY STUDIED AND REMEMBERED.

1. Effects of the graces last received. 2. The soul only cares for God's honour. 3. But still performs its duties. 4. Other fruits of these favours. 5. The soul's fervent desire to serve God. 6. Christ dwells within this soul. 7. And recalls it to fervour if negligent. 8. God's constant care of such souls. 9. Their peace and silence. 10. Few ecstasies in the Seventh Mansions. 11. Probable reasons for this. 12. Allusions in Holy Scripture to this state. 13. Watchfulness of such souls. 14. Crosses suffered in this state.

1. THE little butterfly has died with the greatest joy at having found rest at last, and now Christ lives in her. [*1] Let us see the difference between her present and her former life, for the effects will prove whether what I told you was true. As far as can be ascertained they are these: first, a self-forgetfulness so complete that she really appears not to exist, as I said, [*2] for such a transformation has been worked in her that she no longer recognizes herself; nor does she remember that heaven, or life, or glory are to be hers, but seems entirely occupied in seeking God's interests. Apparently the words spoken by His Majesty have done their work: 'that she was to care for His affairs, and He would care for hers.' [*3]

2. Thus she recks nothing, whatever happens, but lives in such strange oblivion that, as I stated, she seems no longer to exist, nor does she wish to be of

[p. 279]

any account in anything--anything! unless she sees that she can advance, however little, the honour and glory of God, for which she would most willingly die.

3. Do not fancy I mean, daughters, that she neglects to eat and drink, though it brings no small torment to her, or to perform the duties of her state. I am speaking of her interior; as regards her exterior actions there is little to say, for her chief suffering is to see that she has hardly strength to do anything. For nothing in the world would she omit doing all she can which she knows would honour our Lord.

4. The second fruit is a strong desire for suffering, though it does not disturb her peace as before because the fervent wish of such souls for the fulfilment of God's will in them makes them acquiesce in all He does. If He would have her suffer, she is content; if not, she does not torment herself to death about it as she used to do. She feels a great interior joy when persecuted, and is far more peaceful than in the former state under such circumstances: she bears no grudge against her enemies, nor wishes them any ill. Indeed she has a special love for them, is deeply grieved at seeing them in trouble, and does all she can to relieve them, [*4] earnestly interceding with God on their behalf. She would be glad to forfeit the favours His Majesty shows her, if they might be given to her enemies instead, to prevent their offending our Lord.

[p. 280]

5. The most surprising thing to me is that the sorrow and distress which such souls felt because they could not die and enjoy our Lord's presence [*5] are now exchanged for as fervent a desire of serving Him, of causing Him to be praised, and of helping others to the utmost of their power. Not only have they ceased to long for death, but they wish for a long life and most heavy crosses, if such would bring ever so little honour to our Lord. Thus, if they knew for certain that immediately on quitting their bodies their souls would enjoy God, it would make no difference to them, nor do they think of the glory enjoyed by the saints, and long to share it. Such souls hold that their glory consists in helping, in any way, Him Who was crucified, especially as they see how men offend against Him, and how few, detached from all else, care for His honour alone. True, people in this state forget this at times, and are seized with tender longings to enjoy God and to leave this land of exile, especially as they see how little they serve Him. Then, returning to themselves and reflecting how they possess Him continually in their souls, they are satisfied, offering to His Majesty their willingness to live as the most costly oblation they can make. [*6] They fear death no more than they would a delicious trance.

[p. 281]

[6. The fact is, that He Who gave them these torturing desires of death has exchanged them for the others. May He be for ever blessed and praised! Amen. In fact, such persons no longer wish for consolations nor delights, since they bear God Himself within them, and it is He Who lives in them. It is evident that His life was one continual torment: so would He have ours to be, at least in desire, for as to the rest He leads us mercifully as our weakness requires, though when He sees the need He imparts to us His strength.]

7. Such a soul, thoroughly detached from all things, wishes to be either always alone or occupied on what benefits the souls of others: she feels neither aridity nor any interior troubles, but a constant tender recollection of our Lord Whom she wishes to praise unceasingly. When she grows negligent, the same Lord arouses her in the way that I told you, and it is easy to see that this impulse (I know not what term to use for it) comes from the interior of the soul, like the former impetuous desires. [*7] It is now felt very sweetly, but is neither produced by the intellect nor the memory, nor is there reason to believe the soul itself has any share in it. This is so usual and so frequent that whoever has been in this state must have noticed it. However large a fire may be, the flame never burns downwards, but upwards, and so this movement is seen to come from the centre of the soul whose powers it excites. Indeed, were nothing else gained by this way of prayer but the knowledge of the special care God takes to communicate Himself to us and how He entreats us to abide with Him (for indeed I can describe it in no other way) I think that for the sake of these sweet and penetrating touches of His love all our past pains would be well spent.

8. You will have learnt this by experience, sisters, for I think that when our Lord has brought us to the prayer of union, He watches over us in this way unless we neglect to keep His commandments. When these impulses are given you, remember that they come from the innermost mansion, where

[p. 282]

[paragraph continues] God dwells in our souls. Praise Him fervently, for it is He Who sends you this message, or love letter, so tenderly written, and in a cipher that only you can understand and know what He asks. By no means neglect to answer His Majesty, even though you may be occupied exteriorly and engaged in conversation. Our Lord may often be pleased to show you this secret favour in public; but it is very easy, as the reply should be entirely interior, to respond by an at of love or to ask with Saint Paul: 'Lord, what wilt Thou have me to do?" [*8] Jesus will show you in many ways how to please Him. It is a propitious moment, for He seems to be listening to us and the soul is nearly always disposed by this delicate touch to respond with a generous determination. [*9] As I told you, this mansion differs from the rest in that, as I said, [*10] the dryness and disturbance felt in all the rest at times hardly ever enter here, where the soul is nearly always calm. It does not fear that this sublime favour can be counterfeited by the devil, but feels a settled conviction that it is of divine origin because, as above stated, nothing is here perceived

[p. 283]

by the senses or faculties but His Majesty reveals Himself to the spirit, which He takes to be with Himself in a place where I doubt not the devil dares not enter, nor would our Lord ever permit him.

9. All the graces here divinely bestowed on the soul come, as I said, through no a Lion of its own except its total abandonment of itself to God. They are given in peace and silence, like the building of Solomon's Temple where no sound was heard. [*11] It is thus with this temple of God, this mansion of His where He and the soul rejoice in each other alone in profound silence. The mind need not act nor search for anything, as the Lord Who created it wishes it to be at rest and only to watch through a little chink, what passes within. Though at times it cannot see this, yet such intervals are very short, I believe because the powers are not here lost but only cease to work, being, as it were, dazed with astonishment.

10. I, too, am astonished at seeing that when the soul arrives at this state it does not go into ecstasies except perhaps on rare occasions--even then they are not like the former trances and the flight of the spirit and seldom take place in public as they did before. [*12] They are no longer produced by any special calls to devotion, such as by the sight of a religious picture, by hearing a sermon (were it only the first few words), or by sacred music; formerly, like the poor little butterfly, the soul

[p. 284]

was so anxious that anything used to alarm it and make it take flight. This may be either because the spirit has at last found repose, or that it has seen such wonders in this mansion that nothing can frighten it, or perhaps because it no longer feels solitary since it rejoices in such Company.

11. In short, sisters, I cannot tell the reason, but as soon as God shows the soul what this mansion contains, bringing it to dwell within the precincts, the infirmity formerly so troublesome to the mind and impossible to get over, disappears at once. Probably this is because our Lord has now strengthened, dilated, and developed the soul, or it may be that He wished to make public (for some end known only to Himself) what He was doing in secret within such souls, for His judgments are beyond our comprehension in this life.

12. These effects, with all the other good fruits I have mentioned of the different degrees of prayer, are given by God to the soul when it draws near Him to receive that 'kiss of His mouth' for which the bride asked, [*13] and I believe her petition is now granted. Here the overflowing waters are given to the wounded hart: here she delights in the tabernacles of God [*14]: here the dove sent out by Noe to see whether the flood had subsided, has plucked the olive branch, showing that she has found firm land amongst the floods and tempests of this world. [*15] O Jesus! Who knows how much in Holy Scripture refers to this peace of soul? Since, O my God, Thou dost see of what grave import is this peace

[p. 285]

to us, do Thou incite Christians to strive to gain it! In Thy mercy do not deprive those of it on whom Thou hast bestowed it, for until Thou hast given them true peace and brought them to where it is unending, they must ever live in fear.

13. I do not mean that peace is unreal on earth because I say 'true peace,' but that such souls might have to begin all their struggles over again if they forsook God. What must these people feel at the thought that it is possible to lose so great a good? Their dread makes them more careful; they try to gather strength from their weakness lest, through their own fault, they should miss any opportunity of pleasing God better. The greater the favours they have received from His Majesty, the more diffident and mistrustful are they of themselves; the marvels they have witnessed having revealed more clearly to them their own miseries and the heinousness of their sins, so that often, like the publican, they dare not so much as lift up their eyes. [*16]

14. Sometimes they long to die and be in safety, but then their love at once makes them wish to live in order to serve God, as I told you; therefore they commit all that concerns them to His mercy. [*17] At times they are more crushed than ever by the thought of the many graces they have received lest, like an overladen ship, they sink beneath the burden. I assure you, sisters, such souls have their cross to bear, yet it does not trouble them nor rob them of their peace, but is quickly gone like a wave or a storm which is followed by a calm, for God's

[p. 286]

presence within them soon makes them forget all else. May He be for ever blessed and praised by all His creatures! Amen,

Footnotes

^278:1 Gal. ii. 20.

^278:2 Castle, M. vii. ch. i. 11 and 15.

^278:3 Castle, M. vii. ch. ii. 1. Compare the references there given.

^279:4 Don Alvaro de Mendoza, Bishop of Avila, used to say that the best means of obtaining St. Teresa's friendship was to injure or insult her, Acta Ss. n, 1233. Rel. vii. 20.

^280:5 Rel. viii. 15.

^280:6 Compare with the Saint's poem on self-oblation: 'Vuestro soy, para Vos naci' (Poem i. Minor Works).

Long life bestow, or straightway let me die;
 Let health be mine, or pain and sickness send;
 Honour or foul dishonour--be my path
 Beset by war or peaceful till the end.
 My strength or weakness be as Thou dost choose,
 Since naught Thou askest shall I e'er refuse.
 Say, Lord, what is it Thou dost will for me?

^281:7 Castle, M. vi. ch. vi. 6.

^282:8 Acts ix. 6: 'Domine, quid me vis facere?''

^282:9 The words from 'know what He asks' to 'as I told you' are not in the original manuscript, but must have been written on a separate slip, as is proved by a marginal note in the handwriting of the Saint: 'Quando dice aqui: os pide, lease luego este papel.' This paper is now lost, but the passage it contained is preserved in the early manuscript copies of Toledo, Cordova and Salamanca, as well as in the first printed edition, and, through this, in the old translations; hence both Woodhead and Dalton have it in its proper place. It is, of course, not to be found in the autograph published in 1882, nor in Fuente's Spanish editions nor in translations based upon these, The Spanish text will be found in Oeuvres vi, 297 note.

^282:10 Supra  section section i and 2.

^283:11 III Reg. vi. 7.

^283:12 'That is, so as to lose the senses' (marginal note in the Saints' handwriting). Rel. iii. 5.

^284:13 Cant. i. I. 

^284:14 Ps. xli, 2, 5.

^284:15 Gen. viii. 10, 11.

^285:16 St. Luke. xviii. 13.

^285:17 Rel. ix. 19.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IV.

THE CONCLUSION SETS FORTH WHAT APPEARS TO BE OUR LORD'S PRINCIPAL INTENTION IN CONFERRING THESE SUBLIME FAVOURS ON SOULS, AND EXPLAINS HOW NECESSARY IT IS FOR MARY AND MARTHA TO GO TOGETHER. THIS CHAPTER IS VERY PROFITABLE.

1. Vicissitudes of the Seventh Mansion. 2. Humility produced by them. 3. Such souls free from mortal and from wilful venial sins. 4. The fate of Solomon. 5. Holy fear. 6. These favours strengthen souls to suffer. 7. Crosses borne by the saints. 8. Effect of vision of our Lord on St. Peter. 9. Fruits of these favours. 10. Why the spiritual marriage takes place. 11. Love for Christ proved by our deeds. 12. True spirituality. 13. Humility and the virtues must combine with prayer. 14. Zeal of advanced souls. 15. Strengthened by the divine Presence within them. 16. Examples of the saints. 17. Both Martha and Mary must serve our Lord. 18. Christ's food. 19. Mary's mortification. 20. Her grief at the Passion. 21. Can we lead souls to God? 22. How to do so. 23. Love gives value to our deeds. 24. Conclusion.

1. You must not suppose, sisters, that the effects I mentioned always exist in the same degree in these souls, for as far as I remember, I told you that in most cases our Lord occasionally leaves such persons to the weakness of their nature. The venomous creatures from the moat round the castle and the other mansions at once unite to revenge themselves for the time when they were deprived of their power.

2. True, this lasts but a short time--a day perhaps or a little longer--but during this disturbance, which generally arises from some passing event, these persons learn what benefits they derive from

[p. 287]

the holy Company they are in. Our Lord gives them such great fortitude that they never desert His service nor the good resolutions they have made, which only seem to gather strength by trial, nor do their hearts ever turn from them, even by a slight movement of the will. This trouble rarely happens; our Lord wishes the soul to keep in mind its natural condition so that it may be humble and may better understand how much it owes Him, and how great a grace it has received, and so may praise Him.

3. Do not fancy that in spite of the strong desire and determination of these souls that they do not commit imperfections and even fall into many sins: that is, not wilfully; for such people are given special grace from God on this point: I mean venial sins. As far as they are aware, they are free from mortal sins, although they do not feel certain they may not be guilty of some of which they are ignorant.

4. This grieves their hearts sorely, as does the sight of the souls perishing around them; although on the one hand they have strong hopes of not being themselves among the number of the lost, yet remembering what we are told in Holy Scripture of the fate of men who, like Solomon, seemed the special favourites of God [*1] and conversed so familiarly with His Majesty, they cannot help fearing for themselves.

5. Let that one among you who feels most confidence on this point fear the most, for: 'Blessed

[p. 288]

is the man who feareth the Lord,' as David said. [*2] May His Majesty ever protect us. Let us beg Him never to permit us to offend Him: therein lies our greatest safety. May He be for ever praised. Amen.

6. It would be well to tell you, sisters, the reason why God bestows such favours on souls in this world, although you must have learned this by the effects produced if you have considered the matter. I return to the matter in order that none of you may think it is only for the sake of the pleasure such persons feel, which would be a great mistake on your part, for His Majesty can bestow no greater favour on us than to give us a life such as was led by His beloved Son. Therefore, as I have often told you, I feel certain that these graces are sent to strengthen our weakness so that we may imitate Him by suffering much.

7. We always find that those nearest to Christ our Lord bear the heaviest cross: think of what His glorious Mother and the Apostles bore. How do you think St. Paul went through such immense labours? [*3] We learn from his conduct the fruits of genuine visions and contemplation which come from our Lord and not from our own imagination, or the devil's fraud. Do you suppose that St. Paul hid himself to enjoy these spiritual consolations at

[p. 289]

leisure and did nothing else? You know that he never took a day's rest so far as we can learn, nor could he have slept much since he worked all night to get his living. [*4]

8. I am delighted with St. Peter, who when fleeing from prison was met by our Lord, Who told him He was going to Rome to be crucified again. I never recite the Office in which this is commemorated without feeling a special joy. [*5] What effect did this vision have on St. Peter, and what did he do? He went at once to meet his death--and our Lord did him no small favour in finding him an executioner!

9. Oh, my sisters, how forgetful of her ease, how unmindful of honours, and how far from seeking men's esteem should she be whose soul God thus chooses for His special dwelling-place! For if her mind is fixed on Him, as it ought to be, she must needs forget herself: all her thoughts are bent on how to please Him better and when and how she can show the love she bears Him.

10. This is the end and aim of prayer, my daughters; this is the reason of the spiritual marriage whose children are always good works. Works are the unmistakable sign which shows these favours come from God, as I told you. It will do me little

[p. 290]

good to be deeply recollected when alone, making acts of the virtues, planning and promising to do wonders in God's service, if afterwards, when occasion offers, I do just the opposite. I did wrong in saying, 'It will do me little good,' for all the time we spend with God does us great good. Though afterwards we may weakly fail to perform our good intentions, yet some time or other His Majesty will find a way for us to practise them although perhaps much to our regret. Thus when He sees a soul very cowardly, He often sends it some great affliction, much against its will, and brings it through this trial with profit to itself, When the soul has learnt this, it is less timid in offering itself to Him.

11. I ought to have said, 'will do us little good' in comparison with the far greater good we can gain when our works fulfil our aspirations and our promises. She that cannot do all this at once should do it little by little, gradually dominating her will, if she wishes to gain fruit from prayer. Even in this little nook she will find many a chance to praise this. Remember, this is of far more importance than I know how to express. Fix your eyes on the Crucified One, and all will seem easy. If His Majesty proved His love for us by such stupendous labours and sufferings, how can you seek to please Him by words alone?

12. Do you know what it is to be truly spiritual? It is for men to make themselves the slaves of God--branded with His mark, which is the cross. Since they have given Him their freedom, He can sell

[p. 291]

them as slaves to the whole world, as He was, which would be doing them no wrong but the greatest favour. Unless you make up your minds to this, never expect to make much progress, [*6] for as I said humility is the foundation of the whole building and unless you are truly humble, our Lord, for your own sake, will never permit you to rear it very high lest it should fall to the ground.

13. Therefore, sisters, take care to lay a firm foundation by seeking to be the least of all and the slave of others, watching how you can please and help them, for it will benefit you more than them. Built on such strong rocks, your castle can never go to ruin. I insist again: your foundation must not consist of prayer and contemplation alone: unless you acquire the virtues and praise them, you will always be dwarfs; and please God no worse may befall you than making no progress, for you know that to stop is to go back--if you love, you will never be content to come to a standstill.

14. Perhaps you think I am speaking of beginners and that one may rest later on, but, as I told you, the rest such souls feel is within them: they have less outwardly nor do they wish for it. Why, do you think, does the soul send from its centre these inspirations, or rather aspirations, (the messages of which I spoke), to the dwellers in the precincts of the castle and to the surrounding mansions? To send them to sleep? No, no, no! The soul wages a fiercer war from thence to keep the powers,

[p. 292]

senses and the whole body from being idle, than ever it did when it suffered in their company. Formerly it did not understand the immense benefit its afflictions brought, though indeed they may have been the means God used to advance it to this state.

15. Besides, the company it enjoys gives it far greater strength than ever before. If, as David says: 'With the holy thou shalt be holy,' [*7] doubtless by its becoming one with the Almighty, by this sovereign union of spirit with spirit, the soul must gather strength, as we know the saints did, to suffer and to die. Beyond doubt, with the force thus gained, the soul succours all within the castle and even the very body itself, which often seems to have no feeling left in it. The vigour the soul derives from 'the wine' drunk in the 'cellar' [*8] (into which the Bridegroom brought her and would not let her go) overflows into the feeble body, just as the food we eat nourishes both the head and the whole frame.

16. Indeed the body suffers much while alive, for whatever work it does, the soul has energy for far greater tasks and goads it on to more, for all it can perform appears as nothing. This must be the reason of the severe penances performed by many of the saints, especially the glorious Magdalen, who had always spent her life in luxury. [*9] This

[p. 293]

caused the zeal felt by our Father Elias for the honour of God, [*10] and the desires of St. Dominic, [*11] and St. Francis [*12] to draw souls to praise the Almighty. I assure you that, forgetful of themselves, they must have passed through no small trials.

17. This, my sisters, is what I would have us strive for--to offer our petitions and to practise prayer, not for our own enjoyment but to gain strength to serve God. Let us seek no fresh path; we should lose ourselves in ways of ease. It would be a strange thing to fancy we should gain these graces by any other road than that by which Jesus and all His saints have gone before. Let us not dream of such a thing: believe me, both Martha and Mary must entertain our Lord and keep Him as their Guest, nor must they be so inhospitable as to offer Him no food. How can Mary do this

[p. 294]

while she sits at His feet, if her sister does not help her? [*13]

18. His food is that in every possible way we should draw souls to Him so that they may be saved and may praise Him for ever. You may offer two objections--first, that I said that Mary had chosen the better part, [*14] for she had already done Martha's work by waiting on our Lord, by washing His feet and by wiping them with her hair.

19. Do you think it was a small mortification for a woman of rank, as she was, to go through the street, perhaps by herself, for in her zeal she never thought of how she went? Then she entered a house where she was a stranger and had to bear the railing of the Pharisee and many other trials. [*15] It was strange to see such a woman as she had been thus publicly change her life. With a wicked nation like the Jews, the sight of her love for our Lord Whom they hated so bitterly was enough to make them cast in her face her former life and taunt her with wanting to become a saint. Doubtless she must have changed her rich robes and all the rest. Considering how men talk now of people far less known than she was, what must have been said of her?

20. I assure you, sisters, she won the better part after many crosses and mortifications. Must not the mere sight of men's hatred of her Master have been an intolerable trial? Then, think of what she

[p. 295]

endured afterwards at our Lord's death! I believe, myself, that she did not suffer martyrdom because she was already a martyr by grief at witnessing the crucifixion. [*16] Then what terrible pain His absence must have caused her [*17] during the long years afterwards! You see, she was not always enjoying contemplation at the feet of our Saviour!

21. Secondly, you may say that you have neither the power nor the means to lead souls to God; though you would willingly do so, you do not know how, as you can neither teach nor preach as did the Apostles. I have often written an answer to this objection though I cannot tell whether I have done so in connection with the Castle. However, as the difficulty probably often crosses your minds on account of the desires our Lord gives you of serving Him, I will now speak of it again. [*18] I told you elsewhere how the devil frequently fills our thoughts with great schemes, so that instead of putting our hands to what work we can do to serve our Lord, we may rest satisfied with wishing to perform impossibilities.

22. You can do much by prayer; and then, do not try to help the whole world, but principally your companions; this work will be all the better because you are the more bound to it. Do you think it is a trifling matter that your humility and mortification, your readiness to serve your sisters, your fervent charity towards them, and your love of God, should be as a fire to enkindle their zeal,

[p. 296]

and that you should constantly incite them to practise the other virtues? This would be a great work and one most pleasing to our Lord: by thus doing all that is in your power, you would prove to His Majesty your willingness to do still more and He would reward you as if you had won Him many souls. Do you answer: 'This would not be converting my sisters, for they are very good already?' What business is that of yours? If they were still better, the praise they render God would please Him more and their prayers would be more helpful to their neighbours. [*19]

23. In short, my sisters, I will conclude with this advice; do not build towers without a foundation, for our Lord does not care so much for the importance of our works as for the love with which they are done. When we do all we can, His Majesty will enable us to do more every day. If we do not grow weary, but during the brief time this life lasts (and perhaps it will be shorter than any of you think) we give our Lord every sacrifice we can, both interior and exterior, His Majesty will unite them with that He offered to His Father for us on the Cross so that they may be worth the value given them by our love, however mean the works themselves may be.

24. May it please His Majesty, my sisters and my daughters, that we may all meet together where we may praise Him for ever, and may He give me grace to practice something of what I have taught you, by the merits of His Son, Who liveth and

[p. 297]

reigneth for ever! Amen. I assure you that I am filled with confusion at myself and I beg you, for the sake of the same Lord, not to forget this poor sinner in your prayers.

Footnotes

^287:1 III. Reg. xi.

^288:2 Ps. cxi. 1. 'Beatus vir qui timet Dominum.'

^288:3 Though thou shouldst have been rapt up to the third heaven with Saint Paul, thou art not thereby secured that thou shalt suffer no adversity. 'I,' said Jesus, 'will shew him how great things he must suffer for My name's sake' (Acts. ix. 16). To suffer, therefore, is what waits for thee, if thou wilt love Jesus and constantly serve Him For our merit and the advancement of our state consist not in having many sweetnesses and consolations, but rather in bearing great afflictions and tribulations' (Imitation, bk. ii. ch. xii. 12).

^289:4 i Thess. ii. 9.

^289:5 The Antiphon of the Magnificat at first Vespers of the Feast of Saints Peter and Paul, June 29, in the Carmelite Breviary used by St. Teresa is: 'Beatus Petrus Apostolus vidit sibi Christum occurrere. Adorans eum ait: "Domine, quo vadis?"--"Venio Romam iterum crucifigi." 'The Blessed Apostle Peter saw Christ come to meet him. Adoring Him, he asked "Lord, where art Thou going?"--"I go to Rome to be crucified anew." The saint at once returned to Rome and was taken by the soldiers and crucified. See Letter of Jan. 17. 1577, note 4. Vol. II.

^291:6 "If thou wilt stand upon self and wilt not offer thyself freely to My will, thine offering is not perfect, nor will there be entire union between us.' (Imitation, bk. iv. ch. viii. 2.)

^292:7 Ps. xvii. 26: 'Cum sancto sanctus eris.'

^292:8 Cant. ii. 4.

^292:9 'St. Mary Magdalen gave herself up to penance and contemplation in a deep excavation of the rocks at La Baume, near Marseilles. In this wild spot there was neither bread, water, nor even herbage. Thus she lived for more than thirty-two years without any kind of nourishment but that which was celestial, performing meanwhile most severe penances.' (St. Vincent Ferrer.)

^293:10 III Reg. xix. 10.

^293:11 'There was one sentiment within him to which may almost be given the name of passion: it was his ceaseless burning thirst for the salvation of souls. As his Divine Master had come into the world to save sinners and loved them even unto death, so he, too, gave up all that was most dear to him in his life to win souls to Christ. He was always giving himself: it was the very key-note of his existence. He would have sold himself as a slave, he would have been cut to pieces by the heretics, he would spare himself neither by day nor by night, if by any means he might save some.' (From the History of St. Dominic, by Augusta Theodosia Drane. London, 1891, p. 256).

^293:12 'St. Francis of Assisi, at the very beginning of his Order, when he had only seven followers, said to them: "Consider, my brethren, what is our vocation. It is not only for our own salvation that the mercy of God has called us, but for the salvation of many other souls. It is that we may go forth and exhort all men rather by our example than by our words, to do penance and keep the divine commands."' (The Life of St. Francis of Assisi, by a religious of the Order of Poor Clares, London, 1861, p. 32).

^294:13 St. Luke x. 39, 40. Life, ch. xvii. 6. Rel. viii. 6. Way of Perf. ch. xxxi. 4. Concep. ch. vii. 4.

^294:14 Ibid. x. 42: 'Maria optimam partem elegit.'

^294:15 Ibid. vii. 37.

^295:16 Marginal note in the Saint's handwriting.

^295:17 Life, ch. xxi. 9.

^295:18 Way of Perf. ch, i. 1. Found, ch. i, 6, 7. Supra, M. vi ch. vi, 2.

^296:19 Way of Perf. ch. vii. 7.

     The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 298]

  

IHS

ALTHOUGH, as I told you, I felt reluctant to begin this work, yet now it is finished I am very glad to have written it, and I think my trouble has been well spent, though I confess it has cost me but little. Considering your strict enclosure, the little recreation you have, my sisters, and how many conveniences are wanting in some of your convents, I think it may console you to enjoy yourselves in this interior castle which you can enter, and walk about at will, at any hour you please, without asking leave of your superiors. It is true you cannot enter all the mansions by your own power, however great it may appear to you, unless the Lord of the castle Himself admits you. Therefore I advise you to use no violence if you meet with any obstacle, for that would displease Him so much that He would never give you admission to them. He dearly loves humility: [*1] if you think yourselves unworthy to enter the third mansion, He will grant you all the sooner the favour of entering the fifth. Then, if you serve Him well there and often repair to it, He will draw you into the mansion where He dwells Himself, whence you need never depart unless called away by the Prioress, whose

[p. 299]

commands this sovereign Master wishes you to obey as if they were His own. If by her orders, you are often absent from His presence chamber, whenever you return He will hold the door open for you. When once you have learnt how to enjoy this castle, you will always find rest, however painful your trials may be, in the hope of returning to your Lord, which no one can prevent. Although I have only mentioned seven mansions, yet each one contains many more rooms, above, below, and around it, with fair gardens, fountains, and labyrinths, besides other things so delightful that you will wish to consume yourself in praising in return the great God Who has created the soul to His own image and likeness. If you find anything in the plan of this treatise which helps you to know Him better, be certain that it is sent by His Majesty to encourage you, and that whatever you find amiss in it is my own. In return for my strong desire to aid you in serving Him, my God and my Lord, I implore you, whenever you read this, to praise His Majesty fervently in my name and to beg Him to prosper His Church, to give light to the Lutherans, to pardon my sins and to free me from purgatory, where perhaps I shall be, by the mercy of God, when you see this book (if it is given to you after having been examined by theologians). If these writings contain any error, it is through my ignorance; I submit in all things to the teachings of the holy Catholic Roman Church, of which I am now a member, as I protest and promise I will be both in life and death. May our Lord God be for ever praised and blessed! Amen, Amen.

[p. 300]

I finished writing this book in the convent of St. Joseph of Avila, 1577, on the Vigil of St. Andrew, for the glory of God, Who liveth and reigneth for ever and ever! Amen.

HERE ENDS THE INTERIOR CASTLE
 OR THE MANSIONS
 TRANSLATED AND PRINTED BY THE
 BENEDICTINES OF STANBROOK
 A.D. MCMXXI

 

Footnotes

^298:1 Way of Perf. ch. xvi. 1.

    The Interior Castle, by St. Teresa of Avila, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 301]

  

INDEX

Absalom, III. i. 6

Acts of praise, love, etc. IV. i. 7

Agnes St., VI. v. 13

Alcantara, St. Peter of, IV. iii. 5; VI. vi. 13

Alva, Duchess of; VI. iv. 9; VII. i. 9, note 6

Amber, VI. v. 2

Anthony, St., VI. v. 9

Antonius a Spiritu Sancto, IV. iii. I; VI. i. 5, 12, 18, iii. 5; iv. 17, VI. 11

Apostles, our Lord's prayer for, VII. ii. 10; sufferings of, VII. iv. 7

Augustine, St., IV. iii. 3; VI. vii. 11

Avila, Bl. John of; VI. ix. 11; St. Joseph's convent at, VI. vi. 14; VII. iv. conclusion

Awe, produced by visions, VI. ix. 4

 

Babe, likeness of; IV. iii. 9

Banez, Fr. Dominic, VI. ix. 11

Bee, likeness of; I. ii. 9; V. ii. 2

Beggar, likeness of; IV. iii. 5

Beginners, II. i. passim

Bethsaida, the blind man at the pool of; I. i. 10

Blindness, spiritual, VI. iv. 15

Body, the setting of the diamond, I. i. 3; the outer walls of the Castle, I. i. 3; care of, III. ii. 9, 11; VI. iii. 12; strength of; not necessary in prayer of Union, V. i. 2; effect of prayer of Union on, V. i. 3

Books, spiritual insufficiency of, IV. iii. 4; use of; V. ii. 3

Bride, in the Canticle, V. i. 10; and Bridegroom, V. iv. 3

Butterfly, likeness of, V. ii. I, 2. 6, 7, 8; iv. I; VI. iv. 1, Vi. I, 3; xi. I; VII. iii. 1, 10

 

Cecilia, St., V. iv. 1

Call, God's, to the soul, II. i. 4-6; IV. iii. 2, 3

Carelessness in prayer, I. i. 9

Carmel, our Lady of; Preface, p. 36; III. i. 5; Order of, Constitutions, I. ii. 7; V. i. 2; Rule of, VI. vi. 7

Carmelite nuns, discalced, Preface, p. 36; I. i. 9; VI. vi. 14

Castle, Interior, Preface, argument, p. 35; I. i. 2, 3, ii. I; VI. iii. 27, iv. 17; description, I. ii. 8; entrance to, I. i. 7; foundation of, VII. iv. 13; prayer and meditation, I. i. 9, 11; precincts of, I. i. 10

Caterpillar, likeness of, V. ii. 6

Cellar of wine, V. i. 10, ii. 11

[p. 302]

Certitude of the soul, a sign of union, V. i. 8, 9

Changes wrought in the soul by prayer of Union, V. ii. 7, 10, 12

Charity, works of; only remedy in times of darkness, VI. i. 24; effect of spiritual matrimony, VII. iv. 16-23

Christ's face, VI. ix. 12; sufferings, our pains joined to, V. ii. 4

Church, holy Roman Catholic, Preface, p. 36; VII. iv. conclusion; love of, IV. i. 7

Clearness, a sign that locutions come from God, VI. iii. 20

Communion, holy, VII. ii. 1

Complaints, loving, VI. ii. 3

Confession, regular, V. ii. 3

Confessor, to be consulted on locutions, VI. iii. 18; and on visions, VI. ix. 10; if mistaken, VI. viii. 10, 11; timorous, VI. i. 15-19

Confidence, II. i. 17

Confirmation in grace, VII. ii. 13

Conformity with the will of God, II. i. 15; III. ii. 5, 8; VI. xi. 5.

Consolations, divine (prayer of Quiet), III. ii. 13; IV. i. 4, 5, ii. 2, 4, 5, 6, iii. 7; earthly, no use, VI. i. 22

Contempt, III. ii. 6; for earthly things, an effect of raptures, VI. V. 13

Contradiction, by good people, VI. i. 5

Courage, necessary, II. i. 13; III. ii. 10; VI. i. 2, 3, iv. I, V. 7, 14.

Cross, II. i. 15; necessary in prayer of Union, V. ii. 8; of saints, VII. iv. 7

Crystal, I. i. 2, ii. 3, 4

 

Darkness, dispelled by God, VI. i. 20; different kinds of, I. ii. I. VII. i. 4

David, King, III. i. 6; VI. x. 5; VII. iv. 5, 15

Deaf-mutes, II. i. 3, 6

Deception, fear of, VI. i. 16; satanic, V. iv. 5, 6, 7; where impossible, VI. ii. 9-12

Defects, impeding union, V. iii. 6

Desires, of death, VI. xi. 9; VII. iii. 14; generous, IV. i. 7; to serve God, better than visions, etc., VI. ix. 20, 2 i; VII. iii. 5; of suffering, VII. iii. 4; sometimes to be checked, VI. vi. 5; to see God, VI. vii. 3

Detachment, III. i. 13, ii. 7

Detraction, I. ii. 22

Devil, I. ii. 2; like a file, I. ii. 19 deceives by false favours, IV. iii. 10-13; V. ii. 8; a good painter, VI. ix. 11; unable to interfere in prayer of Union, V. i. 6.; and in intellectual visions, VI. x. i; wiles of, I. ii. 13, 18, 20; II, i. 11; IV. iii. 10; VI. i. 25

Devotion, sensible, see Sweetness in prayer

Diamond, soul likened to, I. i.2, 3

Dilatation of heart, IV. i. 5, ii. 5

Direction necessary, II. i. 18; III. ii. 18

Directors, learned and unlearned, V. i. 7; VI. i. 16-19

Distractions, in prayer, I. i. 10; IV. i. 10, 11

Dominic, St., V. iv. 4; VII. iv. 16

Dove, soul likened to, V. iii. 1; iv. I; VI. ii. I, xi. I

Drowsiness, V. i. 3, 5

Dryness, in prayer, III. i. 9, 10, 15

[p. 303]

 

Easter, trance on the feast of, VI. xi. 8.

Ecstasies, rare in Seventh Mansions, VII. iii. 10

Elias, St., VI. vii. 10; VII. iv. 16

Energy, III. ii. 10, 11

Enriquez, Dona Maria, VI. iv. 9; VII. i. 9

Entering within oneself; IV. iii. I, 3, 4

Envy, spiritual, I. i. 5

Espousals, spiritual, V. iv. 1-3; VI. ii. 1, iv. i; difference between, and matrimony, VII. ii. 2, 4

Exclamations, VII. ii. 7

Exterior works do not interfere with interior life, VII. iii. 3

 

Faculties, given to be used, IV. iii. 6; suspension of, VI. iv. 17

Faults, slight, V. iv. 6

Favours, divine, not to be disbelieved, I. i. 6.; value of; III, ii. 16, 17; how to be used, IV. iii. 9, 10; false, IV. iii. 11, 12; V. ii. 8; distinction from divine, IV. iii. 12

Fear of illusions, VI. ix. 8

Ferrer, St. Vincent, VII. iv. 16

Fervour, supernatural, VI. ii. 14; VII. iv. 14

File, devil likened to a, I. ii. 19

Fire of burning coal, God likened to, VI. ii. 6

Flight of the spirit, IV. i. 10; VI. v. I, 2, 8, 10-13

Francis, St., V. iv. 4; VI. vi. 12; VII. iv. 16

Fraternal charity, V. iii. 11, 12

Fretting under trials, III. ii. I, 2

Friendship, spiritual, II. i. 12

Fuente, Don Vicente de, VII. ii. 7

 

Gaze, the simple, VI. vii. 14

Gedeon, II. i. 13

Give all to God, V. i. 3

God compels the soul to listen when He speaks, VI. iii. 27

God's special care of souls most advanced, VII. iii. 8

Gonzalez, Giles, VII. i. 9

Gratian, Father Jerome, I. ii. 21; IV. i. 11; V. i. 9

Grief; natural and supernatural, V. ii. 11, 13, iii. 7

 

Hart, wounded, VII. iii. 12

Heathen philosophers, V. iii. 7

Hell, VI. xi. 7; fear of, lost, VI. vii. 4; torments of, milder than those of the last Judgment, VI. ix. 4

Human praise and blame alike troublesome, VI. i. 7-11

Humanity, sacred of our Lord, meditation on, VI. vii. 6-19; vision of, VI. ix. 2; VII.

Humility, effect of supernatural favours, VI. iii. 25; v. 5, ix. 9; false, I. ii. II, 12; always necessary, I. ii. 9, 10, 12; III. i. 13, 15, ii. 3, 8; IV. ii. 8; from vision of a soul in mortal sin, I. ii. 5; want of I. 15; III. ii. 12; humility and truth, VI. x. 6

Hysteria, see Melancholia

 

Ignatius of Loyola, St., V. iv. 4

Ignorance, injurious, IV. i. 9, 13; of a priest, V. i. 7, 9

Imagination, IV. i. 8-10, iii. 13; VI. i. 1; difference between it and visions, VI. ix. 5, 6; locutions proceeding from, VI. iii. 16, 17

Imitation of Christ, I. i. 8; II. i. 8; V. i. 3, iii. 3; VII. iv. 7, 12

Impulses, VI. ii. 12, xi. per totem.

[p. 304]

Incense, spiritual, IV. ii. 6; VI. ii. 14

Inebriation, spiritual, VI. iv. 18, 19, vi. 15

Insecurity, III. i. 3

Intellectual locutions, VI. iii. 19-24

Interior Castle, see Castle Isabel of Jesus, VI. xi. 8

 

Jacob, VI. iv. 6

Jerome, St., VI. ix. 4

Jesus, I. ii. 4; ever our guide, VI. vii. 7, 8; our model, I. ii. 12; His Passion, V. ii. VI. vii. 8, 9

Jewels, V. i. 2; VI. iv. 9, v. 13, ix. I.

John of Avila, Blessed, VI. ix. 11 n.

John of the Cross, St., I. i. 2, 4; IV. I, 3, iii. 3, 6; V. i. 6, 9; VI. ii. 3, 14, iii. 5, 7 sqq., iv. 21, v. 2, vii. 8, 10, viii. 3. ix. 20 xi. 4, 6; VII. i. 13, ii. 13

Jonas, prophet, V. iii. 6. 14

Jordan, river, VI. vi. 3

Josue, VI. iii. 27

Joy at seeing locutions fulfilled, VI. iii. 13

Jubilation, I. ii. 5; VI. vi. 11-1 5

Judas, V. iii. 2, iv. 5

Judgment, last, VI. ix. 4

 

Kernel of palmito, I. ii. 8

Kiss of the Bridegroom, VII. iii. 12

 

Lazarus, V. iii. 5

Leon, Fray Luis de, III. i. 3; VII. ii. 7

Liberty of spirit, I. ii. 9

Light, I. ii. 15; supernatural, VI. v. 8

Likeness of Christ, VI. ix. 11

Lizards, V. i. 5

Locutions, VI. iii. per totum; 'Be not troubled,' ib. 7; VI. iv. 21; 'It is I,' VI. iii. 8, viii. 3, 4; 'Be at peace,' VI. iii. 8; VII. ii. 2; 'To care for God's affairs,' VII. 11. I, iii. 1

Loss of highly favoured souls, IV. iii. 10

Lot's wife, I. i. 8

Love of enemies, VI. i. 12; of God, IV. i. 7; V. iii. 7, 8; of neighbour, V. iii. 7, 8

Ludolf of Saxony, VI. ix. 4

Lutherans, VII. iv. conclusion

 

Mansions, I. i. 2, 4, ii. 4, 8, 15; VII. iv. conclusion

Martha, VII. i. 14, iv. 17

Martin, St., VI. vi. 6

Mary, Blessed Virgin, our help, I. ii. 14; meditation on, VI. vii. 8; sufferings of, VII. iv. 7

Mary Magdalen, St., I. i. 5; VI. vii. 5, xi. 1 2; VII. i. 14, ii. 9, iv. i6-20

Matrimony, spiritual, VII. I, 7, ii. per totum; difference between, and Espousals, VII. ii. 2; effects of, VII. iv. 10 sqq.; in this state soul free from sin, VII. iv. 3; and confirmed in grace, VII. ii. 13

Meditation, VI. vii. 11-13

Melancholia, (hysteria), III. i 9; IV. ii. 1, 2; VI. i. 15, iii. 2, 3, vi. 7, 15

Memento, VI. iv. 14

Mendoza, Don Alvaro de, VII. iii. 4

Moses, VI. iv. 7

Mount Carmel, see Carmel

Music, VII. iii. 10

Mysteries, revealed during raptures, VI. iv. 10, 12, 13

[p. 305]

 

Noe's Ark, VII. iii. 12

Nuptials, spiritual, see Matrimony

 

Obedience, preface, p. 3 5; I. i. 1; III. i. 4, ii. 18

Obligations, of a soul enraptured, VI. v. 4; on account of intellectual visions, VI. viii. 8

Odour, supernatural, VI. ii. 14

Olive branch, VII. iii. 12

 

Padranos, Fr. Juan de, VI. viii. 3

Palace, God likened to, VI. x. 3; VII. ii. 15

Palmito, I. ii. 8

Passion of Christ, V. ii. 13; becomes the property of the soul, VI. v. 6; meditation on, VI. vii. 8, 9, 13-15

Paul, St., I. i. 5; III. i. 13; VI. vii. 5, ix. 7; VII. i. 8, ii. 6, iv. 7; (hermit) VI. v. 9

Peace, II. i. 16; following upon Spiritual Matrimony, VII. ii. 10, 13, iii. 9, 13; 'Peace be with you,' V. i. 10; VII. ii. 2

Penances, indiscreet, I. ii. 19.; too discreet, III. ii. 9

Perfection, true, I. ii. 20

Perfume, IV. ii. 6; VI. ii. 14

Perseverance, II. i. 17, 18; III. i. 1

Peter, St., III. i. 13; VI. vii. 5; VII. iv. 8

Phoenix, VI. iv. 3

Philippus a Ss. Trinitate, IV. i. 3, ii. 8, iii. 1; V. i. 8, iii. 4, iv. 3; VI. i. 18, iv. 3 sqq., v. 2, 10, vi. 11

Pictures, holy, VII. iii. 10

Pilate, VI. x. 5

Prayer, St. Teresa's writings on, Preface, p. 36; books on, I. i. 8; IV. iii. 4, 5; no difference between vocal and mental, I. i 9; talking inconsiderately to God is not prayer, I. i. 9; need of guidance in, I. ii. 7; II. i. 18; perseverance in, II. i. 19; prayer and mortification a great work, VII. iv. 22

Preparation for prayer of Union, V. ii. 4, 5

Presence, spiritual of our Lord, VI. viii. 2-6; VII. iii. 5, 7; of Saints, ib. 7; of the Blessed Trinity, VII. i. 9-13

Presence chamber, God's, VII. i. 3, 7

Prioress, advice to, IV. iii. 12; VI. iii. 2, vii. 16, viii. 11, 12

Prophecies, VI. iii. 11, 12

Purgatory, VI. xi. 6

 

Quiet, prayer of, IV. iii. 7; different from prayer of Union, V. i. 5. See also Consolations, divine

 

Raptures, VI. iv. per totum; effects of, VI. vi. i; false, IV. iii. 11; VI. iv. 22; rare in Seventh Mansion, VII. iii. 10 Recollection, prayer of, IV. iii. 1, 3, 4; different from prayer of Quiet, IV. iii. 7

Reptiles, I. i. 11, II. ii. 15; II. i. 16; IV. i. 3; VII. ii. 15, iv, 1

River of living waters, I. ii. 1, 3

 

Sacrament, Blessed, V. i. 9

Samaritan woman, VI. xi. 5

Saul, king, V. iii. 2; VI. ix. 18

Schram, Dom, VI. iii. 10; viii. 10

Search for God, VI. vii. 11

Secrecy of raptures, VI. iv. 20, 21, viii. 12

Security, III. i. 1, 2

Self-knowledge, I. ii. 9-11; IV. i.

[p. 306]

13; V. iv. 8; VI. V. 12

Senses, I, ii. 4; IV. iii. 1; VI, iv. 17

Sepulchre, V. i. 10

Sermons, V. ii. 3; VII. 10

Seville, III. ii. 10

Siena, St. Catharine of; VI. v. 2

Silkworm, likeness of, V. ii. 1-6; 5

Sin, mortal, I. ii. 1-3; committed under the very eyes of God, VI. x. 2, 3

Sinners in prison, VII. i. 4, 5

Slaves of Christ, VII. iv. 12; of our neighbour, VII. iv. 13

Sleep of the soul in prayer of Union, V. i. 3

Solitude, desire of, VI. vi. 1, 2

Solomon, III. i. 6; VII. iii. 9, IV. 4

Sorrow for sins increasing with graces, VI. vii. 1-5

Soul likened to a castle, I. i, 2; to a crystal, I. ii. 3; to a garden, I. i. 2; to a ship, VI. v. 3; dignity of, I. i. 3; a soul that does not pray is lame, I. i. 8; soul in mortal sin, I. ii. 1-5; VII. i. 4-6; the soul and its faculties, VII. i. 15, 16

Spark from the fire of God, VI. ii. 6, 7

Standstill in virtue, V. iv. 10

Struggles, interior, II. i. 9, 10

Sufferings, bodily, VI. i. 13, 14

Sun, source of light, I. ii. I, 3-5, 8

Sweetness in prayer, (sensible devotion), IV. i. 4-7, ii. 4.

 

Tears, IV. i. 4, 6; V. ii. 9; VI. vi. 6, 9

Temptations, advantages of, IV. i. 3; particularly fierce before Espousals, V. iv. 4, 7

Teresa, St., consoled by Christ, VI. v. 6; cures a melancholy nun, IV. iii. 12; desires death, VI. vii. 3; desires others to serve God better, V. iii. 2; her experience in spiritual matters, V. i. 7, iv. 4; feels no pain during ecstasies, IV. i. 11; feels presence of our Lord, VI. viii. 2-5; of the Saints, ib. 7; former mistakes, VI. vii. 18, 19; suffers from headaches, Preface, pp. 35, 36; IV. i. 10; never suffered from hysteria, IV. ii. 2; locutions, vide sub voce; has more light now than formerly, I. ii. 7; IV. i. i, ii. 6; praises God for favours bestowed on others, III. ii. 16; profits by vision of a soul in mortal sin, I. ii. 1, 2, 5, VII. i. 4; by heavenly visions, VII. i. 14; her raptures, vide sub voce; readiness to suffer, VI. xi, 10; self-disparagement, Preface, p. 37; I. ii. 7; III. i. 4, 5, 7; submits her writings to the judgment of the Church, Preface, p. 36; VII. iv. conclusion; suffers at the sight of sin, V. ii. 13; transverberation, VI. xi. 2, 4, 8; is troubled by turmoil of thoughts, IV. 18; troubles she went through, VI, i. 5-27; vi. 1, viii. 12; her visions, VI. ix. 20; VII. 1; of the Blessed Trinity, VII. i. 9 sqq; wound of love, VI. ii. 9; writings, Preface, p. 36; I. ii. 6, 7; V. iv. 12

Theriac, II. i. 16

Thomas Aquinas, St., V. i. 6; VI. v. 8

Toledo, St. Joseph's convent at, Preface, p. 36

[p. 307]

Tortoise, IV. iii. 4.

Trance, false, IV. iii. 11, 12; VI. iv. 22; at Easter, VI. xi. 8

Transverberation, VI. xi. 2, 4, 8

Tree of life, I. ii. I, 3

Trinity, Blessed, feast of, Preface, p. 36; vision of, VII. i. 9; presence of, VII. i. 9-13

Troubles preceding perfect union, VI. i. 3-20

 

Understanding, IV. i. 8

Union, prayer of; different from prayer of Quiet, V. i. 5; leads to Espousals, V. iv. 2; with vanities of the world, V. i. 6, 7; with the Will of God, V. iii. 5-8

Ursula, St., V. iv. 4

 

Velasquez, Don Alonso, VII, 13

Virtues, real and imaginary, V. iii. 9, 10

Visions, corporal, St. Teresa never saw one, VI. ix. 3; imaginary, VI. iv. 6, v. 9, ix, per totem; intellectual, VI. iv. 10, 11; v. 9; viii. per totem; x, per totum; not to be sought or wished for, VI. ix. 13-19; of a soul in mortal sin. I. ii. 2, 5

 

Watchfulness, III. i. 2; V. iv. 8, 9

Water, spiritual, I. ii, 3; IV. ii. 3, 4, 8; iii. 8; VI. v. 3; xi, 5; VII. ii. 8, 13

Wax, soul likened to, V. ii, 11, 12; wax candles, VII. ii. 5

Will of God, union with, V. iii. 4, 5; VI. xi. 5

Works, good, II. i. 20; III. i, 12, 14, ii. 1 5; V. iii. 11; VI, i. 24; VII. iv. 17-24

World, persons in the, III. i. 8, 9; ii. 4, 5

Worldliness, I. ii, i 6, 17; II. i, 7

Wound of love, VI. ii. 2-12; xi. 2-4, 10-12

 

Zeal, indiscreet, I. ii. 19, 21; III. ii. 19

Zebedee, sons of; VI, xi. 12

    


===== BOOK: tigs.txt =====


     
True Irish Ghost Stories, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

True Irish Ghost Stories

  

compiled by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L Neligan

  

Dublin, Hodges, Figgis & Co., ltd.;

  

[1914]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com May 2009, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

TO
 THREE LIVELY POLTERGEISTS
 W--, J--, AND G--,
 THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED
 BY
 THE COMPILERS

      
True Irish Ghost Stories, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xi]

  

FOREWORD

THIS book had its origin on this wise. In my Irish Witchcraft and Demonology, published in October 1913, I inserted a couple of famous 17th century ghost stories which described how lawsuits were set on foot at the instigation of most importunate spirits. It then occurred to me that as far as I knew there was no such thing in existence as a book of Irish ghost stories. Books on Irish fairy and folk-lore there were in abundance--some of which could easily be spared--but there was no book of ghosts. And so I determined to supply this sad omission.

In accordance with the immortal recipe for making hare-soup I had first to obtain my ghost stories. Where was I to get them from? For myself I knew none worth publishing, nor had I ever had any strange experiences, while I feared that my friends and acquaintances were in much the

[p. xii]

same predicament. Suddenly a brilliant thought struck me. I wrote out a letter, stating exactly what I wanted, and what I did not want, and requesting the readers of it either to forward me ghost stories, or else to put me in the way of getting them: this letter was sent to the principal Irish newspapers on October 27, and published on October 29, and following days.

I confess I was a little doubtful as to the result of my experiment, and wondered what response the people of Ireland would make to a letter which might place a considerable amount of trouble on their shoulders. My mind was speedily set at rest. On October 30, the first answers reached me. Within a fortnight I had sufficient material to make a book; within a month I had so much material that I could pick and choose--and more was promised. Further on in this preface I give a list of those persons whose contributions I have made use of, but here I should like to take the opportunity of thanking all those ladies and gentlemen throughout the length and breadth of Ireland, the majority of whom were utter strangers to me, who

[p. xiii]

went to the trouble of sitting down and writing out page after page of stories. I cannot forget their kindness, and I am only sorry that I could not make use of more of the matter that was sent to me. As one would expect, this material varied in value and extent. Some persons contributed incidents, of little use by themselves, but which worked in as helpful illustrations, while others forwarded budgets of stories, long and short. To sift the mass of matter, and bring the various portions of it into proper sequence, would have been a lengthy and difficult piece of work had I not been ably assisted by Mr. Harry L. Neligan, D.I.; but I leave it as a pleasant task to the Higher Critic to discover what portions of the book were done by him, and what should be attributed to me.

Some of the replies that reached me were sufficiently amusing. One gentleman, who carefully signed himself "Esquire," informed me that he was after "reading a great book of ghost stories, but several letters of mine failed to elicit any subsequent information. Another person offered to sell me ghost stories, while several

[p. xiv]

proffered tales that had been worked up comically. One lady addressed a card to me as follows:

"THE REVD.--

(Name and address lost of the clergyman whose letter appeared lately in Irish Times, re apparitions")

CAPPAWHITE."

As the number of clergy in the above village who deal in ghost stories is strictly limited, the Post Office succeeded in delivering it safely. I wrote at once in reply, and got a story. In a letter bearing the Dublin postmark a correspondent, veiled in anonymity, sent me a religious tract with the curt note, "Re ghost stories, will you please read this." I did so, but still fail to see the sender's point of view. Another person in a neighbouring parish declared that if I were their rector they would forthwith leave my church, and attend service elsewhere. There are many, I fear, who adopt this attitude; but it will soon become out of date.

Some of my readers may cavil at the expression, "True Ghost Stories." For myself I cannot guarantee the genuineness of a single

[p. xv]

incident in this book--how could I, as none of them are my own personal experience? This at least I can vouch for, that the majority of the stories were sent to me as first or second-hand experiences by ladies and gentlemen whose statement on an ordinary matter of fact would be accepted without question. And further, in order to prove the bona fides of this book, I make the following offer. The original letters and documents are in my custody at Donohil Rectory, and I am perfectly willing to allow any responsible person to examine them, subject to certain restrictions, these latter obviously being that names of people and places must not be divulged, for I regret to say that in very many instances my correspondents have laid this burden upon me. This is to be the more regretted, because the use of blanks, or fictitious initials, makes a story appear much less convincing than if real names had been employed.

Just one word. I can imagine some of my readers (to be numbered by the thousand, I hope) saying to themselves: "Oh! Mr. Seymour has left out some of the best stories. Did he never hear of such-and-such a

[p. xvi]

haunted house, or place?" Or, "I could relate an experience better than anything he has got." If such there be, may I beg of them to send me on their stories with all imagined speed, as they may be turned to account at some future date.

I beg to return thanks to the following for permission to make use of matter in their publications: Messrs. Sealy, Bryers, and Walker, proprietors of the New Ireland Review; the editor of the Review of Reviews; the editor of the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research; the editor of the journal of the American S.P.R.; the editor of the Occult Review, and Mr. Elliott O'Donnell; Messrs. Longmans, Green and Co., and Mrs. Andrew Lang; the editor of the Wide World Magazine; the representatives of the late Rev. Dr. Craig.

In accordance with the promise made in my letter, I have now much pleasure in giving the names of the ladies and gentle-who have contributed to, or assisted in, the compilation of this book, and as well to assure them that Mr. Neligan and I are deeply grateful to them for their kindness.

Mrs. S. Acheson, Drumsna, Co. Roscommon;

[p. xvii]

[paragraph continues] Mrs. M. Archibald, Cliftonville Road, Belfast; J. J. Burke, Esq., U.D.C., Rahoon, Galway; Capt. R. Beamish, Passage West, Co. Cork; Mrs. A. Bayly, Woodenbridge, Co. Wicklow; R. Blair, Esq., South Shields; Jas. Byrne, Esq., Castletownroche, Co. Cork; Mrs. Kearney Brooks, Killarney; H. Buchanan, Esq., Inishannon, Co. Cork; J. A. Barlow, Esq., Bray, Co. Wicklow; J. Carton, Esq., King's Inns Library, Dublin; Miss A. Cooke, Cappagh House, Co. Limerick; J. P. V. Campbell, Esq., Solicitor, Dublin; Rev. E. G. S. Crosthwait, M.A., Littleton, Thurles; J. Crowley, Esq., Munster and Leinster Bank, Cashel; Miss C. M. Doyle, Ashfield Road, Dublin; J. Ralph Dagg, Esq., Baltinglass; Gerald A. Dillon, Esq., Wicklow; Matthias and Miss Nan Fitzgerald, Cappagh House, Co. Limerick; Lord Walter Fitzgerald, Kilkea Castle; Miss Finch, Rushbrook, Co. Cork; Rev. H. R. B. Gillespie, M.A., Aghacon Rectory, Roscrea; Miss Grene, Grene Park, Co. Tipperary; L. H. Grubb, Esq., J. P., D.L., Ardmayle, Co. Tipperary; H. Keble Gelston, Esq., Letterkenny; Ven. J. A. Haydn, LL.D., Archdeacon of Limerick; Miss Dorothy Hamilton, Portarlington;

[p. xviii]

[paragraph continues] Richard Hogan, Esq., Bowman St., Limerick; Mrs. G. Kelly, Rathgar, Dublin; Miss Keefe, Carnahallia, Doon; Rev. D. B. Knox, Whitehead, Belfast; Rev. J. D. Kidd, M. A., Castlewellan; E. B. de Lacy, Esq., Marlboro' Road, Dublin; Miss K. Lloyd, Shinrone, King's Co.; Canon Lett, M.A., Aghaderg Rectory; T. MacFadden, Esq., Carrigart, Co. Donegal; Wm. Mackey, Esq., Strabane; Canon Courtenay Moore, M.A., Mitchelstown, Co. Cork; J. McCrossan, Esq., Journalist, Strabane; G. H. Miller, Esq., J.P., Edgeworthstown; Mrs. P. C. F. Magee, Dublin; Rev. R. D. Paterson, B.A., Ardmore Rectory; E. A. Phelps, Esq., Trinity College Library; Mrs. Pratt, Munster and Leinster Bank, Rathkeale; Miss Pim, Monkstown, Co. Dublin; Miss B. Parker, Passage West, Co. Cork; Henry Reay, Esq., Harold's Cross, Dublin; M. J. Ryan, Esq., Taghmon, Co. Wexford; P. Ryan, Esq., Nicker, Pallasgrean; Canon Ross-Lewin, Kilmurry, Limerick; Miss A. Russell, Elgin Road, Dublin; Lt.-Col. the Hon. F. Shore, Thomastown, Co. Kilkenny; Mrs. Seymour, Donohil Rectory; Mrs. E. L. Stritch, North Great Georges

[p. xix]

[paragraph continues] St., Dublin; M. C. R. Stritch, Esq., Belturbet; Very Rev. the Dean of St. Patrick's. D.D.; Mrs. Spratt, Thurles; W. S. Thompson, Esq., Inishannon, Co. Cork; Mrs, Thomas, Sandycove, Dublin; Mrs. Walker, Glenbeigh, Co. Kerry; Miss Wolfe, Skibbereen, Co. Cork; Mrs. E. Welsh, Nenagh; T. J. Westropp, Esq., M.A., M.R.I.A., Sandymount, Dublin; Mrs. M. A. Wilkins, Rathgar, Dublin; John Ward, Esq., Ballymote; Mrs. Wrench, Ballybrack, Co. Dublin; Miss K. E. Younge, Upper Oldtown, Rathdowney.

ST. JOHN D. SEYMOUR.

DONOHIL RECTORY,
     CAPPAWHITE, TIPPERARY,
         February 2, 1914.

      
True Irish Ghost Stories, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xx] [p. xxi]

  

CONTENTS

          I.

       HAUNTED HOUSES IN OR NEAR DUBLIN

       <page 1>

     
      II.

       HAUNTED HOUSES IN CONN'S HALF

       <page 32>

     
      III.

       HAUNTED HOUSES IN MOGH'S HALF

       <page 55>

     
      IV.

       POLTERGEISTS

       <page 100>

     
      V.

       HAUNTED PLACES

       <page 121>

     
      VI.

       APPARITIONS AT OR AFTER DEATH

       <page 146>

     
      VII.

       BANSHEES, AND OTHER DEATH-WARNINGS

       <page 175>

     
      VIII.

       MISCELLANEOUS SUPERNORMAL EXPERIENCES

       <page 198>

     
      IX.

       LEGENDARY AND ANCESTRAL GHOSTS

       <page 223>

     
      X.

       MISTAKEN IDENTITY--CONCLUSION

       <page 249>

     
       

       INDEX OF PLACE NAMES

       <page 273>

     
   
      
True Irish Ghost Stories, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

TRUE IRISH GHOST STORIES

  

CHAPTER I

  

HAUNTED HOUSES IN OR NEAR DUBLIN

OF all species of ghostly phenomena, that commonly known as "haunted houses" appeals most to the ordinary person. There is something very eerie in being shut up within the four walls of a house with a ghost. The poor human being is placed at such a disadvantage. If we know that a gateway, or road, or field has the reputation of being haunted, we can in nearly every case make a detour, and so avoid the unpleasant locality. But the presence of a ghost in a house creates a very different state of affairs. It appears and disappears at its own sweet will, with a total disregard for our feelings: it seems to be as much

[p. 2]

part and parcel of the domicile as the staircase or the hall door, and, consequently, nothing short of leaving the house or of pulling it down (both of these solutions are not always practicable) will free us absolutely from the unwelcome presence.

There is also something so natural, and at the same time so unnatural, in seeing a door open when we know that no human hand rests on the knob, or in hearing the sound of footsteps, light or heavy, and feeling that it cannot be attributed to the feet of mortal man or woman. Or perhaps a form appears in a room, standing, sitting, or walking--in fact, situated in its three dimensions apparently as an ordinary being of flesh and blood, until it proves its unearthly nature by vanishing before our astonished eyes. Or perhaps we are asleep in bed. The room is shrouded in darkness, and our recumbent attitude, together with the weight of bed-clothes, hampers our movements and probably makes us more cowardly. A man will meet pain or danger boldly if he be standing upright--occupying that erect position which is his as Lord of Creation;

[p. 3]

but his courage does not well so high if he be supine. We are awakened suddenly by the feel that some superhuman Presence is in the room. We are transfixed with terror, we cannot find either the bell-rope or the matches, while we dare not leap out of bed and make a rush for the door lest we should encounter we know not what. In an agony of fear, we feel it moving towards us; it approaches closer, and yet closer, to the bed, and--for what may or may not then happen we must refer our readers to the pages of this book.

But the sceptical reader will say: "This is all very well, but--there are no haunted houses. All these alleged strange happenings are due to a vivid imagination, or else to rats and mice." (The question of deliberate and conscious fraud may be rejected in almost every instance.) This simple solution has been put forward so often that it should infallibly have solved the problem long ago. But will such a reader explain how it is that the noise made by rats and mice can resemble slow, heavy footsteps, or else take the form of a human being seen by several persons; or how our imagination

[p. 4]

can cause doors to open and shut, or else create a conglomeration of noises which, physically, would be beyond the power of ordinary individuals to reproduce? Whatever may be the ultimate explanation, we feel that there is a great deal in the words quoted by Professor Barrett: "In spite of all reasonable scepticism, it is difficult to avoid accepting, at least provisionally, the conclusion that there are, in a certain sense, haunted houses, i.e. that there are houses in which similar quasi-human apparitions have occurred at different times to different inhabitants, under circumstances which exclude the hypothesis of suggestion or expectation."

We must now turn to the subject of this chapter. Mrs. G. Kelly, a lady well known in musical circles in Dublin, sends as her own personal experience the following tale of a most quiet haunting, in which the spectral charwoman (!) does not seem to have entirely laid aside all her mundane habits.

"My first encounter with a ghost occurred about twenty years ago. On that occasion I was standing in the kitchen of my house

[p. 5]

in -- Square, when a woman, whom I was afterwards to see many times, walked down the stairs into the room. Having heard the footsteps outside, I was not in the least perturbed, but turned to look who it was, and found myself looking at a tall, stout, elderly woman, wearing a bonnet and old-fashioned mantle. She had grey hair, and a benign and amiable expression. We stood gazing at each other while one could count twenty. At first I was not at all frightened, but gradually as I stood looking at her an uncomfortable feeling, increasing to terror, came over me. This caused me to retreat farther and farther back, until I had my back against the wall, and then the apparition slowly faded.

"This feeling of terror, due perhaps to the unexpectedness of her appearance, always overcame me on the subsequent occasions on which I saw her. These occasions numbered twelve or fifteen, and I have seen her in every room in the house, and at every hour of the day, during a period of about ten years. The last time she appeared was ten years ago. My husband and I had just returned from a concert at which he

[p. 6]

had been singing, and we sat for some time over supper, talking about the events of the evening. When at last I rose to leave the room, and opened the dining-room door, I found my old lady standing on the mat outside with her head bent towards the door in the attitude of listening. I called out loudly, and my husband rushed to my side. That was the last time I have seen her."

"One peculiarity of this spectral visitant was a strong objection to disorder or untidyness of any kind, or even to an alteration in the general routine of the house. For instance, she showed her disapproval of any stranger coming to sleep by turning the chairs face downwards on the floor in the room they were to occupy. I well remember one of our guests, having gone to his room one evening for something he had forgotten, remarking on coming downstairs again, 'Well, you people have an extraordinary manner of arranging your furniture! I have nearly broken my bones over one of the bedroom chairs which was turned down on the floor.' As my husband and I had restored that chair twice already to

[p. 7]

its proper position during the day, we were not much surprised at his remarks, although we did not enlighten him. The whole family have been disturbed by a peculiar knocking which occurred in various rooms in the house, frequently on the door or wall, but sometimes on the furniture, quite close to where we had been sitting. This was evidently loud enough to be heard in the next house, for our next-door neighbour once asked my husband why he selected such curious hours for hanging his pictures. Another strange and fairly frequent occurrence was the following. I had got a set of skunk furs which I fancied had an unpleasant odour, as this fur sometimes has; and at night I used to take it from my wardrobe and lay it on a chair in the drawing-room, which was next my bedroom. The first time that I did this, on going to the drawing-room I found, to my surprise, my muff in one corner and my stole in another. Not for a moment suspecting a supernatural agent, I asked my servant about it, and she assured me that she had not been in the room that morning. Whereupon I determined to test the matter, which I did

[p. 8]

by putting in the furs late at night, and taking care that I was the first to enter the room in the morning. I invariably found that they had been disturbed."

The following strange and pathetic incident occurred in a well-known Square in the north side of the city. In or about a hundred years ago a young officer was ordered to Dublin, and took a house there for himself and his family. He sent on his wife and two children, intending to join them in the course of a few days. When the latter and the nurse arrived, they found only the old charwoman in the house, and she left shortly after their arrival. Finding that something was needed, the nurse went out to purchase it. On her return she asked the mother were the children all right, as she had seen two ghostly forms flit past her on the door-step! The mother answered that she believed they were, but on going up to the nursery they found both the children with their throats cut. The murderer was never brought to justice, and no motive was ever discovered for the crime. The unfortunate mother went mad, and it is said that an eerie feeling still clings to

[p. 9]

the house, while two little heads are sometimes seen at the window of the room where the deed was committed.

A most weird experience fell to the lot of Major Macgregor, and was contributed by him to Real Ghost Stories, the celebrated Christmas number of the Review of Reviews. He says: "In the end of 1871 I went over to Ireland to visit a relative living in a Square in the north side of Dublin. In January 1872 the husband of my relative fell ill. I sat up with him for several nights, and at last, as he seemed better, I went to bed, and directed the footman to call me if anything went wrong. I soon fell asleep, but some time after was awakened by a push on the left shoulder. I started up, and said, 'Is there anything wrong?' I got no answer, but immediately received another push. I got annoyed, and said 'Can you not speak, man! and tell me if there is anything wrong?' Still no answer, and I had a feeling I was going to get another push when I suddenly turned round and caught a human hand, warm, plump, and soft. I said, 'Who are you?' but I got no answer. I then tried to pull the person

[p. 10]

towards me, but could not do so. I then said, 'I will know who you are!' and having the hand tight in my right hand, with my left I felt the wrist and arm, enclosed, as it seemed to me, in a tight-fitting sleeve of some winter material with a linen cuff; but when I got to the elbow all trace of an arm ceased. I was so astounded that I let the hand go, and just then the clock struck two. Including the mistress of the house, there were five females in the establishment, and I can assert that the hand belonged to none of them. When I reported the adventure, the servants exclaimed, 'Oh, it must have been the master's old Aunt Betty, who lived for many years in the upper part of that house, and had died over fifty years before at a great age.' I afterwards heard that the room in which I felt the hand had been considered haunted, and very curious noises and peculiar incidents occurred, such as the bed-clothes torn off, &c. One lady got a slap in the face from some invisible hand, and when she lit her candle she saw as if something opaque fell or jumped off the bed. A general officer, a brother of the lady, slept there two nights, but preferred

[p. 11]

going to a hotel to remaining the third night. He never would say what he heard or saw, but always said the room was uncanny. I slept for months in the room afterwards, and was never in the least disturbed."

A truly terrifying sight was witnessed by a clergyman in a school-house a good many years ago. This cleric was curate of a Dublin parish, but resided with his parents some distance out of town in the direction of Malahide. It not infrequently happened that he had to hold meetings in the evenings, and on such occasions, as his home was so far away, and as the modern convenience of tramcars was not then known, he used to sleep in the schoolroom, a large bare room, where the meetings were held. He had made a sleeping-apartment for himself by placing a pole across one end of the room, on which he had rigged up two curtains which, when drawn together, met in the middle. One night he had been holding some meeting, and when everybody had left he locked up the empty schoolhouse, and went to bed. It was a bright moonlight night, and every object

[p. 12]

could be seen perfectly clearly. Scarcely had he got into bed when he became conscious of some invisible presence. Then he saw the curtains agitated at one end, as if hands were grasping them on the outside. In an agony of terror he watched these hands groping along outside the curtains till they reached the middle. The curtains were then drawn a little apart, and a Face peered in--an awful, evil Face, with an expression of wickedness and hate upon it which no words could describe. It looked at him for a few moments, then drew back again, and the curtains closed. The clergyman had sufficient courage left to leap out of bed and make a thorough examination of the room, but, as he expected, he found no one. He dressed himself as quickly as possible, walked home, and never again slept a night in that schoolroom.

The following tale, sent by Mr. E. B. de Lacy, contains a most extraordinary and unsatisfactory element of mystery. He says: "When I was a boy I lived in the suburbs, and used to come in every morning to school in the city. My way lay through a certain street in which stood a very dismal semi-detached

[p. 13]

house, which, I might say, was closed up regularly about every six months. I would see new tenants coming into it, and then in a few months it would be 'To let' again. This went on for eight or nine years, and I often wondered what was the reason. On inquiring one day from a friend, I was told that it had the reputation of being haunted.

"A few years later I entered business in a certain office, and one day it fell to my lot to have to call on the lady who at that particular period was the tenant of the haunted house. When we had transacted our business she informed me that she was about to leave. Knowing the reputation of the house, and being desirous of investigating a ghost-story, I asked her if she would give me the history of the house as far as she knew it, which she very kindly did as follows:

"About forty years ago the house was left by will to a gentleman named --. He lived in it for a short time, when he suddenly went mad, and had to be put in an asylum. Upon this his agents let the house to a lady. Apparently nothing unusual

[p. 14]

happened for some time, but a few months later, as she went down one morning to a room behind the kitchen, she found the cook hanging by a rope attached to a hook in the ceiling. After the inquest the lady gave up the house.

"It was then closed up for some time, but was again advertised 'To let,' and a caretaker, a woman, was put into it. One night about one o'clock, a constable going his rounds heard some one calling for help from the house, and found the caretaker on the sill of one of the windows holding on as best she could. He told her to go in and open the hall door and let him in, but she refused to enter the room again. He forced open the door and succeeded in dragging the woman back into the room, only to find she had gone mad.

"Again the house was shut up, and again it was let, this time to a lady, on a five-years' lease. However, after a few months' residence, she locked it up, and went away. On her friends asking her why she did so, she replied that she would rather pay the whole five years' rent than live in it herself, or allow anyone

[p. 15]

else to do so, but would give no other reason.

"'I believe I was the next person to take this house,' said the lady who narrated the story to me (i.e. Mr. de Lacy). 'I took it about eighteen months ago on a three years' lease in the hopes of making money by taking in hoarders, but I am now giving it up because none of them will stay more than a week or two. They do not give any definite reason as to why they are leaving; they are careful to state that it is not because they have any fault to find with me or my domestic arrangements, but they merely say they do not like the rooms! The rooms themselves, as you can see, are good, spacious, and well lighted. I have had all classes of professional men; one of the last was a barrister, and he said that he had no fault to find except that he did not like the rooms! I myself do not believe in ghosts, and I have never seen anything strange here or elsewhere; and if I had known the house had the reputation of being haunted, I would never have rented it."

Marsh's library, that quaint, old-world repository of ponderous tomes, is reputed to

[p. 16]

be haunted by the ghost of its founder, Primate Narcissus Marsh. He is said to frequent the inner gallery, which contains what was formerly his own private library: he moves in and out among the cases, taking down books from the shelves, and occasionally throwing them down on the reader's desk as if in anger. However, he always leaves things in perfect order. The late Mr. --, who for some years lived in the librarian's rooms underneath, was a firm believer in this ghost, and said he frequently heard noises which could only be accounted for by the presence of a nocturnal visitor; the present tenant is more sceptical. The story goes that Marsh's niece eloped from the Palace, and was married in a tavern to the curate of Chapelizod. She is reported to have written a note consenting to the elopement, and to have then placed it in one of her uncle's books to which her lover had access, and where he found it. As a punishment for his lack of vigilance, the Archbishop is said to be condemned to hunt for the note until he find it--hence the ghost.

The ghost of a deceased Canon was seen

[p. 17]

in one of the Dublin cathedrals by several. independent witnesses, one of whom, a lady, gives her own experience as follows: "Canon -- was a personal friend of mine, and we had many times discussed ghosts and spiritualism, in which he was a profound believer, having had many supernatural experiences himself. It was during the Sunday morning service in the cathedral that I saw my friend, who had been dead for two years, sitting inside the communion-rails. I was so much astonished at the flesh-and blood appearance of the figure that I took off my glasses and wiped them with my handkerchief, at the same time looking away from him down the church. On looking back again he was still there, and continued to sit there for about ten or twelve minutes, after which he faded away. I remarked a change in his personal appearance, which was, that his beard was longer and whiter than when I had known him--in fact, such a change as would have occurred in life in the space of two years. Having told my husband of the occurrence on our way home, he remembered having heard some talk of an appearance of this clergyman in the

[p. 18]

cathedral since his death. He hurried back to the afternoon service, and asked the robestress if anybody had seen Canon --'s ghost. She informed him that she had, and that he had also been seen by one of the sextons in the cathedral. I mention this because in describing his personal appearance she had remarked the same change as I had with regard to the beard."

Some years ago a family had very uncanny experiences in a house in Rathgar, and subsequently in another in Rathmines. These were communicated by one of the young ladies to Mrs. M. A. Wilkins, who published them in the Journal of the American S.P.R., [*1] from which they are here taken. The Rathgar house had a basement passage leading to a door into the yard, and along this passage her mother and the children used to hear dragging, limping steps, and the latch of the door rattling, but no one could ever be found when search was made. The house-bells were old and all in a row, and on one occasion they all rang, apparently of their own accord. The lady narrator used to sleep in the back drawing room, and

[p. 19]

always when the light was put out she heard strange noises, as if some one was going round the room rubbing paper along the wall, while she often had the feeling that a person was standing beside her bed. A cousin, who was a nurse, once slept with her, and also noticed these strange noises. On one occasion this room was given up to a very matter-of-fact young man to sleep in, and next morning he said that the room was very strange, with queer noises in it.

Her mother also had an extraordinary experience in the same house. One evening she had just put the baby to bed, when she heard a voice calling "mother." She left the bedroom, and called to her daughter, who was in a lower room, "What do you want?" But the girl replied that she had not called her; and then, in her turn, asked her mother if she had been in the front room, for she had just heard a noise as if some one was trying to fasten the inside bars of the shutters across. But her mother had been upstairs, and no one was in the front room. The experiences in the Rathmines house were of a similar auditory nature, i.e. the young ladies heard their names called,

[p. 20]

though it was found that no one in the house had done so.

Occasionally it happens that ghosts inspire a law-suit. In the seventeenth century they were to be found actively urging the adoption of legal proceedings, but in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries they play a more passive part. A case about a haunted house took place in Dublin in the year 1885, in which the ghost may be said to have won. A Mr. Waldron, a solicitor's clerk, sued his next-door neighbour, one Mr. Kiernan, a mate in the merchant service, to recover L500 for damages done to his house.

Kiernan altogether denied the charges, but asserted that Waldron's house was notoriously haunted. Witnesses proved that every night, from August 1884 to January 1885, stones were thrown at the windows and doors, and extraordinary and inexplicable occurrences constantly took place.

Mrs. Waldron, wife of the plaintiff, swore that one night she saw one of the panes of glass of a certain window cut through with a diamond, and a white hand inserted through the hole. She at once caught up

[p. 21]

a bill-hook and aimed a blow at the hand, cutting off one of the fingers. This finger could not be found, nor were any traces of blood seen.

A servant of hers was sorely persecuted by noises and the sound of footsteps. Mr. Waldron, with the aid of detectives and policemen, endeavoured to find out the cause, but with no success. The witnesses in the case were closely cross-examined, but without shaking their testimony. The facts appeared to be proved, so the jury found for Kiernan, the defendant. At least twenty persons had testified on oath to the fact that the house had been known to have been haunted. [*1]

Before leaving the city and its immediate surroundings, we must relate the story of an extraordinary ghost, somewhat lacking in good manners, yet not without a certain distorted sense of humour. Absolutely incredible though the tale may seem, yet it comes on very good authority. It was related to our informant, Mr. D., by a Mrs. C., whose daughter he had employed as governess. Mrs. C., who is described as

[p. 22]

[paragraph continues] "a woman of respectable position and good education," heard it in her turn from her father and mother. In the story the relationship of the different persons seems a little involved, but it would appear that the initial A belongs to the surname both of Mrs. C.'s father and grandfather.

This ghost was commonly called "Corney" by the family, and he answered to this though it was not his proper name. He disclosed this latter to Mr. C.'s mother, who forgot it. Corney made his presence manifest to the A-- family shortly after they had gone to reside in Street in the following manner. Mr. A-- had sprained his knee badly, and had to use a crutch, which at night was left at the head of his bed. One night his wife heard some one walking on the lobby, thump, thump, thump, as if imitating Mr. A--. She struck a match to see if the crutch had been removed from the head of the bed, but it was still there.

From that on Corney commenced to talk, and he spoke every day from his usual habitat, the coal-cellar off the kitchen. His voice sounded as if it came out of an empty barrel.

[p. 23]

He was very troublesome, and continually played practical jokes on the servants, who, as might be expected, were in terror of their lives of him; so much so that Mrs. A-- could hardly induce them to stay with her. They used to sleep in a press-bed in the kitchen, and in order to get away from Corney, they asked for a room at the top of the house, which was given to them. Accordingly the press-bed was moved up there. The first night they went to retire to bed after the change, the doors of the press were flung open, and Corney's voice said, "Ha! ha! you devils, I am here before you! I am not confined to any particular part of this house."

Corney was continually tampering with the doors, and straining locks and keys, He only manifested himself in material form to two persons; to --, who died with the fright, and to Mr. A-- (Mrs. C.'s father) when he was about seven years old. The latter described him to his mother as a naked man, with a curl on his forehead, and a skin like a clothes-horse (!).

One day a servant was preparing fish for dinner. She laid it on the kitchen table

[p. 24]

while she went elsewhere for something she wanted. When she returned the fish had disappeared. She thereupon began to cry, fearing she would be accused of making away with it. The next thing she heard was the voice of Corney from the coal-cellar saying, "There, you blubbering fool, is your fish for you!" and, suiting the action to the word, the fish was thrown out on the kitchen floor.

Relatives from the country used to bring presents of vegetables, and these were often hung up by Corney like Christmas decorations round the kitchen. There was one particular press in the kitchen he would not allow anything into. He would throw it out again. A crock with meat in pickle was put into it, and a fish placed on the cover of the crock. He threw the fish out.

Silver teaspoons were missing, and no account of them could be got until Mrs. A-- asked Corney to confess if he had done anything with them. He said, "They are under the ticking in the servants' bed." He had, so he said, a daughter in -- Street, and sometimes announced that he was going to see her, and would not be here to-night.

[p. 25]

On one occasion he announced that he was going to have "company" that evening, and if they wanted any water out of the soft-water tank, to take it before going to bed, as he and his friends would be using it. Subsequently that night five or six distinct voices were heard, and next morning the water in the tank was as black as ink, and not alone that, but the bread and butter in the pantry were streaked with the marks of sooty fingers.

A clergyman in the locality, having heard of the doings of Corney, called to investigate the matter. He was advised by Mrs. A-- to keep quiet, and not to reveal his identity, as being the best chance of hearing Corney speak. He waited a long time, and as the capricious Corney remained silent, he left at length. The servants asked, "Corney, why did you not speak?" and he replied, "I could not speak while that good man was in the house." The servants sometimes used to ask him where he was. He would reply, "The Great God would not permit me to tell you. I was a bad man, and I died the death." He named the room in the house in which he died.

[p. 26]

Corney constantly joined in any conversation carried on by the people of the house. One could never tell when a voice from the coal-cellar would erupt into the dialogue. He had his likes and dislikes: he appeared to dislike anyone that was not afraid of him, and would not talk to them. Mrs. C.'s mother, however, used to get good of him by coaxing. An uncle, having failed to get him to speak one night, took the kitchen poker, and hammered at the door of the coal-cellar, (saying, "I'll make you speak"; but Corney wouldn't. Next morning the poker was found broken in two. This uncle used to wear spectacles, and Corney used to call him derisively, "Four-eyes." An uncle named Richard came to sleep one night, and complained in the morning that the clothes were pulled off him. Corney told the servants in great glee, "I slept on Master Richard's feet all night."

Finally Mr. A-- made several attempts to dispose of his lease, but with no success, for when intending purchasers were being shown over the house and arrived at Corney's domain, the spirit would begin to speak and the would-be purchaser would fly. They

[p. 27]

asked him if they changed house would he trouble them. He replied, "No! but if they throw down this house, I will trouble the stones."

At last Mrs. A-- appealed to him to keep quiet, and not to injure people who had never injured him. He promised that he would do so, and then said, "Mrs. A--, you will be all right now, for I see a lady in black coming up the street to this house, and she will buy it." Within half an hour a widow called and purchased the house. Possibly Corney is still there, for our informant looked up the Directory as he was writing, and found the house marked "Vacant."

Near Blanchardstown, Co. Dublin, is a house, occupied at present, or up to very recently, by a private family; it was formerly a monastery, and there are said to be secret passages in it. Once a servant ironing in the kitchen saw the figure of a nun approach the kitchen window and look in. Our informant was also told by a friend (now dead), who had it from the lady of the house, that once night falls, no doors can be kept closed. If anyone shuts them, almost immediately they are flung open again with the greatest

[p. 28]

violence and apparent anger. If left open there is no trouble or noise, but light footsteps are heard, and there is a vague feeling of people passing to and fro. The persons inhabiting the house are matter-of-fact, unimaginative people, who speak of this as if it were an everyday affair. "So long as we leave the doors unclosed they don't harm us: why should we be afraid of them?" Mrs. -- said. Truly a most philosophical attitude to adopt!

A haunted house in Kingstown, Co. Dublin, was investigated by Professor W. Barrett and Professor Henry Sidgwick. The story is singularly well attested (as one might expect from its being inserted in the pages of the Proceedings S.P.R. [*1]), as the apparition was seen on three distinct occasions, and by three separate persons who were all personally known to the above gentlemen. The house in which the following occurrences took place is described as being a very old one, with unusually thick walls. The lady saw her strange visitant in her bedroom. She says: "Disliking cross-lights, I had got into the habit

[p. 29]

of having the blind of the back window drawn and the shutters closed at night, and of leaving the blind raised and the shutters opened towards the front, liking to see the trees and sky when I awakened. Opening my eyes now one morning, I saw right before me (this occurred in July 1873) the figure of a woman, stooping down and apparently looking at me. Her head and shoulders were wrapped in a common woollen shawl; her arms were folded, and they were also wrapped, as if for warmth, in the shawl. I looked at her in my horror, and dared not cry out lest I might move the awful thing to speech or action. Behind her head I saw the window and the growing dawn, the looking-glass upon the toilet-table, and the furniture in that part of the room. After what may have been only seconds--of the duration of this vision I cannot judge--she raised herself and went backwards towards the window, stood at the toilet-table, and gradually vanished. I mean she grew by degrees transparent, and that through the shawl and the grey dress she wore I saw the white muslin of the table-cover again, and at last saw that only in the

[p. 30]

place where she had stood." The lady lay motionless with terror until the servant came to call her. The only other occupants of the house at the time were her brother and the servant, to neither of whom did she make any mention of the circumstance, fearing that the former would laugh at her, and the latter give notice.

Exactly a fortnight later, when sitting at breakfast, she noticed that her brother seemed out of sorts, and did not eat. On asking him if anything were the matter, he answered, "I have had a horrid nightmare--indeed it was no nightmare: I saw it early this morning, just as distinctly as I see you." "What?" she asked. "A villainous-looking hag," he replied, with her head and arms wrapped in a cloak, stooping over me, and looking like this--" He got up, folded his arms, and put himself in the exact posture of the vision. Whereupon she informed him of what she herself had seen a fortnight previously.

About four years later, in the same month, the lady's married sister and two children were alone in the house. The eldest child, a boy of about four or five years, asked for

[p. 31]

a drink, and his mother went to fetch it, desiring him to remain in the dining-room until her return. Coming back she met the boy pale and trembling, and on asking him why he left the room, he replied, "Who is that woman--who is that woman?" "Where?" she asked. "That old woman who went upstairs," he replied. So agitated was he, that she took him by the hand and went upstairs to search, but no one was to be found, though he still maintained that a woman went upstairs. A friend of the family subsequently told them that a woman had been killed in the house many years previously, and that it was reported to be haunted.

Footnotes

^18:1 For September 1913.

^21:1 See Sights and Shadows, p. 42 ff.

^28:1 July 1884, p. 141.

      
True Irish Ghost Stories, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 32]

  

CHAPTER II

  

HAUNTED HOUSES IN CONN'S HALF

FROM a very early period a division of Ireland into two "halves" existed. This was traditionally believed to have been made by Conn the Hundred-fighter and Mogh Nuadat, in A.D. 166. The north was in consequence known as Conn's Half, the south as Mogh's Half, the line of division being a series of gravel hills extending from Dublin to Galway. This division we have followed, except that we have included the whole of the counties of West Meath and Galway in the northern portion. We had hoped originally to have had four chapters on Haunted Houses, one for each of the four provinces, but, for lack of material from Connaught, we have been forced to adopt the plan on which Chapters I--III are arranged.

Mrs. Acheson, of Co. Roscommon, sends the following: "Emo House, Co. Westmeath,

[p. 33]

a very old mansion since pulled down, was purchased by my grandfather for his son, my father. The latter had only been living in it for a few days when knocking commenced at the hall door. Naturally he thought it was someone playing tricks, or endeavouring to frighten him away. One night he had the lobby window open directly over the door. The knocking commenced, and he looked out: it was a very bright night, and as there was no porch he could see the door distinctly; the knocking continued, but he did not see the knocker move. Another night he sat up expecting his brother, but as the latter did not come he went to bed. Finally the knocking became so loud and insistent that he felt sure his brother must have arrived. He went downstairs and opened the door, but no one was there. Still convinced that his brother was there and had gone round to the yard to put up his horse, he went out; but scarcely had he gone twenty yards from the door when the knocking recommenced behind his back. On turning round he could see no one."

"After this the knocking got very bad,

[p. 34]

so much so that he could not rest. All this time he did not mention the strange occurrence to anyone. One morning he went up through the fields between four and five o'clock. To his surprise he found the herd out feeding the cattle. My father asked him why he was up so early. He replied that he could not sleep. 'Why?' asked my father. 'You know why yourself, sir --the knocking.' He then found that this man had heard it all the time, though he slept at the end of a long house. My father was advised to take no notice of it, for it would go as it came, though at this time it was continuous and very loud; and so it did. The country people said it was the late resident who could not rest."

"We had another curious and most eerie experience in this house. A former rector was staying the night with us, and as the evening wore on we commenced to tell ghost-stories. He related some remarkable experiences, and as we were talking the drawing-room door suddenly opened as wide as possible, and then slowly closed again. It was a calm night, and at any rate it was a heavy double door which never flies open

[p. 35]

however strong the wind may be blowing. Everyone in the house was in bed, as it was after 12 o'clock, except the three persons who witnessed this, viz. myself, my daughter, and the rector. The effect on the latter was most marked. He was a big, strong, jovial man and a good athlete, but when he saw the door open he quivered like an aspen leaf."

A strange story of a haunting, in which nothing was seen, but in which the same noises were heard by different people, is sent by one of the percipients, who does not wish to have her name disclosed. She says: "When staying for a time in a country house in the North of Ireland some years ago I was awakened on several nights by hearing the tramp, tramp, of horses' hoofs. Sometimes it sounded as if they were walking on paving-stones, while at other times I had the impression that they were going round a large space, and as if someone was using a whip on them. I heard neighing, and champing of bits, and so formed the impression that they were carriage horses. I did not mind it much at first, as I thought the stables must be

[p. 36]

near that part of the house. After hearing these noises several times I began to get curious, so one morning I made a tour of the place. I found that the side of the house I occupied overlooked a neglected garden, which was mostly used for drying clothes. I also discovered that the stables were right at the back of the house, and so it would be impossible for me to hear any noises in that quarter; at any rate there was only one farm horse left, and this was securely fastened up every night. Also there were no cobble-stones round the yard. I mentioned what I had heard to the people of the house, but as they would give me no satisfactory reply I passed it over. I did not hear these noises every night."

"One night I was startled out of my sleep by hearing a dreadful disturbance in the kitchen. It sounded as if the dish-covers were being taken off the wall and dashed violently on the flagged floor. At length I got up and opened the door of my bedroom, and just as I did so an appalling crash resounded through the house. I waited to see if there was any light to be seen, or footstep to be heard, but nobody

[p. 37]

was stirring. There was only one servant in the house, the other persons being my host, his wife, and a baby, who had all retired early. Next morning I described the noises in the kitchen to the servant, and she said she had often heard them. I then told her about the tramping of horses: she replied that she herself had never heard it, but that other persons who had occupied my room had had experiences similar to mine. I asked her was there any explanation; she said No, except that a story was told of a gentleman who had lived there some years ago, and was very much addicted to racing and gambling, and that he was shot one night in that house. For the remainder of my visit I was removed to another part of the house, and I heard no more noises."

A house in the North of Ireland, near that locality which is eternally famous as having furnished the material for the last trial for witchcraft in the country, is said to be haunted, the reason being that it is built on the site of a disused and very ancient graveyard. It is said that when some repairs were being carried out nine human skulls

[p. 38]

were unearthed. It would be interesting to ascertain how many houses in Ireland are traditionally said to be built on such unpleasant sites, and if they all bear the reputation of being haunted. The present writer knows of one, in the South, which is so situated (and this is supported, to a certain extent, by documentary evidence from the thirteenth century down) and which in consequence has an uncanny reputation. But concerning the above house it has been found almost impossible to get any information. It is said that strange noises were frequently heard there, which sometimes seemed as if cartloads of stones were being run down one of the gables. On one occasion an inmate of the house lay dying upstairs. A friend went up to see the sick person, and on proceeding to pass through the bedroom door was pressed and jostled as if by some unseen person hurriedly leaving the room. On entering, it was found that the sick person had just passed away.

An account of a most unpleasant haunting is contributed by Mr. W. S. Thompson, who vouches for the substantial accuracy of it, and also furnishes the names of two men,

[p. 39]

still living, who attended the "station." We give it as it stands, with the comment that some of the details seem to have been grossly exaggerated by local raconteurs. In the year 1869 a ghost made its presence manifest in the house of a Mr. M-- in Co. Cavan. In the daytime it resided in the chimney, but at night it left its quarters and subjected the family to considerable annoyance. During the day they could cook nothing, as showers of soot would be sent down the chimney on top of every pot and pan that was placed on the fire. At night the various members of the family would be dragged out of bed by the hair, and pulled around the house. When anyone ventured to light a lamp it would immediately be put out, while chairs and tables would be sent dancing round the room. At last matters reached such a pitch that the family found it impossible to remain any longer in the house. The night before they left Mrs. M-- was severely handled, and her boots left facing the door as a gentle hint for her to be off. Before they departed some of the neighbours went to the house, saw the ghost, and even described to Mr.

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] Thompson what they had seen. According to one man it appeared in the shape of a human being with a pig's head with long tusks. Another described it as a horse with an elephant's head, and a headless man seated on its back. Finally a "station" was held at the house by seven priests, at which all the neighbours attended. The station commenced after sunset, and everything in the house had to be uncovered, lest the evil spirit should find any resting-place. A free passage was left out of the door into the street, where many people were kneeling. About five minutes after the station opened a rumbling noise was heard, and a black barrel rolled out with an unearthly din, though to some coming up the street it appeared in the shape of a black horse with a bull's head, and a headless man seated thereon. From this time the ghost gave no further trouble.

The same gentleman also sends an account of a haunted shop in which members of his family had some very unpleasant experiences. "In October 1882 my father, William Thompson, took over the grocery and spirit business from a Dr. S-- to whom it had

[p. 41]

been left by will. My sister was put in charge of the business, and she slept on the premises at night, but she was not there by herself very long until she found things amiss. The third night matters were made so unpleasant for her that she had to get up out of bed more dead than alive, and go across the street to Mrs. M--, the servant at the R.I.C. barrack, with whom she remained until the morning. She stated that as she lay in bed, half awake and half asleep, she saw a man enter the room, who immediately seized her by the throat and well-nigh choked her. She had only sufficient strength left to gasp 'Lord, save me!' when instantly the man vanished. She also said that she heard noises as if every bottle and glass in the shop was smashed to atoms, yet in the morning everything would be found intact. My brother was in charge of the shop one day, as my sister had to go to Belturbet to do some Christmas shopping. He expected her to return to the shop that night, but as she did not do so he was preparing to go to bed about 1 A.M., when suddenly a terrible noise was heard. The light was extinguished, and the tables and

[p. 42]

chairs commenced to dance about the floor, and some of them struck him on the shins. Upon this he left the house, declaring that he had seen the Devil!" Possibly this ghost had been a rabid teetotaller in the flesh, and continued to have a dislike to the publican's trade after he had become discarnate. At any rate the present occupants, who follow a different avocation, do not appear to be troubled.

Ghosts are no respecters of persons or places, and take up their quarters where they are least expected. One can hardly imagine them entering a R.I.C. barrack, and annoying the stalwart inmates thereof. Yet more than one tale of a haunted police-barrack has been sent to us--nay, in its proper place we shall relate the appearance of a deceased member of the "Force," uniform and all! The following personal experiences are contributed by an ex-R.I.C. constable, who requested that all names should be suppressed. "The barrack of which I am about to speak has now disappeared, owing to the construction of a new railway line. It was a three-storey house, with large airy apartments and splendid

[p. 43]

accommodation. This particular night I was on guard. After the constables had retired to their quarters I took my palliasse downstairs to the day-room, and laid it on two forms alongside two six-foot tables which were placed end to end in the centre of the room."

"As I expected a patrol in at midnight, and as another had to be sent out when it arrived, I didn't promise myself a very restful night, so I threw myself on the bed, intending to read a bit, as there was a large lamp on the table. Scarcely had I commenced to read when I felt as if I was being pushed off the bed. At first I thought I must have fallen asleep, so to make sure, I got up, took a few turns around the room, and then deliberately lay down again and took up my book. Scarcely had I done so, when the same thing happened, and, though I resisted with all my strength, I was finally landed on the floor. My bed was close to the table, and the pushing came from that side, so that if anyone was playing a trick on me they could not do so without being under the table: I looked, but there was no visible presence there. I felt shaky, but

[p. 44]

changed my couch to another part of the room, and had no further unpleasant experience. Many times after I was 'guard' in the same room, but I always took care not to place my couch in that particular spot."

"One night, long afterwards, we were all asleep in the dormitory, when we were awakened in the small hours of the morning by the guard rushing upstairs, dashing through the room, and jumping into a bed in the farthest corner behind its occupant. There he lay gasping, unable to speak for several minutes, and even then we couldn't get a coherent account of what befel him. It appears he fell asleep, and suddenly awoke to find himself on the floor, and a body rolling over him. Several men volunteered to go downstairs with him, but he absolutely refused to leave the dormitory, and stayed there till morning. Nor would he even remain downstairs at night without having a comrade with him. It ended in his applying for an exchange of stations."

"Another time I returned off duty at midnight, and after my comrade, a married Sergeant, had gone outside to his quarters I went to the kitchen to change my boots.

[p. 45]

[paragraph continues] There was a good fire on, and it looked so comfortable that I remained toasting my toes on the hob, and enjoying my pipe. The lock-up was a lean-to one-storey building off the kitchen, and was divided into two cells, one opening into the kitchen, the other into that cell. I was smoking away quietly when I suddenly heard inside the lock-up a dull, heavy thud, just like the noise a drunken man would make by crashing down on all-fours. I wondered who the prisoner could be, as I didn't see anyone that night who seemed a likely candidate for free lodgings. However as I heard no other sound I decided I would tell the guard in order that he might look after him. As I took my candle from the table I happened to glance at the lock-up, and, to my surprise, I saw that the outer door was open. My curiosity being roused, I looked inside, to find the inner door also open. There was nothing in either cell, except the two empty plank-beds, and these were immovable as they were firmly fixed to the walls. I betook myself to my bedroom much quicker than I was in the habit of doing."

[p. 46]

"I mentioned that this barrack was demolished owing to the construction of a new railway line. It was the last obstacle removed, and in the meantime workmen came from all points of the compass. One day a powerful navvy was brought into the barrack a total collapse from drink, and absolutely helpless. After his neckwear was loosened he was carried to the lock-up and laid on the plank-bed, the guard being instructed to visit him periodically, lest he should smother. He was scarcely half an hour there--this was in the early evening--when the most unmerciful screaming brought all hands to the lock-up, to find the erstwhile helpless man standing on the plank-bed, and grappling with a, to us, invisible foe. We took him out, and he maintained that a man had tried to choke him, and was still there when we came to his relief. The strange thing was, that he was shivering with fright, and perfectly sober, though in the ordinary course of events he would not be in that condition for at least seven or eight hours. The story spread like wildfire through the town, but the inhabitants were not in the least surprised, and one old man

[p. 47]

told us that many strange things happened in that house long before it became a police-barrack."

A lady, who requests that her name be suppressed, relates a strange sight seen by her sister in Galway. The latter's husband was stationed in that town about seventeen years ago. One afternoon he was out, and she was lying on a sofa in the drawing-room, when suddenly from behind a screen (where there was no door) came a little old woman, with a small shawl over her head and shoulders, such as the country women used to wear. She had a most diabolical expression on her face. She seized the lady by the hand, and said: "I will drag you down to Hell, where I am!" The lady sprang up in terror and shook her off, when the horrible creature again disappeared behind the screen. The house was an old one, and many stories were rife amongst the people about it, the one most to the point being that the apparition of an old woman, who was supposed to have poisoned someone, used to be seen therein. Needless to say, the lady in question never again sat by herself in the drawing-room.

[p. 48]

Two stories are told about haunted houses at Drogheda, the one by A. G. Bradley in Notes on some Irish Superstitions (Drogheda, 1894), the other by F. G. Lee in Sights and Shadows (p. 42) . As both appear to be placed at the same date, i.e. 1890, it is quite possible that they refer to one and the same haunting, and we have so treated them accordingly. The reader, if he wishes, can test the matter for himself.

This house, which was reputed to be haunted, was let to a tailor and his wife by the owner at an annual rent of L23. They took possession in due course, but after a very few days they became aware of the presence of a most unpleasant supernatural lodger. One night, as the tailor and his wife were preparing to retire, they were terrified at seeing the foot of some invisible person kick the candlestick off the table, and so quench the candle. Although it was a very dark night, and the shutters were closed, the man and his wife could see everything in the room just as well as if it were the middle of the day. All at once a woman entered the room, dressed in white, carrying something in her hand,

[p. 49]

which she threw at the tailor's wife, striking her with some violence, and then vanished. While this was taking place on the first floor, a most frightful noise was going on overhead in the room where the children and their nurse were sleeping. The father immediately rushed upstairs, and found to his horror the floor all torn up, the furniture broken, and, worst of all, the children lying senseless and naked on the bed, and having the appearance of having been severely beaten. As he was leaving the room with the children in his arms he suddenly remembered that he had not seen the nurse, so he turned back with the intention of bringing her downstairs, but could find her nowhere. The girl, half-dead with fright, and very much bruised, had fled to her mother's house, where she died in a few days in agony.

Because of these occurrences they were legally advised to refuse to pay any rent. The landlady, however, declining to release them from their bargain, at once claimed a quarter's rent; and when this remained for some time unpaid, sued them for it before Judge Kisby. A Drogheda solicitor appeared

[p. 50]

for the tenants, who, having given evidence of the facts concerning the ghost in question, asked leave to support their sworn testimony by that of several other people. This, however, was disallowed by the judge. It was admitted by the landlady that nothing on one side or the other had been said regarding the haunting when the house was let. A judgment was consequently entered for the landlady, although it had been shown indirectly that unquestionably the house had had the reputation of being haunted, and that previous tenants had been much inconvenienced.

This chapter may be concluded with two stories dealing with haunted rectories. The first, and mildest, of these is contributed by the present Dean of St. Patrick's; it is not his own personal experience, but was related to him by a rector in Co. Monaghan, where he used to preach on special occasions. The rector and his daughters told the Dean that they had often seen in that house the apparition of an old woman dressed in a drab cape, while they frequently heard noises. On one evening the rector was in the kitchen together with the cook and the coachman.

[p. 51]

[paragraph continues] All three heard noises in the pantry as if vessels were being moved. Presently they saw the old woman in the drab cape come out of the pantry and move up the stairs. The rector attempted to follow her, but the two servants held him tightly by the arms, and besought him not to do so. But hearing the children, who were in bed, screaming, he broke from the grip of the servants and rushed upstairs. The children said that they had been frightened by seeing a strange old woman coming into the room, but she was now gone. The house had a single roof, and there was no way to or from the nursery except by the stairs. The rector stated that he took to praying that the old woman might have rest, and that it was now many years since she had been seen. A very old parishioner told him that when she was young she remembered having seen an old woman answering to the rector's description, who had lived in the house, which at that time was not a rectory.

The second of these, which is decidedly more complex and mystifying, refers to a rectory in Co. Donegal. It is sent as the personal experience of one of the percipients,

[p. 52]

who does not wish to have his name disclosed. He says: "My wife, children, and myself will have lived here four years next January (1914). From the first night that we came into the house most extraordinary noises have been heard. Sometimes they were inside the house, and seemed as if the furniture was being disturbed, and the fireirons knocked about, or at other times as if a dog was running up and down stairs. Sometimes they were external, and resembled tin buckets being dashed about the yard, or as if a herd of cattle was galloping up the drive before the windows. These things would go on for six months, and then everything would be quiet for three months or so, when the noises would commence again. My dogs--a fox-terrier, a boar-hound, and a spaniel--would make a terrible din, and would bark at something in the hall we could not see, backing away from it all the time.

"The only thing that was ever seen was as follows: One night my daughter went down to the kitchen about ten o'clock for some hot water. She saw a tall man, with one arm, carrying a lamp, who walked out

[p. 53]

of the pantry into the kitchen, and then through the kitchen wall. Another daughter saw the same man walk down one evening from the loft, and go into the harness-room. She told me, and I went out immediately, but could see nobody. Shortly after that my wife, who is very brave, heard a knock at the hall door in the dusk. Naturally thinking it was some friend, she opened the door, and there saw standing outside the self-same man. He simply looked at her, and walked through the wall into the house. She got such a shock that she could not speak for several hours, and was ill for some days. That is eighteen months ago, and he has not been seen since, and it is six months since we heard any noises." Our correspondent's letter was written on 25th November 1913. "An old man nearly ninety died last year. He lived all his life within four hundred yards of this house, and used to tell me that seventy years ago the parsons came with bell, book, and candle to drive the ghosts out of the house." Evidently they were unsuccessful. In English ghost-stories it is the parson who performs the exorcism successfully,

[p. 54]

while in Ireland such work is generally performed by the priest. Indeed a tale was sent to us in which a ghost quite ignored the parson's efforts, but succumbed to the priest.

      
True Irish Ghost Stories, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

  

CHAPTER III

  

HAUNTED HOUSES IN MOGH'S HALF

THE northern half of Ireland has not proved as prolific in stories of haunted houses as the southern portion: the possible explanation of this is, not that the men of the north are less prone to hold, or talk about, such beliefs, but that, as regards the south half, we have had the good fortune to happen upon some diligent collectors of these and kindred tales, whose eagerness in collecting is only equalled by their kindness in imparting information to the compilers of this book.

On a large farm near Portarlington there once lived a Mrs.--, a strong-minded, capable woman, who managed all her affairs for herself, giving her orders, and taking none from anybody. In due time she died, and the property passed to the next-of-kin. As soon, however, as the funeral was over, the house was nightly disturbed by strange noises: people downstairs would hear rushings

[p. 56]

about in the upper rooms, banging of doors, and the sound of heavy footsteps. The cups and saucers used to fall off the dresser, and all the pots and pans would rattle.

This went on for some time, till the people could stand it no longer, so they left the house and put in a herd and his family. The latter was driven away after he had been in the house a few weeks. This happened to several people, until at length a man named Mr. B-- took the house. The noises went on as before until some one suggested getting the priest in. Accordingly the priest came, and held a service in the late Mrs. --'s bedroom. When this was over, the door of the room was locked. After that the noises were not heard till one evening Mr. B-- came home from a fair, fortified, no doubt, with a little "Dutch courage," and declared that even if the devil were in it he would go into the locked room. In spite of all his family could say or do, he burst open the door, and entered the room, but apparently saw nothing. That night pandemonium reigned in the house, the chairs were hurled about, the china was

[p. 57]

broken, and the most weird and uncanny sounds were heard. Next day the priest was sent for, the room again shut up, and nothing has happened from that day to this.

Another strange story comes from the same town. "When I was on a visit to a friend in Portarlington," writes a lady in the Journal of the American S.P.R. [*1] "a rather unpleasant incident occurred to me. At about two o'clock in the morning I woke up suddenly, for apparently no reason whatever; however, I quite distinctly heard snoring coming from under or in the bed in which I was lying. It continued for about ten minutes, during which time I was absolutely limp with fright. The door opened, and my friend entered the bedroom, saying, 'I thought you might want me, so I came in.' Needless to say, I hailed the happy inspiration that sent her to me. I then told her what I had heard; she listened to me, and then to comfort (!) me said, 'Oh, never mind; it is only grandfather! He died in this room, and a snoring is heard every night at two o'clock, the hour at which he passed away.' Some time previously a German

[p. 58]

gentleman was staying with this family. They asked him in the morning how he had slept, and he replied that he was disturbed by a snoring in the room, but he supposed it was the cat."

A lady, formerly resident in Queen's Co., but who now lives near Dublin, sends the following clear and concise account of her own personal experiences in a haunted house: "Some years ago, my father, mother, sister, and myself went to live in a nice but rather small house close to the town of -- in Queen's Co. We liked the house, as it was conveniently and pleasantly situated, and we certainly never had a thought of ghosts or haunted houses, nor would my father allow any talk about such things in his presence. But we were not long settled there when we were disturbed by the opening of the parlour door every night regularly at the hour of eleven o'clock. My father and mother used to retire to their room about ten o'clock, while my sister and I used to sit up reading. We always declared that we would retire before the door opened, but we generally got so interested in our books that we would forget until we would hear the handle of

[p. 59]

the door turn, and see the door flung open. We tried in every way to account for this, but we could find no explanation, and there was no possibility of any human agent being at work.

"Some time after, light was thrown on the subject. We had visitors staying with us, and in order to make room for them, my sister was asked to sleep in the parlour. She consented without a thought of ghosts, and went to sleep quite happily; but during the night she was awakened by some one opening the door, walking across the room, and disturbing the fireirons. She, supposing it to be the servant, called her by name, but got no answer: then the person seemed to come away from the fireplace, and walk out of the room. There was a fire in the grate, but though she heard the footsteps, she could see no one.

"The next thing was, that I was coming downstairs, and as I glanced towards the hall door I saw standing by it a man in a grey suit. I went to my father and told him. He asked in surprise who let him in, as the servant was out, and he himself had already locked, bolted, and chained the door

[p. 60]

an hour previously. None of us had let him in, and when my father went out to the hall the man had disappeared, and the door was as he had left it.

"Some little time after, I had a visit from a lady who knew the place well, and in the course of conversation she said:

"'This is the house poor Mr. -- used to live in.'

"'Who is Mr. --?' I asked.

"'Did you never hear of him?' she replied. 'He was a minister who used to live in this house quite alone, and was murdered in this very parlour. His landlord used to visit him sometimes, and one night he was seen coming in about eleven o'clock, and was seen again leaving about five o'clock in the morning. When Mr. -- did not come out as usual, the door was forced open, and he was found lying dead in this room by the fender, with his head battered in with the poker.'

"We left the house soon after," adds our informant.

The following weird incidents occurred, apparently in the Co. Kilkenny, to a Miss K. B., during two visits paid by her to

[p. 61]

[paragraph continues] Ireland in 1880 and 1881. The house in which she experienced the following was really an old barrack, long disused, very old-fashioned, and surrounded with a high wall: it was said that it had been built during the time of Cromwell as a stronghold for his men. The only inhabitants of this were Captain C-- (a retired officer in charge of the place), Mrs. C--, three daughters, and two servants. They occupied the central part of the building, the mess-room being their drawing-room. Miss K. B.'s bedroom was very lofty, and adjoined two others which were occupied by the three daughters, E., G., and L.

"The first recollection I have of anything strange," writes Miss B., "was that each night I was awakened about three o'clock by a tremendous noise, apparently in the next suite of rooms, which was empty, and it sounded as if some huge iron boxes and other heavy things were being thrown about with great force. This continued for about half an hour, when in the room underneath (the kitchen) I heard the fire being violently poked and raked for several minutes, and this was immediately followed by a most

[p. 62]

terrible and distressing cough of a man, very loud and violent. It seemed as if the exertion had brought on a paroxysm which he could not stop. In large houses in Co. Kilkenny the fires are not lighted every day, owing to the slow-burning property of the coal, and it is only necessary to rake it up every night about eleven o'clock, and in the morning it is still bright and clear. Consequently I wondered why it was necessary for Captain C-- to get up in the middle of the night to stir it so violently."

A few days later Miss B. said to E. C.: "I hear such strange noises every night--are there any people in the adjoining part of the building?" She turned very pale, and looking earnestly at Miss B., said, "Oh K., I am so sorry you heard. I hoped no one but myself had heard it. I could have given worlds to have spoken to you last night, but dared not move or speak." K. B. laughed at her for being so superstitious, but E. declared that the place was haunted, and told her of a number of weird things that had been seen and heard.

In the following year, 1881, Miss K. B. paid another visit to the barrack. This

[p. 63]

time there were two other visitors there--a colonel and his wife. They occupied Miss B.'s former room, while to her was allotted a huge bedroom on the top of the house, with a long corridor leading to it; opposite to this was another large room, which was occupied by the girls.

Her strange experiences commenced again. "One morning, about four o'clock, I was awakened by a very noisy martial footstep ascending the stairs, and then marching quickly up and down the corridor outside my room. Then suddenly the most violent coughing took place that I ever heard, which continued for some time, while the quick, heavy step continued its march. At last the footsteps faded away in the distance, and I then recalled to mind the same coughing after exertion last year." In the morning, at breakfast, she asked both Captain C-- and the colonel had they been walking about, but both denied, and also said they had no cough. The family looked very uncomfortable, and afterwards E. came up with tears in her eyes, and said, "Oh K., please don't say anything more about that dreadful coughing; we all hear it often, especially

[p. 64]

when anything terrible is about to happen."

Some nights later the C--s gave a dance. When the guests had departed, Miss B. went to her bedroom. "The moon was shining so beautifully that I was able to read my Bible by its light, and had left the Bible open on the window-sill, which was a very high one, and on which I sat to read, having had to climb the washstand to reach it. I went to bed, and fell asleep, but was not long so when I was suddenly awakened by the strange feeling that some one was in the room. I opened my eyes, and turned around, and saw on the window-sill in the moonlight a long, very thin, very dark figure bending over the Bible, and apparently earnestly scanning the page. As if my movement disturbed the figure, it suddenly darted up, jumped off the window-ledge on to the washstand, then to the ground, and flitted quietly across the room to the table where my jewellery was." That was the last she saw of it. She thought it was some one trying to steal her jewellery, so waited till morning, but nothing was missing. In the morning she described to one of the daughters,

[p. 65]

[paragraph continues] G., what she had seen, and the latter told her that something always happened when that appeared. Miss K. B. adds that nothing did happen. Later on she was told that a colonel had cut his throat in that very room.

Another military station, Charles Fort, near Kinsale, has long had the reputation of being haunted. An account of this was sent to the Wide World Magazine (Jan. 1908), by Major H. L. Ruck Keene, D.S.O.; he states that he took it from a manuscript written by a Captain Marvell Hull about the year 1880. Further information on the subject of the haunting is to be found in Dr. Craig's Real Pictures of Clerical Life in Ireland. [*1]*

Charles Fort was erected in 1667 by the Duke of Ormonde. It is said to be haunted by a ghost known as the "White Lady," and the traditional account of the reason for this haunting is briefly as follows: Shortly after the erection of the fort, a Colonel Warrender, a severe disciplinarian, was appointed its governor. He had a daughter, who bore the quaint Christian name of

[p. 66]

[paragraph continues] "Wilful"; she became engaged to a Sir Trevor Ashurst, and subsequently married him. On the evening of their wedding-day the bride and bridegroom were walking on the battlements, when she espied some flowers growing on the rocks beneath. She expressed a wish for them, and a sentry posted close by volunteered to climb down for them, provided Sir Trevor took his place during his absence. He assented, and took the soldier's coat and musket while he went in search of a rope. Having obtained one, he commenced his descent; but the task proving longer than he expected, Sir Trevor fell asleep. Meantime the governor visited the sentries, as was his custom, and in the course of his rounds came to where Sir Trevor was asleep. He challenged him, and on receiving no answer perceived that he was asleep, whereupon he drew a pistol and shot him through the heart. The body was brought in, and it was only then the governor realised what had happened. The bride, who appears to have gone indoors before the tragedy occurred, then learned the fate that befell her husband, and in her distraction, rushed from the house and flung herself

[p. 67]

over the battlements. In despair at the double tragedy, her father shot himself during the night.

The above is from Dr. Craig's book already alluded to. In the Wide World Magazine the legend differs slightly in details. According to this the governor's name was Browne, and it was his own son, not his son-in-law, that he shot; while the incident is said to have occurred about a hundred and fifty years ago.

The "White Lady" is the ghost of the young bride. Let us see what accounts there are of her appearance. A good many years ago Fort-Major Black, who had served in the Peninsular War, gave his own personal experience to Dr. Craig. He stated that he had gone to the hall door one summer evening, and saw a lady entering the door and going up the stairs. At first he thought she was an officer's wife, but as he looked, he observed she was dressed in white, and in a very old-fashioned style. Impelled by curiosity, he hastened upstairs after her, and followed her closely into one of the rooms, but on entering it he could not find the slightest trace of anyone there. On

[p. 68]

another occasion he stated that two sergeants were packing some cast stores. One of them had his little daughter with him, and the child suddenly exclaimed, "Who is that white lady who is bending over the banisters, and looking down at us?" The two men looked up, but could see nothing, but the child insisted that she had seen a lady in white looking down and smiling at her.

On another occasion a staff officer, a married man, was residing in the "Governor's House." One night as the nurse lay awake--she and the children were in a room which opened into what was known as the White Lady's apartment--she suddenly saw a lady clothed in white glide to the bedside of the youngest child, and after a little place her hand upon its wrist. At this the child started in its sleep, and cried out, "Oh! take that cold hand from my wrist!" the next moment the lady disappeared.

One night, about the year 1880, Captain Marvell Hull and Lieutenant Hartland were going to the rooms occupied by the former officer. As they reached a small landing they saw distinctly in front of them a woman in a white dress. As they stood

[p. 69]

there in awestruck silence she turned and looked towards them, showing a face beautiful enough, but colourless as a corpse, and then passed on through a locked door.

But it appears that this presence did not always manifest itself in as harmless a manner. Some years ago Surgeon L-- was quartered at the fort. One day he had been out snipe-shooting, and as he entered the fort the mess-bugle rang out. He hastened to his rooms to dress, but as he failed to put in an appearance at mess, one of the officers went in search of him, and found him lying senseless on the floor. When he recovered consciousness he related his experience. He said he had stooped down for the key of his door, which he had placed for safety under the mat; when in this position he felt himself violently dragged across the hall, and flung down a flight of steps. With this agrees somewhat the experience of a Captain Jarves, as related by him to Captain Marvell Hull. Attracted by a strange rattling noise in his bedroom, he endeavoured to open the door of it, but found it seemingly locked. Suspecting a hoax, he called out, whereupon a gust of wind passed him, and some unseen

[p. 70]

power flung him down the stairs, and laid him senseless at the bottom.

Near a seaside town in the south of Ireland a group of small cottages was built by an old lady, in one of which she lived, while she let the others to her relatives. In process of time all the occupants died, the cottages fell into ruin, and were all pulled down (except the one in which the old lady had lived), the materials being used by a farmer to build a large house which he hoped to let to summer visitors. It was shortly afterwards taken for three years by a gentleman for his family. It should be noted that the house had very bare surroundings; there were no trees near, or outhouses where people could be concealed. Soon after the family came to the house they began to hear raps all over it, on doors, windows, and walls; these raps varied in nature, sometimes being like a sledgehammer, loud and dying away, and sometimes quick and sharp, two or three or five in succession; and all heard them. One morning about 4. A.M., the mother heard very loud knocking on the bedroom door; thinking it was the servant wanting to go

[p. 71]

to early mass, she said, "Come in," but the knocking continued till the father was awakened by it; he got up, searched the house, but could find no one. The servant's door was slightly open, and he saw that she was sound asleep. That morning a telegram came announcing the death of a beloved uncle just about the hour of the knocking. Some time previous to this the mother was in the kitchen, when a loud explosion took place beside her, startling her very much, but no cause for it could be found, nor were any traces left. This coincided with the death of an aunt, wife to the uncle who died later.

One night the mother went to her bedroom. The blind was drawn, and the shutters closed, when suddenly a great crash came, as if a branch was thrown at the window, and there was a sound of broken glass. She opened the shutters with the expectation of finding the window smashed, but there was not even a crack in it. She entered the room next day at one o'clock, and the same crash took place, being heard by all in the house: she went in at 10 A.M. on another day, and the same thing happened,

[p. 72]

after which she refused to enter that room again.

Another night, after 11 P.M., the servant was washing up in the kitchen, when heavy footsteps were heard by the father and mother going upstairs, and across a lobby to the servant's room; the father searched the house, but could find no one. After that footsteps used to be heard regularly at that hour, though no one could ever be seen walking about.

The two elder sisters slept together, and used to see flames shooting up all over the floor, though there was no smell or heat; this used to be seen two or three nights at a time, chiefly in the one room. The first time the girls saw this one of them got up and went to her father in alarm, naturally thinking the room underneath must be on fire.

The two boys were moved to the haunted room [which one?], where they slept in one large bed with its head near the chimney-piece. The elder boy, aged about thirteen, put his watch on the mantelpiece, awoke about 2 A.M., and wishing to ascertain the time, put his hand up for his watch; he

[p. 73]

then felt a deathly cold hand laid on his. For the rest of that night the two boys were terrified by noises, apparently caused by two people rushing about the room fighting and knocking against the bed. About 6 A.M. they went to their father, almost in hysterics from terror, and refused to sleep there again. The eldest sister, not being nervous, was then given that room; she was, however, so disturbed by these noises that she begged her father to let her leave it, but having no other room to give her, he persuaded her to stay there, and at length she got accustomed to the noise, and could sleep in spite of it. Finally the family left the house before their time was up. [*1]

Mr T. J. Westropp, to whom we are indebted for so much material, sends a tale which used to be related by a relative of his, the Rev. Thomas Westropp, concerning experiences in a house not very far from the city of Limerick. When the latter was appointed to a certain parish he had some difficulty in finding a suitable house, but finally fixed on one which had been untenanted for many years, but had nevertheless

[p. 74]

been kept aired and in good repair, as a caretaker who lived close by used to come and look after it every day. The first night that the family settled there, as the clergyman was going upstairs he heard a footstep and the rustle of a dress, and as he stood aside a lady passed him, entered a door facing the stairs, and closed it after her. It was only then he realised that her dress was very old-fashioned, and that he had not been able to enter that particular room. Next day he got assistance from a carpenter, who, with another man, forced open the door. A mat of cobwebs fell as they did so, and the floor and windows were thick with dust. The men went across the room, and as the clergyman followed them he saw a small white bird flying round the ceiling; at his exclamation the men looked back and also saw it. It swooped, flew out of the door, and they did not see it again. After that the family were alarmed by hearing noises under the floor of that room every night. At length the clergyman had the boards taken up, and the skeleton of a child was found underneath. So old did the remains appear that the coroner did not deem it

[p. 75]

necessary to hold an inquest on them, so the rector buried them in the churchyard. Strange noises continued, as if some one were trying to force up the boards from underneath. Also a heavy ball was heard rolling down the stairs and striking against the study door. One night the two girls woke up screaming, and on the nurse running up to them, the elder said she had seen a great black dog with fiery eyes resting its paws on her bed. Her father ordered the servants to sit constantly with them in the evenings, but, notwithstanding the presence of two women in the nursery, the same thing occurred. The younger daughter was so scared that she never quite recovered. The family left the house immediately.

The same correspondent says; "An old ruined house in the hills of east Co. Clare enjoyed the reputation of being 'desperately haunted' from, at any rate, 1865 down to its dismantling. I will merely give the experiences of my own relations, as told by them to me. My mother told how one night she and my father heard creaking and grating, as if a door were being forced open. The sound came from a passage in which

[p. 76]

was a door nailed up and clamped with iron bands. A heavy footstep came down the passage, and stopped at the bedroom door for a moment; no sound was heard, and then the 'thing' came through the room to the foot of the bed. It moved round the bed, they not daring to stir. The horrible unseen visitant stopped, and they felt it watching them. At last it moved away, they heard it going up the passage, the door crashed, and all was silence. Lighting a candle, my father examined the room, and found the door locked; he then went along the passage, but not a sound was to be heard anywhere.

"Strange noises like footsteps, sobbing, whispering, grim laughter, and shrieks were often heard about the house. On one occasion my eldest sister and a girl cousin drove over to see the family and stayed the night. They and my two younger sisters were all crowded into a huge, old-fashioned bed, and carefully drew and tucked in the curtains all round. My eldest sister awoke feeling a cold wind blowing on her face, and putting out her hand found the curtains drawn back and, as they subsequently discovered, wedged

[p. 77]

between the bed and the wall. She reached for the match-box, and was about to light the candle when a horrible mocking laugh rang out close to the bed, which awakened the other girls. Being always a plucky woman, though then badly scared, she struck a match, and searched the room, but nothing was to be seen. The closed room was said to have been deserted after a murder, and its floor was supposed to be stained with blood which no human power could wash out."

Another house in Co. Clare, nearer the estuary of the Shannon, which was formerly the residence of the D-- family, but is now pulled down, had some extraordinary tales told about it in which facts (if we may use the word) were well supplemented by legend. To commence with the former. A lady writes: "My father and old Mr. D-- were first cousins. Richard D-- asked my father would he come and sit up with him. one night, in order to see what might be seen. Both were particularly sober men. The annoyances in the house were becoming unbearable. Mrs. D--'s work-box used to be thrown down, the table-cloth would be

[p. 78]

whisked off the table, the fender and fireirons would be hurled about the room, and other similar things would happen. Mr. D-- and my father went up to one of the bedrooms, where a big fire was made up. They searched every part of the room carefully, but nothing uncanny was to be seen or found. They then placed two candles and a brace of pistols on a small table between them, and waited. Nothing happened for some time, till all of a sudden a large black dog walked out from under the bed. Both men fired, and the dog disappeared. That is all! The family had to leave the house."

Now to the blending of fact with fiction, of which we have already spoken: the intelligent reader can decide in his own mind which is which. It was said that black magic had been practised in this house at one time, and that in consequence terrible and weird occurrences were quite the order of the day there. When being cooked, the hens used to scream and the mutton used to bleat in the pot. Black dogs were seen frequently. The beds used to be lifted up, and the occupants thereof used to be beaten black and blue, by invisible

[p. 79]

hands. One particularly ghoulish tale was told. It was said that a monk (!) was in love with one of the daughters of the house, who was an exceedingly fat girl. She died unmarried, and was buried in the family vault. Some time later the vault was again opened for an interment, and those who entered it found that Miss D--'s coffin had been disturbed, and the lid loosened. They then saw that all the fat around her heart had been scooped away.

Apropos of ineradicable blood on a floor, which is a not infrequent item in stories of haunted houses, it is said that a manifestation of this nature forms the haunting in a farmhouse in Co. Limerick. According to our informants, a light must be kept burning in this house all night; if by any chance it is forgotten, or becomes quenched, in the morning the floor is covered with blood. The story is evidently much older than the house, but no traditional explanation is given.

Two stories of haunted schools have been sent to us, both on very good authority; these establishments lie within the geographical limits of this chapter, but for

[p. 80]

obvious reasons, we cannot indicate their locality more precisely, though the names of both are known to us. The first of these was told to our correspondent by the boy Brown, who was in the room, but did not see the ghost.

When Brown was about fifteen he was sent to -- School. His brother told him not to be frightened at anything he might see or hear, as the boys were sure to play tricks on all new-comers. He was put to sleep in a room with another new arrival, a boy named Smith, from England. In the middle of the night Brown was roused from his sleep by Smith crying out in great alarm, and asking who was in the room. Brown, who was very angry at being waked up, told him not to be a fool--that there was no one there. The second night Smith roused him again, this time in greater alarm than the first night. He said he saw a man in cap and gown come into the room with a lamp, and then pass right through the wall. Smith got out of his bed, and fell on his knees beside Brown, beseeching him not to go to sleep. At first Brown thought it was all done to frighten him, but he then

[p. 81]

saw that Smith was in a state of abject terror. Next morning they spoke of the occurrence, and the report reached the ears of the Head Master, who sent for the two boys. Smith refused to spend another night in the room. Brown said he had seen or heard nothing, and was quite willing to sleep there if another fellow would sleep with him, but he would not care to remain there alone. The Head Master then asked for volunteers from the class of elder boys, but not one of them would sleep in the room. It had always been looked upon as "haunted," but the Master thought that by putting in new boys who had not heard the story they would sleep there all right.

Some years after, Brown revisited the place, and found that another attempt had been made to occupy the room. A new Head Master who did not know its history, thought it a pity to have the room idle, and put a teacher, also new to the school, in possession. When this teacher came down the first morning, he asked who had come into his room during the night. He stated that a man in cap and gown, having books under his arm and a lamp in his hand, came

[p. 82]

in, sat down at a table, and began to react. He knew that he was not one of the masters, and did not recognise him as one of the boys. The room had to be abandoned. The tradition is that many years ago a master was murdered in that room by one of the students. The few boys who ever had the courage to persist in sleeping in the room said if they stayed more than two or three nights that the furniture was moved, and they heard violent noises.

The second story was sent to us by the percipient herself, and is therefore a firsthand experience. Considering that she was only a schoolgirl at the time, it must be admitted that she made a most plucky attempt to run the ghost to earth.

"A good many years ago, when I first went to school, I did not believe in ghosts, but I then had an experience which caused me to alter my opinion. I was ordered with two other girls to sleep in a small top room at the back of the house which overlooked a garden which contained ancient apple-trees.

"Suddenly in the dead of night I was awakened out of my sleep by the sound of

[p. 83]

heavy footsteps, as of a man wearing big boots unlaced, pacing ceaselessly up and down a long corridor which I knew was plainly visible from the landing outside my door, as there was a large window at the farther end of it, and there was sufficient moonlight to enable one to see its full length. After listening for about twenty minutes, my curiosity was aroused, so I got up and stood on the landing. The footsteps still continued, but I could see nothing, although the sounds actually reached the foot of the flight of stairs which led from the corridor to the landing on which I was standing. Suddenly the footfall ceased, pausing at my end of the corridor, and I then considered it was high time for me to retire, which I accordingly did, carefully closing the door behind me.

"To my horror the footsteps ascended the stairs, and the bedroom door was violently dashed back against a washing-stand, beside which was a bed; the contents of the ewer were spilled over the occupant, and the steps advanced a few paces into the room in my direction. A cold perspiration broke out all over me; I cannot describe the sensation.

[p. 84]

[paragraph continues] It was not actual fear--it was more than that--I felt I had come into contact with the Unknown.

"What was about to happen? All I could do was to speak; I cried out, "Who are you? What do you want?" Suddenly the footsteps ceased; I felt relieved, and lay awake till morning, but no further sound reached my ears. How or when my ghostly visitant disappeared I never knew; suffice it to say, my story was no nightmare, but an actual fact, of which there was found sufficient proof in the morning; the floor was still saturated with water, the door, which we always carefully closed at night, was wide open, and last, but not least, the occupant of the wet bed had heard all that had happened, but feared to speak, and lay awake till morning.

"Naturally, we related our weird experience to our schoolmates, and it was only then I learned from one of the elder girls that this ghost had manifested itself for many years in a similar fashion to the inhabitants of that room. It was supposed to be the spirit of a man who, long years before, had occupied this apartment (the house was

[p. 85]

then a private residence), and had commited suicide by hanging himself from an old apple tree opposite the window. Needless to say, the story was hushed up, and we were sharply spoken to, and warned not to mention the occurrence again.

"Some years afterwards a friend, who happened at the time to be a boarder at this very school, came to spend a week-end with me. She related an exactly similar incident which occurred a few nights previous to her visit. My experience was quite unknown to her."

The following account of strange happenings at his glebe-house has been sent by the rector of a parish in the diocese of Cashel: "Shortly after my wife and I came to live here, some ten years ago, the servants complained of hearing strange noises in the top storey of the Rectory where they sleep. One girl ran away the day after she arrived, declaring that the house was haunted, and that nothing would induce her to sleep another night in it. So often had my wife to change servants on this account that at last I had to speak to the parish priest, as I suspected that the idea of 'ghosts' might

[p. 86]

have been suggested to the maids by neighbours who might have some interest in getting rid of them. I understand that my friend the parish priest spoke very forcibly from the altar on the subject of spirits, saying that the only spirits he believed ever did any harm to anyone were --, mentioning a well-known brand of the wine of the country. Whether this priestly admonition was the cause or not, for some time we heard no more tales of ghostly manifestations.

"After a while, however, my wife and I began to hear a noise which, while in no sense alarming, has proved to be both remarkable and inexplicable. If we happen to be sitting in the dining-room after dinner, sometimes we hear what sounds like the noise of a heavy coach rumbling up to the hall door. We have both heard this noise hundreds of times between eight P.M. and midnight. Sometimes we hear it several times the same night, and then perhaps we won't hear it again for several months. We hear it best on calm nights, and as we are nearly a quarter of a mile from the high road, it is difficult to account for, especially

[p. 87]

as the noise appears to be quite close to us--I mean not farther away than the hall-door. I may mention that an Englishman was staying with us a few years ago. As we were sitting in the dining-room one night after dinner he said, 'A carriage has just driven up to the door'; but we knew it was only the 'phantom coach,' for we also heard it. Only once do I remember hearing it while sitting in the drawing-room. So much for the 'sound' of the 'phantom coach,' but now I must tell you what I saw with my own eyes as clearly as I now see the paper on which I am writing. Some years ago in the middle of the summer, on a scorching hot day, I was out cutting some hay opposite the hall door just by the tennis court. It was between twelve and one o'clock. I remember the time distinctly, as my man had gone to his dinner shortly before. The spot on which I was commanded a view of the avenue from the entrance gate for about four hundred yards. I happened to look up from my occupation--for scything is no easy work--and I saw what I took to be a somewhat high dogcart, in which two people were seated, turning

[p. 88]

in at the avenue gate. As I had my coat and waistcoat off, and was not in a state to receive visitors, I got behind a newly-made hay-cock and watched the vehicle until it came to a bend in the avenue where there is a clump of trees which obscured it from my view. As it did not, however, reappear, I concluded that the occupants had either stopped for some reason or had taken by mistake a cart-way leading to the back gate into the garden. Hastily putting on my coat, I went down to the bend in the avenue, but to my surprise there was nothing to be seen.

"Returning to the Rectory, I met my housekeeper, who has been with me for nearly twenty years, and I told her what I had seen. She then told me that about a month before, while I was away from home, my man had one day gone with the trap to the station. She saw, just as I did, a trap coming up the avenue until it was lost to sight owing to the intervention of the clump of trees. As it did not come on, she went down to the bend, but there was no trap to be seen. When the man came in some half-hour after, my housekeeper asked

[p. 89]

him if he had come half-way up the avenue and turned back, but he said he had only that minute come straight from the station. My housekeeper said she did not like to tell me about it before, as she thought I 'would have laughed at her.' Whether the 'spectral gig' which I saw and the 'phantom coach' which my wife and I have often heard are one and the same I know not, but I do know that what I saw in the full blaze of the summer sun was not inspired by a dose of the spirits referred to by my friend the parish priest.

"Some time during the winter of 1912, I was in the motor-house one dark evening at about 6 P.M. I was working at the engine, and as the car was 'nose in' first, I was, of course, at the farthest point from the door. I had sent my man down to the village with a message. He was gone about ten minutes when I heard heavy footsteps enter the yard and come over to the motor-house. I 'felt' that there was some one in the house quite close to me, and I said, 'Hullo, --, what brought you back so soon,' as I knew he could not have been to the village and back. As I got no reply, I took up my electric

[p. 90]

lamp and went to the back of the motor to see who was there, but there was no one to be seen, and although I searched the yard with my lamp, I could discover no one. About a week later I heard the footsteps again under almost identical conditions, but I searched with the same futile result.

"Before I stop, I must tell you about a curious 'presentiment' which happened with regard to a man I got from the Queen's County. He arrived on a Saturday evening, and on the following Monday morning I put him to sweep the avenue. He was at his work when I went out in the motor car at about 10-30 A.M. Shortly after I left he left his wheel-barrow and tools on the avenue (just at the point where I saw the 'spectral gig' disappear) and, coming up to the Rectory, he told my housekeeper in a great state of agitation that he was quite sure that his brother, with whom he had always lived, was dead. He said he must return home at once. My housekeeper advised him to wait until I returned, but he changed his clothes and packed his box, saying he must catch the next train. Just before I returned home at 12 o'clock, a telegram came saying

[p. 91]

his brother had died suddenly that morning, and that he was to return at once. On my return I found him almost in a state of collapse. He left by the next train, and I never heard of him again."

K-- Castle is a handsome blending of ancient castle and modern dwelling-house, picturesquely situated among trees, while the steep glen mentioned below runs close beside it. It has the reputation of being haunted, but, as usual, it is difficult to get information. One gentleman, to whom we wrote, stated that he never saw or heard anything worse than a bat. On the other hand, a lady who resided there a good many years ago, gives the following account of her extraordinary experiences therein:

DEAR MR. SEYMOUR,

I enclose some account of our experiences in K-- Castle. It would be better not to mention names, as the people occupying it have told me they are afraid of their servants hearing anything, and consequently giving notice. They themselves hear voices often, but, like me, they do not mind. When first we went there

[p. 92]

we heard people talking, but on looking everywhere we could find no one. Then on some nights we heard fighting in the glen beside the house. We could hear voices raised in anger, and the clash of steel: no person would venture there after dusk.

One night I was sitting talking with my governess, I got up, said good-night, and opened the door, which was on the top of the back staircase. As I did so, I heard some one (a woman) come slowly upstairs, walk past us to a window at the end of the landing, and then with a shriek fall heavily. As she passed it was bitterly cold, and I drew back into the room, but did not say anything, as it might frighten the governess. She asked me what was the matter, as I looked so white. Without answering, I pushed her into her room, and then searched the house, but with no results.

Another night I was sleeping with my little girl. I awoke, and saw a girl with long, fair hair standing at the fireplace, one hand at her side, the other on the chimney-piece. Thinking at first it was my little girl, I felt on the pillow to see

[p. 93]

if she were gone, but she was fast asleep. There was no fire or light of any kind in the room.

Some time afterwards a friend was sleeping there, and she told me that she was pushed out of bed the whole night. Two gentlemen to whom I had mentioned this came over, thinking they would find out the cause. In the morning when they came down they asked for the carriage to take them to the next train, but would not tell what they had heard or seen. Another person who came to visit her sister, who was looking after the house before we went in, slept in this room, and in the morning said she must go back that day. She also would give no information.

On walking down the corridor, I have heard a door open, a footstep cross before me, and go into another room, both doors being closed at the time. An old cook I had told me that when she went into the hall in the morning, a gentleman would come down the front stairs, take a plumed hat off the stand, and vanish through the hall door. This she saw nearly

[p. 94]

every morning. She also said that a girl often came into her bedroom, and put her hand on her (the cook's) face; and when she would push her away she would hear a girl's voice say, "Oh don't!" three times. I have often heard voices in the drawing-room, which decidedly sounded as if an old gentleman and a girl were talking. Noises like furniture being moved were frequently heard at night, and strangers staying with us have often asked why the servants turned out the rooms underneath them at such an unusual hour. The front-door bell sometimes rang, and I have gone down, but found no one.--Yours very sincerely,

F. T.     

"Kilman" Castle, in the heart of Ireland--the name is obviously a pseudonym--has been described as perhaps the worst haunted mansion in the British Isles. That it deserves this doubtful recommendation, we cannot say; but at all events the ordinary reader will be prepared to admit that it contains sufficient "ghosts" to satisfy the most greedy ghost-hunter. A couple of months

[p. 95]

ago the present writer paid a visit to this castle, and was shown all over it one morning by the mistress of the house, who, under the nom de plume of "Andrew Merry" has published novels dealing with Irish life, and has also contributed articles on the ghostly phenomena of her house to the Occult Review (Dec. 1908 and Jan. 1909).

The place itself is a grim, grey, bare building. The central portion, in which is the entrance-hall, is a square castle of the usual type; it is built on a rock, and a slight batter from base to summit gives an added appearance of strength and solidity. On either side of the castle are more modern wings, one of which terminates in what is known as the "Priest's House."

Now to the ghosts. The top storey of the central tower is a large, well-lighted apartment, called the "Chapel," having evidently served that purpose in times past. At one end is what is said to be an oubliette, now almost filled up. Occasionally in the evenings, people walking along the roads or in the fields see the windows of this chapel lighted up for a few seconds as if many lamps were suddenly brought into it. This is certainly not due

[p. 96]

to servants; from our experience we can testify that it is the last place on earth that a domestic would enter after dark. It is also said that a treasure is buried somewhere in or around the castle. The legend runs that an ancestor was about to be taken to Dublin on a charge of rebellion, and, fearing he would never return, made the best of the time left to him by burying somewhere a crock full of gold and jewels. Contrary to expectation, he did return; but his long confinement had turned his brain, and he could never remember the spot where he had deposited his treasure years before. Some time ago a lady, a Miss B., who was decidedly psychic, was invited to Kilman Castle in the hope that she would be able to locate the whereabouts of this treasure. In this respect she failed, unfortunately, but gave, nevertheless, a curious example of her power. As she walked through the hall with her hostess, she suddenly laid her hand upon the bare stone wall, and remarked, "There is something uncanny here, but I don't know what it is." In that very spot, some time previously, two skeletons had been discovered walled up.

[p. 97]

The sequel to this is curious. Some time after, Miss B. was either trying automatic writing, or else was at a seance (we forget which), when a message came to her from the Unseen, stating that the treasure at Kilman Castle was concealed in the chapel under the tessellated pavement near the altar. But this spirit was either a "lying spirit," or else a most impish one, for there is no trace of an altar, and it is impossible to say, from the style of the room, where it stood; while the tessellated pavement (if it exists) is so covered with the debris of the former roof that it would be almost impossible to have it thoroughly cleared.

There is as well a miscellaneous assortment of ghosts. A monk with tonsure and cowl walks in at one window of the Priest's House, and out at another. There is also a little old man, dressed in the antique garb of a green cut-away coat, knee breeches, and buckled shoes: he is sometimes accompanied by an old lady in similar old-fashioned costume. Another ghost has a penchant for lying on the bed beside its lawful and earthly occupant; nothing is seen, but a great weight is felt, and a

[p. 98]

consequent deep impression made on the bedclothes.

The lady of the house states that she has a number of letters from friends, in which they relate the supernatural experiences they had while staying at the Castle. In one of these the writer, a gentleman, was awakened one night by an extraordinary feeling of intense cold at his heart. He then saw in front of him a tall female figure, clothed from head to foot in red, and with its right hand raised menacingly in the air: the light which illuminated the figure was from within. He lit a match, and sprang out of bed, but the room was empty. He went back to bed, and saw nothing more that night, except that several times the same cold feeling gripped his heart, though to the touch the flesh was quite warm.

But of all the ghosts in that well-haunted house the most unpleasant is that inexplicable thing that is usually called "It." The lady of the house described to the present writer her personal experience of this phantom. High up round one side of the hall runs a gallery which connects with some of the bedrooms. One evening she was in this

[p. 99]

gallery leaning on the balustrade, and looking down into the hall. Suddenly she felt two hands laid on her shoulders; she turned round sharply, and saw "It" standing close beside her. She described it as being human in shape, and about four feet high; the eyes were like two black holes in the face, and the whole figure seemed as if it were made of grey cotton-wool, while it was accompanied by a most appalling stench, such as would come from a decaying human body. The lady got a shock from which she did not recover for a long time.

Footnotes

^57:1 For September, 1913.

^65:1 Proceedings S.P.R., x. 341.

^73:1 Journal of American S.P.R. for September 1913.

      
True Irish Ghost Stories, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 100]

  

CHAPTER IV

  

POLTERGEISTS

POLTERGEIST is the term assigned to those apparently meaningless noises and movements of objects of which we from time to time hear accounts. The word is, of course, German, and may be translated "boisterous ghost." A poltergeist is seldom or never seen, but contents itself by moving furniture and other objects about in an extraordinary manner, often contrary to the laws of gravitation; sometimes footsteps are heard, but nothing is visible, while at other times vigorous rappings will be heard either on the walls or floor of a room, and in the manner in which the raps are given a poltergeist has often showed itself as having a close connection with the physical phenomena of spiritualism, for cases have occurred in which a poltergeist has given the exact number of raps mentally asked for by some person present. Another point that is

[p. 101]

worthy of note is the fact that the hauntings of a poltergeist are generally attached to a certain individual in a certain spot, and thus differ from the operations of an ordinary ghost.

The two following incidents related in this chapter are taken from a paper read by Professor Barrett, F.R.S., before the Society for Psychical Research. [*1] In the case of the first anecdote he made every possible inquiry into the facts set forth, short of actually being an eye-witness of the phenomena. In the case of the second he made personal investigation, and himself saw the whole of the incidents related. There is therefore very little room to doubt the genuineness of either story.

In the year 1910, in a certain house in Court Street, Enniscorthy, there lived a labouring man named Redmond. His wife took in boarders to supplement her husband's wages, and at the time to which we refer there were three men boarding with her, who slept in one room above the kitchen. The house consisted of five rooms--two on the ground-floor, of which one was a shop

[p. 102]

and the other the kitchen. The two other rooms upstairs were occupied by the Redmonds and their servant respectively. The bedroom in which the boarders slept was large, and contained two beds, one at each end of the room, two men sleeping in one of them; John Randall and George Sinnott were the names of two, but the name of the third lodger is not known--he seems to have left the Redmonds very shortly after the disturbances commenced.

It was on July 4, 1910, that John Randall, who is a carpenter by trade, went to live at Enniscorthy, and took rooms with the Redmonds. In a signed statement, now in possession of Professor Barrett, he tells a graphic tale of what occurred each night during the three weeks he lodged in the house, and as a result of the poltergeist's attentions he lost three-quarters of a stone in weight. It was on the night of Thursday, July 7, that the first incident occurred, when the bedclothes were gently pulled off his bed. Of course he naturally thought it was a joke, and shouted to his companions to stop. As no one could explain what was happening, a match was struck,

[p. 103]

and the bedclothes were found to be at the window, from which the other bed (a large piece of furniture which ordinarily took two people to move) had been rolled just when the clothes had been taken off Randall's bed. Things were put straight and the light blown out, "but," Randall's account goes on to say, "it wasn't long until we heard some hammering in the room--tap-tap-tap-like. This lasted for a few minutes, getting quicker and quicker. When it got very quick, their bed started to move out across the room. . . . We then struck a match and got the lamp. We searched the room thoroughly, and could find nobody. Nobody had come in the door. We called the man of the house (Redmond); he came into the room, saw the bed, and told us to push it back and get into bed (he thought all the time one of us was playing the trick on the other). I said I wouldn't stay in the other bed by myself, so I got in with the others; we put out the light again, and it had only been a couple of minutes out when the bed ran out on the floor with the three of us. Richard struck a match again, and this time

[p. 104]

we all got up and put on our clothes; we had got a terrible fright and couldn't stick it any longer. We told the man of the house we would sit up in the room till daylight. During the time we were sitting in the room we could hear footsteps leaving the kitchen and coming up the stairs; it would stop on the landing outside the door, and wouldn't come into the room. The footsteps and noises continued through the house until daybreak."

The next night the footsteps and noises were continued, but the unfortunate men did not experience any other annoyance. On the following day the men went home, and it is to be hoped they were able to make up for all the sleep they had lost on the two previous nights. They returned on the Sunday, and from that night till they finally left the house the men were disturbed practically every night. On Monday, 11th July the bed was continually running out from the wall with its three occupants. They kept the lamp alight, and a chair was seen to dance gaily out into the middle of the floor. On the following Thursday we read of the same happenings, with the addition

[p. 105]

that one of the boarders was lifted out of the bed, though he felt no hand near him. It seems strange that they should have gone through such a bad night exactly a week from the night the poltergeist started its operations. So the account goes on; every night that they slept in the room the hauntings continued, some nights being worse than others. On Friday, 29th July, "the bed turned up on one side and threw us out on the floor, and before we were thrown out, the pillow was taken from under my head three times. When the bed rose up, it fell back without making any noise. This bed was so heavy, it took both the woman and the girl to pull it out from the wall without anybody in it, and there were only three castors on it." The poltergeist must have been an insistent fellow, for when the unfortunate men took refuge in the other bed, they had not been long in it before it began to rise, but could not get out of the recess it was in unless it was taken to pieces.

"It kept very bad," we read, "for the next few nights. So Mr. Murphy, from the Guardian office, and another man named

[p. 106]

[paragraph continues] Devereux, came and stopped in the room one night."

The experiences of Murphy and Devereux on this night are contained in a further statement, signed by Murphy and corroborated by Devereux. They seem to have gone to work in a business-like manner, as before taking their positions for the night they made a complete investigation of the bedroom and house, so as to eliminate all chance of trickery or fraud. By this time, it should be noted, one of Mrs. Redmond's lodgers had evidently suffered enough from the poltergeist, as only two men are mentioned in Murphy's statement, one sleeping in each bed. The two investigators took up their position against the wall midway between the two beds, so that they had a full view of the room and the occupants of the beds. "The night," says Murphy, was a clear, starlight night. No blind obstructed the view from outside, and one could see the outlines of the beds and their occupants clearly. At about 11.30 a tapping was heard close at the foot of Randall's bed. My companion remarked that it appeared to be like the noise of a rat eating at timber.

[p. 107]

[paragraph continues] Sinnott replied, 'You'll soon see the rat it is.' The tapping went on slowly at first . . . then the speed gradually increased to about a hundred or a hundred and twenty per minute, the noise growing louder. This continued for about five minutes, when it stopped suddenly. Randall then spoke. He said: 'The clothes are slipping off my bed: look at them sliding off. Good God, they are going off me.' Mr. Devereux immediately struck a match, which he had ready in his hand. The bedclothes had partly left the boy's bed, having gone diagonally towards the foot, going out at the left corner, and not alone did they seem to be drawn off the bed, but they appeared to be actually going back under the bed, much in the same position one would expect bedclothes to be if a strong breeze were blowing through the room at the time. But then everything was perfectly calm."

A search was then made for wires or strings, but nothing of the sort could be found. The bedclothes were put back and the light extinguished. For ten minutes silence reigned, only to be broken by more rapping which was followed by shouts from

[p. 108]

[paragraph continues] Randall. He was told to hold on to the clothes, which were sliding off again. But this was of little use, for he was heard to cry, "I'm going, I'm going, I'm gone," and when a light was struck he was seen to slide from the bed and all the bedclothes with him. Randall, who, with Sinnott, had shown considerable strength of mind by staying in the house under such trying circumstances, had evidently had enough of ghostly hauntings, for as he lay on the floor, trembling in every limb and bathed in perspiration, he exclaimed: "Oh, isn't this dreadful! I can't stand it; I can't stay here any longer." He was eventually persuaded to get back to bed. Later on more rapping occurred in a different part of the room, but it soon stopped, and the rest of the night passed away in peace.

Randall and Sinnott went to their homes the next day, and Mr. Murphy spent from eleven till long past midnight in their vacated room, but heard and saw nothing unusual. He states in conclusion that "Randall could not reach that part of the floor from which the rapping came on any

[p. 109]

occasion without attracting my attention and that of my comrade."

The next case related by Professor Barrett occurred in County Fermanagh, at a spot eleven miles from Enniskillen and about two miles from the hamlet of Derrygonelly, where there dwelt a farmer and his family of four girls and a boy, of whom the eldest was a girl of about twenty years of age named Maggie. His cottage consisted of three rooms, the kitchen, or dwelling-room, being in the centre, with a room on each side used as bedrooms. In one of these two rooms Maggie slept with her sisters, and it was here that the disturbances occurred, generally after they had all gone to bed, when rappings and scratchings were heard which often lasted all night. Rats were first blamed, but when things were moved by some unseen agent, and boots and candles thrown out of the house, it was seen that something more than the ordinary rat was at work. The old farmer, who was a Methodist, sought advice from his class leader, and by his directions laid an open Bible on the bed in the haunted room, placing a big stone on the book. But the stone was lifted off by an

[p. 110]

unseen hand, the Bible moved out of the room, and seventeen pages torn out of it. They could not keep a lamp or candle in the house, so they went to their neighbours for help, and, to quote the old farmer's words to Professor Barrett, "Jack Flanigan came and lent us a lamp, saying the devil himself would not steal it, as he had got the priest to sprinkle it with holy water." "But that," the old man said, "did us no good either, for the next day it took away that lamp also."

Professor Barrett, at the invitation of Mr. Thomas Plunkett of Enniskillen, went to investigate. He got a full account from the farmer of the freakish tricks which were continually being played in the house, and gives a graphic account of what he himself observed: "After the children, except the boy, had gone to bed, Maggie lay down on the bed without undressing, so that her hands and feet could be observed. The rest of us sat round the kitchen fire, when faint raps, rapidly increasing in loudness, were heard coming apparently from the walls, the ceiling, and various parts of the inner room, the door of which was open. On

[p. 111]

entering the bedroom with a light the noises at first ceased, but recommenced when I put the light on the window-sill in the kitchen. I had the boy and his father by my side, and asked Mr. Plunkett to look round the house outside. Standing in the doorway leading to the bedroom, the noises recommenced, the light was gradually brought nearer, and after much patience I was able to bring the light into the bedroom whilst the disturbances were still loudly going on. At last I was able to go up to the side of the bed, with the lighted candle in my hand, and closely observed each of the occupants lying on the bed. The younger children were apparently asleep, and Maggie was motionless; nevertheless, knocks were going on everywhere around; on the chairs, the bedstead, the walls and ceiling. The closest scrutiny failed to detect any movement on the part of those present that could account for the noises, which were accompanied by a scratching or tearing sound. Suddenly a large pebble fell in my presence on to the bed; no one had moved to dislodge it, even if it had been placed for the purpose. When I replaced the candle on the window-sill in the

[p. 112]

kitchen, the knocks became still louder, like those made by a heavy carpenter's hammer driving nails into flooring."

A couple of days afterwards, the Rev. Maxwell Close, M.A., a well-known member of the S.P.R., joined Professor Barrett and Mr. Plunkett, and together the party of three paid visits on two consecutive nights to the haunted farm-house, and the noises were repeated. Complete search was made, both inside and outside of the house, but no cause could be found. When the party were leaving, the old farmer was much perturbed that they had not "laid the ghost." When questioned he said he thought it was fairies. He was asked if it had answered to questions by raps and he said he had; "but it tells lies as often as truth, and oftener, I think. We tried it, and it only knocked at L M N when we said the alphabet over." Professor Barrett then tested it by asking mentally for a certain number of raps, and immediately the actual number was heard. He repeated this four times with a different number each time, and with the same result.

Perhaps the most interesting part of this particular case is at the end of Professor

[p. 113]

[paragraph continues] Barrett's account, when, at the request of the old farmer, Mr. Maxwell Close read some passages from Scripture, followed by the Lord's Prayer, to an accompaniment of knockings and scratches, which were at first so loud that the solemn words could hardly be heard, but which gradually ceased as they all knelt in prayer. And since that night no further disturbance occurred.

Another similar story comes from the north of Ireland. In the year 1866 (as recorded in the Larne Reporter of March 31 in that year), two families residing at Upper Ballygowan, near Larne, suffered a series of annoyances from having stones thrown into their houses both by night and by day. Their neighbours came in great numbers to sympathise with them in their affliction, and on one occasion, after a volley of stones had been poured into the house through the window, a young man who was present fired a musket in the direction of the mysterious assailants. The reply was a loud peal of satanic laughter, followed by a volley of stones and turf. On another occasion a heap of potatoes, which was in an inner apartment of one of the houses, was seen to be in commotion,

[p. 114]

and shortly afterwards its contents were hurled into the kitchen, where the inmates of the house, with some of their neighbours, were assembled.

The explanation given by some people of this mysterious affair was as mysterious as the affair itself. It was said that many years before the occurrences which we have now related took place, the farmer who then occupied the premises in which they happened was greatly annoyed by mischievous tricks which were played upon him by a company of fairies who had a habit of holding their rendezvous in his house. The consequence was that this man had to leave the house, which for a long time stood a roofless ruin. After the lapse of many years, and when the story about the dilapidated fabric having been haunted had probably been forgotten, the people who then occupied the adjoining lands unfortunately took some of the stones of the old deserted mansion to repair their own buildings. At this the fairies, or "good people," were much incensed; and they vented their displeasure on the offender in the way we have described.

[p. 115]

A correspondent from County Wexford, who desires to have his name suppressed, writes as follows: "Less than ten miles from the town of, Co. Wexford, lives a small farmer named M--, who by dint of thrift and industry has reared a large family decently and comfortably.

"Some twenty years ago Mr. M--, through the death of a relative, fell in for a legacy of about a hundred pounds. As he was already in rather prosperous circumstances, and as his old thatched dwelling-house was not large enough to accommodate his increasing family, he resolved to spend the money in building a new one."

"Not long afterwards building operations commenced, and in about a year he had a fine slated cottage, or small farm-house, erected and ready for occupation: so far very well; but it is little our friend M-- anticipated the troubles which were still ahead of him. He purchased some new furniture at the nearest town, and on a certain day he removed all the furniture which the old house contained into the new one; and in the evening the family found themselves installed in the latter for

[p. 116]

good, as they thought. They all retired to rest at their usual hour; scarcely were they snugly settled in bed when they heard peculiar noises inside the house. As time passed the din became terrible--there was shuffling of feet, slamming of doors, pulling about of furniture, and so forth. The man of the house got up to explore, but could see nothing, neither was anything disturbed. The door was securely locked as he had left it. After a thorough investigation, in which his wife assisted, he had to own he could find no clue to the cause of the disturbance. The couple went to bed again, and almost immediately the racket recommenced, and continued more or less till dawn.

"The inmates were puzzled and frightened, but determined to try whether the noise would be repeated the next night before telling their neighbours what had happened. But the pandemonium experienced the first night of their occupation was as nothing compared with what they had to endure the second night and for several succeeding nights. Sleep was impossible, and finally Mr. M-- and family in terror

[p. 117]

abandoned their new home, and retook possession of their old one.

"That is the state of things to this day. The old house has been repaired and is tenanted. The new house, a few perches off, facing the public road, is used as a storehouse. The writer has seen it scores of times, and its story is well known all over the country-side. Mr. M-- is disinclined to discuss the matter or to answer questions; but it is said he made several subsequent attempts to occupy the house, but always failed to stand his ground when night came with its usual rowdy disturbances.

"It is said that when building operations were about to begin, a little man of bizarre appearance accosted Mr. M-- and exhorted him to build on a different site; otherwise the consequences would be unpleasant for him and his; while the local peasantry allege that the house was built across a fairy pathway between two raths, and that this was the cause of the trouble. It is quite true that there are two large raths in the vicinity, and the haunted house is directly in a bee-line between them. For myself I offer no explanation; but I guarantee

[p. 118]

the substantial accuracy of what I have stated above."

Professor Barrett, in the paper to which we have already referred, draws certain conclusions from his study of this subject; one of the chief of these is that "the widespread belief in fairies, pixies, gnomes, brownies, &c., probably rests on the varied manifestations of poltergeists." The popular explanation of the above story bears out this conclusion, and it is further emphasized by the following, which comes from Portarlington: A man near that town had saved five hundred pounds, and determined to build a house with the money. He fixed on a certain spot, and began to build, very much against the advice of his friends, who said it was on a fairy path, and would bring him ill-luck. Soon the house was finished, and the owner moved in; but the very first night his troubles began, for some unseen hand threw the furniture about and broke it, while the man himself was injured. Being unwilling to lose the value of his money, he tried to make the best of things. But night after night the disturbances continued, and life in the house was impossible; the

[p. 119]

owner chose the better part of valour and left. No tenant has been found since, and the house stands empty, a silent testimony to the power of the poltergeist.

Poltergeistic phenomena from their very nature lend themselves to spurious reproduction and imitation, as witness the famous case of Cock Lane and many other similar stories. At least one well-known case occurred in Ireland, and is interesting as showing that where fraud is at work, close investigation will discover it. It is related that an old Royal Irish Constabulary pensioner, who obtained a post as emergency man during the land troubles, and who in 1892 was in charge of an evicted farm in the Passage East district, was being continually disturbed by furniture and crockery being thrown about in a mysterious manner. Reports were brought to the police, and they investigated the matter; but nothing was heard or seen beyond knocking on an inside wall of a bedroom in which one of the sons was sleeping; this knocking ceased when the police were in the bedroom, and no search was made in the boy's bed to see if he had a stick. The police therefore

[p. 120]

could find no explanation, the noises continued night after night, and eventually the family left and went to live in Waterford. A great furore was raised when it was learnt that the hauntings had followed them, and again investigation was made, but it seems to have been more careful this time: an eye was kept on the movements of the young son, and at least two independent witnesses saw him throwing things about--fireirons and jam-pots--when he thought his father was not looking. It seems to have been a plot between the mother and son owing to the former's dislike to her husband's occupation, which entailed great unpopularity and considerable personal risk. Fearing for her own and her family's safety, the wife conceived of this plan to force her husband to give up his post. Her efforts were successful, as the man soon resigned his position and went to live elsewhere. [*1]

Footnotes

^101:1 Proceedings, August 1911, pp. 377-95.

^120:1 Proceedings, S.P.R.

      
True Irish Ghost Stories, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 121]

  

CHAPTER V

  

HAUNTED PLACES

THAT houses are haunted and apparitions frequently seen therein are pretty well established facts. The preceding chapters have dealt with this aspect of the subject, and, in view of the weight of evidence to prove the truth of the stories told in them, it would be hard for anyone to doubt that there is such a thing as a haunted house, whatever explanation may be given of "haunting." We now turn to another division of the subject--the outdoor ghost who haunts the roadways, country lanes, and other places. Sceptics on ghostly phenomena are generally pretty full of explanations when they are told of a ghost having been seen in a particular spot, and the teller may be put down as hyper-imaginative, or as having been deluded by moonlight playing through the trees; while cases are not wanting where a reputation for temperance

[p. 122]

has been lost by a man telling his experiences of a ghost he happens to have met along some country lane; and the fact that there are cases where an imaginative and nervous person has mistaken for a ghost a white goat or a sheet hanging on a bush only strengthens the sceptic's disbelief and makes him blind to the very large weight of evidence that can be arrayed against him. Some day, no doubt, psychologists and scientists will be able to give us a complete and satisfactory explanation of these abnormal apparitions, but at present we are very much in the dark, and any explanation that may be put forward is necessarily of a tentative nature.

The following story is sent us by Mr. J. J. Crowley, of the Munster and Leinster Bank, who writes as follows: "The scene is outside Clonmel, on the main road leading up to a nice old residence on the side of the mountains called -- Lodge. I happened to be visiting my friends, two other bank men. It was night, about eight o'clock, moonless, and tolerably dark, and when within a quarter of a mile or perhaps less of a bridge over a small stream near the house

[p. 123]

[paragraph continues] I saw a girl, dressed in white, wearing a black sash and long flowing hair, walk in the direction from me up the culvert of the bridge and disappear down the other side. At the time I saw it I thought it most peculiar that I could distinguish a figure so far away, and thought a light of some sort must be falling on the girl, or that there were some people about and that some of them had struck a match. When I got to the place I looked about, but could find no person there.

"I related this story to my friends some time after arriving, and was then told that one of them had wakened up in his sleep a few nights previously, and had seen an identical figure standing at the foot of his bed, and rushed in fright from his room, taking refuge for the night with the other lodger. They told the story to their landlady, and learned from her that this apparition had frequently been seen about the place, and was the spirit of one of her daughters who had died years previously rather young, and who, previous to her death, had gone about just as we described the figure we had seen. I had heard nothing of this story until after I

[p. 124]

had seen the ghost, and consequently it could not be put down to hallucination or over-imagination on my part."

The experiences of two constables of the Royal Irish Constabulary while on despatch duty one winter's night in the early eighties has been sent us by one of the men concerned, and provides interesting reading. It was a fine moonlight night, with a touch of frost in the air, when these two men set out to march the five miles to the next barrack. Brisk walking soon brought them near their destination. The barrack which they were approaching was on the left side of the road, and facing it on the other side was a white-thorn hedge. The road at this point was wide, and as the two constables got within fifty yards of the barrack, they saw a policeman step out from this hedge and move across the road, looking towards the two men as he did so. He was plainly visible to them both. "He was bare-headed" (runs the account), "with his tunic opened down the front, a stout-built man, black-haired, pale, full face, and short mutton-chop whiskers." They thought he was a newly-joined constable who was doing "guard"

[p. 125]

and had come out to get some fresh air while waiting for a patrol to return. As the two men approached, he disappeared into the shadow of the barrack, and apparently went in by the door; to their amazement, when they came up they found the door closed and bolted, and it was only after loud knocking that they got a sleepy "All right" from some one inside, and after the usual challenging were admitted. There was no sign of the strange policeman when they got in, and on inquiry they learnt that no new constable had joined the station. The two men realised then that they had seen a ghost, but refrained from saying anything about it to the men at the station--a very sensible precaution, considering the loneliness of the average policeman's life in this country.

Some years afterwards the narrator of the above story learnt that a policeman had been lost in a snow-drift near this particular barrack. Whether this be the explanation we leave to others: the facts as stated are well vouched for. There is no evidence to support the theory of hallucination, for the apparition was so vivid that the idea of

[p. 126]

its being other than normal never entered the constables' heads till they had got into the barrack. When they found the door shut and bolted, their amazement was caused by indignation against an apparently unsociable or thoughtless comrade, and it was only afterwards, while discussing the whole thing on their homeward journey, that it occurred to them that it would have been impossible for any ordinary mortal to shut, bolt, and bar a door without making a sound.

In the winter of 1840-1, in the days when snow and ice and all their attendant pleasures were more often in evidence than in these degenerate days, a skating party was enjoying itself on the pond in the grounds of the Castle near Rathfarnham, Co. Dublin. Among the skaters was a man who had with him a very fine curly-coated retriever dog. The pond was thronged with people enjoying themselves, when suddenly the ice gave way beneath him, and the man fell into the water; the dog went to his rescue, and both were drowned. A monument was erected to perpetuate the memory of the dog's heroic self-sacrifice, but only the pedestal now remains. The ghost of the

[p. 127]

dog is said to haunt the grounds and the public road between the castle gate and the Dodder Bridge. Many people have seen the phantom dog, and the story is well known locally.

The ghost of a boy who was murdered by a Romany is said to haunt one of the lodge gates of the Castle demesne, and the lodge-keeper states that he saw it only a short time ago. The Castle, however, is now in possession of Jesuit Fathers, and the Superior assures us that there has been no sign of a ghost for a long time, his explanation being that the place is so crowded out with new buildings "that even a ghost would have some difficulty in finding a comfortable corner."

It is a fairly general belief amongst students of supernatural phenomena that animals have the psychic faculty developed to a greater extent than we have. There are numerous stories which tell of animals being scared and frightened by something that is invisible to a human being, and the explanation given is that the animal has seen a ghost which we cannot see. A story that is told of a certain spot near the village of

[p. 128]

[paragraph continues] G--, in Co. Kilkenny, supports this theory. The account was sent us by the eye-witness of what occurred, and runs as follows: "I was out for a walk one evening near the town of G-- about 8.45 P.M., and was crossing the bridge that leads into the S. Carlow district with a small wire-haired terrier dog. When we were about three-quarters of a mile out, the dog began to bark and yelp in a most vicious manner at 'nothing' on the left-hand side of the roadway and near to a straggling hedge. I felt a bit creepy and that something was wrong. The dog kept on barking, but I could at first see nothing, but on looking closely for a few seconds I believe I saw a small grey-white object vanish gradually and noiselessly into the hedge. No sooner had it vanished than the dog ceased barking, wagged his tail, and seemed pleased with his successful efforts." The narrator goes on to say that he made inquiries when he got home, and found that this spot on the road had a very bad reputation, as people had frequently seen a ghost there, while horses had often to be beaten, coaxed, or led past the place. The explanation locally current is that a suicide was

[p. 129]

buried at the cross-roads near at hand, or that it may be the ghost of a man who is known to have been killed at the spot.

The following story has been sent us by the Rev. H. R. B. Gillespie, to whom it was told by one of the witnesses of the incidents described therein. One bright moonlight night some time ago a party consisting of a man, his two daughters, and a friend were driving along a country road in County Leitrim. They came to a steep hill, and all except the driver got down to walk. One of the two sisters walked on in front, and after her came the other two, followed closely by the trap. They had not gone far, when those in rear saw a shabbily-dressed man walking beside the girl who was leading. But she did not seem to be taking any notice of him, and, wondering what he could be, they hastened to overtake her. But just when they were catching her up the figure suddenly dashed into the shadow of a disused forge, which stood by the side of the road, and as it did so the horse, which up to this had been perfectly quiet, reared up and became unmanageable. The girl beside whom the figure had walked had seen and

[p. 130]

heard nothing. The road was not bordered by trees or a high hedge, so that it could not have been some trick of the moonlight. One of the girls described the appearance of the figure to a local workman, who said, "It is very like a tinker who was found dead in that forge about six months ago."

Here is another story of a haunted spot on a road, where a "ghost" was seen, not at the witching hour of night, not when evening shadows lengthen, but in broad daylight. It is sent to us by the percipient, a lady, who does not desire to have her name mentioned. She was walking along a country road in the vicinity of Cork one afternoon, and passed various people. She then saw coming towards her a country-woman dressed in an old-fashioned style. This figure approached her, and when it drew near, suddenly staggered, as if under the influence of drink, and disappeared! She hastened to the spot, but searched in vain for any clue to the mystery; the road was bounded by high walls, and there was no gateway or gap through which the figure might slip. Much mystified, she continued on her way, and arrived at her destination. She there

[p. 131]

mentioned what had occurred, and was then informed by an old resident in the neighbourhood that that woman had constantly been seen up to twenty years before, but not since that date. By the country-people the road was believed to be haunted, but the percipient did not know this at the time.

The following is sent us by Mr. T. J. Westropp, and has points of its own which are interesting; he states: "On the road from Bray to Windgates, at the Deerpark of Kilruddy, is a spot which, whatever be the explanation, is distinguished by weird sounds and (some say) sights. I on one occasion was walking with a friend to catch the train at Bray about eleven o'clock one evening some twenty-five years ago, when we both heard heavy steps and rustling of bracken in the Deerpark; apparently some one got over the gate, crossed the road with heavy steps and fell from the wall next Bray Head, rustling and slightly groaning. The night was lightsome, though without actual moonlight, and we could see nothing over the wall where we had heard the noise.

"For several years after I dismissed the matter as a delusion; but when I told the

[p. 132]

story to some cousins, they said that another relative (now a Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin) had heard it too, and that there was a local belief that it was the ghost of a poacher mortally wounded by gamekeepers, who escaped across the road and died beyond it." Mr. Westropp afterwards got the relative mentioned above to tell his experience, and it corresponded with his own, except that the ghost was visible. "The clergyman who was rector of Greystones at that time used to say that he had heard exactly similar noises though he had seen nothing."

The following story of an occurrence near Dublin is sent us by a lady who is a very firm believer in ghosts. On a fine night some years ago two sisters were returning home from the theatre. They were walking along a very lonely part of the Kimmage Road about two miles beyond the tram terminus, and were chatting gaily as they went, when suddenly they heard the "clink, clink" of a chain coming towards them. At first they thought it was a goat or a donkey which had got loose, and was dragging its chain along the ground. But they could see nothing, and could hear no noise

[p. 133]

but the clink of the chain, although the road was clear and straight. Nearer and nearer came the noise, gradually getting louder, and as it passed them closely they distinctly felt a blast or whiff of air. They were paralysed with an indefinable fear, and were scarcely able to drag themselves along the remaining quarter of a mile to their house. The elder of the two was in very bad health, and the other had almost to carry her. Immediately she entered the house she collapsed, and had to be revived with brandy.

An old woman, it seems, had been murdered for her savings by a tramp near the spot where this strange occurrence took place, and it is thought that there is a connection between the crime and the haunting of this part of the Kimmage Road. Whatever the explanation may be, the whole story bears every evidence of truth, and it would be hard for anyone to disprove it.

Churchyards are generally considered to be the hunting-ground of all sorts and conditions of ghosts. People who would on all other occasions, when the necessity arises, prove themselves to be possessed of at any rate a normal amount of courage, turn pale

[p. 134]

and shiver at the thought of having to pass through a churchyard at dead of night, It may be some encouragement to such to state that out of a fairly large collection of accounts of haunted places, only one relates to a churchyard. The story is told by Mr. G. H. Millar of Edgeworthstown: "During the winter of 1875," he writes, "I attended a soiree about five miles from here. I was riding, and on my way home about 11.30 P.M. I had to pass by the old ruins and burial-ground of Abbeyshrule. The road led round by two sides of the churchyard. It was a bright moonlight night, and as my girth broke I was walking the horse quite slowly. As I passed the ruin, I saw what I took to be a policeman in a long overcoat; he was walking from the centre of the churchyard towards the corner, and, as far as I could see, would be at the corner by the time I would reach it, and we would meet. Quite suddenly, however, he disappeared, and I could see no trace of him. Soon after I overtook a man who had left the meeting long before me. I expressed wonder that he had not been farther on, and he explained that he went a 'round-about'

[p. 135]

way to avoid passing the old abbey, as he did not want to see 'The Monk.' On questioning him, he told me that a monk was often seen in the churchyard."

A story told of a ghost which haunts a certain spot on an estate near the city of Waterford, bears a certain resemblance to the last story for the reason that it was only after the encounter had taken place in both cases that it was known that anything out of the ordinary had been seen. In the early eighties of last century -- Court, near Waterford, was occupied by Mr. and Mrs. S-- and their family of two young boys and a girl of twenty-one years of age. Below the house is a marshy glen with a big open drain cut through it. Late one evening the daughter was out shooting rabbits near this drain and saw, as she thought, her half-brother standing by the drain in a sailor suit, which like other small boys he wore. She called to him once or twice, end to her surprise got no reply. She went towards him, and when she got close he suddenly disappeared. The next day she asked an old dependent, who had lived many years in the place, if there was anything

[p. 136]

curious about the glen. He replied at once: "Oh! you mean the little sailor man. Sure, he won't do you any harm." This was the first she had heard of anything of the sort, but it was then found that none of the country-people would go through the glen after dusk.

Some time afterwards two sons of the clergyman of the parish in which -- Court stands were out one evening fishing in the drain, when one of them suddenly said, "What's that sailor doing there?" The other saw nothing, and presently the figure vanished. At the time of the appearance neither had heard of Miss S--'s experience, and no one has been able to explain it, as there is apparently no tradition of any "little sailor man" having been there in the flesh.

Mr. Joseph M'Crossan, a journalist on the staff of the Strabane Chronicle, has sent us a cutting from that paper describing a ghost which appeared to men working in an engine-house at Strabane railway station on two successive nights in October 1913. The article depicts very graphically the antics of the ghost and the fear of the men who saw it. Mr. M'Crossan interviewed

[p. 137]

one of these men (Pinkerton by name), and the story as told in his words is as follows: "Michael Madden, Fred Oliphant, and I were engaged inside a shed cleaning engines, when, at half-past twelve (midnight),a knocking came to all the doors, and continued without interruption, accompanied by unearthly yells. The three of us went to one of the doors, and saw--I could swear to it without doubt--the form of a man of heavy build. I thought I was about to faint. My hair stood high on my head. We all squealed for help, when the watchman and signalman came fast to our aid. Armed with a crowbar, the signalman made a dash at the 'spirit,' but was unable to strike down the ghost, which hovered about our shed till half-past two. It was moonlight, and we saw it plainly. There was no imagination on our part. We three cleaners climbed up the engine, and hid on the roof of the engine, lying there till morning at our wit's end. The next night it came at half-past one. Oliphant approached the spirit within two yards, but he then collapsed, the ghost uttering terrible yells. I commenced work, but the spirit 'gazed' into

[p. 138]

my face, and I fell forward against the engine. Seven of us saw the ghost this time. Our clothes and everything in the shed were tossed and thrown about."

The other engine-cleaners were interviewed and corroborated Pinkerton's account. One of them stated that he saw the ghost run up and down a ladder leading to a water tank and disappear into it, while the signalman described how he struck at the ghost with a crowbar, but the weapon seemed to go through it. The spirit finally took his departure through the window.

The details of this affair are very much on the lines of the good old-fashioned ghost yarns. But it is hard to see how so many men could labour under the same delusion. The suggestion that the whole thing was a practical joke may also be dismissed, for if the apparition had flesh and bones the crowbar would have soon proved it. The story goes that a man was murdered near the spot some time ago; whether there is any connection between this crime and the apparition it would be hard to say. However, we are not concerned with explanations

[p. 139]

[paragraph continues] (for who, as yet, can explain the supernatural?); the facts as stated have all the appearance of truth.

Mr. Patrick Ryan, of P--, Co. Limerick, gives us two stories as he heard them related by Mr. Michael O'Dwyer of the same place. The former is evidently a very strong believer in supernatural phenomena, but he realises how strong is the unbelief of many, and in support of his stories he gives names of several persons who will vouch for the truth of them. With a few alterations, we give the story in his own words: "Mr. O'Dwyer has related how one night, after he had carried the mails to the train, he went with some fodder for a heifer in a field close to the railway station near to which was a creamery. He discovered the animal grazing near the creamery although how she came to be there was a mystery, as a broad trench separated it from the rest of the field, which is only spanned by a plank used by pedestrians when crossing the field. 'Perhaps,' he said in explanation, 'it was that he should go there to hear.' It was about a quarter to twelve (midnight), and, having searched the field in vain, he was returning home,

[p. 140]

when, as he crossed the plank, he espied the heifer browsing peacefully in the aforementioned part of the field which was near the creamery. He gave her the fodder and --Heavens! was he suffering from delusions? Surely his ears were not deceiving him--from the creamery funnel there arose a dense volume of smoke mingled with the sharp hissing of steam and the rattling of cans, all as if the creamery were working, and it were broad daylight. His heifer became startled and bellowed frantically. O'Dwyer, himself a man of nerves, yet possessing all the superstitions of the Celt, was startled and ran without ceasing to his home near by, where he went quickly to bed.

"O'Dwyer is not the only one who has seen this, as I have been told by several of my friends how they heard it. Who knows the mystery surrounding this affair!"

The second story relates to a certain railway station in the south of Ireland; again we use Mr. Ryan's own words: "A near relative of mine" (he writes) "once had occasion to go to the mail train to meet a friend. While sitting talking to O'Dwyer, whom he met on the platform, he heard talking going

[p. 141]

on in the waiting-room. O'Dwyer heard it also, and they went to the door, but saw nothing save for the light of a waning moon which filtered in through the window. Uncertain, they struck matches, but saw nothing. Again they sat outside, and again they heard the talking, and this time they did not go to look, for they knew about it. In the memory of the writer a certain unfortunate person committed suicide on the railway, and was carried to the waiting-room pending an inquest. He lay all night there till the inquest was held next day. 'Let us not look further into the matter,' said O'Dwyer, and my relative having acquiesced, he breathed a shuddering prayer for the repose of the dead."

The following story, which has been sent as a personal experience by Mr. William Mackey of Strabane, is similar in many ways to an extraordinary case of retro-cognitive vision which occurred some years ago to two English ladies who were paying a visit to Versailles; and who published their experiences in a book entitled, An Adventure (London, 1911). Mr. Mackey writes: "It was during the severe winter of the Crimean

[p. 142]

[paragraph continues] War, when indulging in my favourite sport of wild-fowl shooting, that I witnessed the following strange scene. It was a bitterly cold night towards the end of November or beginning of December; the silvery moon had sunk in the west shortly before midnight; the sport had been all that could be desired, when I began to realise that the blood was frozen in my veins, and I was on the point of starting for home, when my attention was drawn to the barking of a dog close by, which was followed in a few seconds by the loud report of a musket, the echo of which had scarcely died away in the silent night, when several musket-shots went off in quick succession; this seemed to be the signal for a regular fusillade of musketry, and it was quite evident from the nature of the firing that there was attack and defence.

"For the life of me I could not understand what it all meant; not being superstitious I did not for a moment imagine it was supernatural, notwithstanding that my courageous dog was crouching in abject terror between my legs; beads of perspiration began to trickle down from my forehead, when suddenly there arose a flame as

[p. 143]

if a house were on fire, but I knew from the position of the blaze (which was only a few hundred yards from where I stood), that there was no house there, or any combustible that would burn, and what perplexed me most was to see pieces of burning thatch and timber sparks fall hissing into the water at my feet. When the fire seemed at its height the firing appeared to weaken, and when the clear sound of a bugle floated out on the midnight air, it suddenly ceased, and I could hear distinctly the sound of cavalry coming at a canter, their accoutrements jingling quite plainly on the frosty air; in a very short time they arrived at the scene of the fight. I thought it an eternity until they took their departure, which they did at the walk.

"It is needless to say that, although the scene of this tumult was on my nearest way home, I did not venture that way, as, although there are many people who would say that I never knew what fear was, I must confess on this occasion I was thoroughly frightened.

"At breakfast I got a good sound rating from my father for staying out so late.

[p. 144]

[paragraph continues] My excuse was that I fell asleep and had a horrible dream, which I related. When I finished I was told I had been dreaming with my eyes open!--that I was not the first person who had witnessed this strange sight. He then told me the following narrative: 'It was towards the end of the seventeenth century that a widow named Sally Mackey and her three sons lived on the outskirts of the little settlement of the Mackeys. A warrant was issued by the Government against the three sons for high treason, the warrant being delivered for execution to the officer in command of the infantry regiment stationed at Lifford. A company was told off for the purpose of effecting the arrest, and the troops set out from Lifford at 11 P.M.

"'The cottage home of the Mackeys was approached by a bridle-path, leading from the main road to Derry, which only permitted the military to approach in single file; they arrived there at midnight, and the first intimation the inmates had of danger was the barking, and then the shooting, of the collie dog. Possessing as they did several stand of arms, they opened fire

[p. 145]

on the soldiers as they came in view and killed and wounded several; it was the mother, Sally Mackey, who did the shooting, the sons loading the muskets. Whether the cottage went on fire by accident or design was never known; it was only when the firing from the cottage ceased and the door was forced open that the officer in command rushed in and brought out the prostrate form of the lady, who was severely wounded and burned. All the sons perished, but the soldiers suffered severely, a good many being killed and wounded.

"'The firing was heard by the sentries at Lifford, and a troop of cavalry was despatched to the scene of conflict, but only arrived in time to see the heroine dragged from the burning cottage. She had not, however, been fatally wounded, and lived for many years afterwards with a kinsmen. My father remembered conversing with old men, when he was a boy, who remembered her well. She seemed to take a delight in narrating incidents of the fight to those who came to visit her, and would always finish up by making them feel the pellets between the skin and her ribs.'"

      
True Irish Ghost Stories, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 146]

  

CHAPTER VI

  

APPARITIONS AT OR AFTER DEATH

IT has been said by a very eminent literary man that the accounts of the appearance of people at or shortly after the moment of death make very dull reading as a general rule. This may be; they are certainly not so lengthy, or full of detail, as the accounts of haunted houses--nor could such be expected. In our humble opinion, however, they are full of interest, and open up problems of telepathy and thought-transference to which the solutions may not be found for years to come. That people have seen the image of a friend or relative at the moment of dissolution, sometimes in the ordinary garb of life, sometimes with symbolical accompaniments, or that they have been made acquainted in some abnormal manner with the fact that such a one has passed away, seems to be demonstrated beyond all reasonable doubt. But we would hasten to add that

[p. 147]

such appearances are not a proof of existence after death, nor can they be regarded in the light of special interventions of a merciful Providence. Were they either they would surely occur far oftener. The question is, Why do they occur at all? As it is, the majority of them seem to happen for no particular reason, and are often seen by persons who have little or no connection with the deceased, not by their nearest and dearest, as one might expect. It is supposed they are veridical hallucinations, i.e. ones which correspond with objective events at a distance, and are caused by a telepathic impact conveyed from the mind of an absent agent to the mind of the percipient.

From their nature they fall under different heads. The majority of them occur at what may most conveniently be described as the time of death, though how closely they approximate in reality to the instant of the Great Change it is impossible to say. So we have divided this chapter into three groups:

(1) Appearances at the time of death (as explained above).

(2) Appearances clearly after the time of death.

[p. 148]

(3) In this third group we hope to give three curious tales of appearances some time before death.

  

GROUP I

We commence this group with stories in which the phenomena connected with the respective deaths were not perceived as representations of the human form. In the first only sounds were heard. It is sent as a personal experience by the Archdeacon of Limerick, Very Rev. J. A. Haydn, LL.D. "In the year 1879 there lived in the picturesque village of Adare, at a distance of about eight or nine miles from my residence, a District Inspector named --, with whom I enjoyed a friendship of the most intimate and fraternal kind. At the time I write of, Mrs. -- was expecting the arrival of their third child. She was a particularly tiny and fragile woman, and much anxiety was felt as to the result of the impending event. He and she had very frequently spent pleasant days at my house, with all the apartments of which they were thoroughly acquainted--a fact of importance in this narrative.

[p. 149]

"On Wednesday, October 17, 1879, I had a very jubilant letter from my friend, announcing that the expected event had successfully happened on the previous day, and that all was progressing satisfactorily. On the night of the following Wednesday, October 22, I retired to bed at about ten o'clock. My wife, the children, and two maid-servants were all sleeping upstairs, and I had a small bed in my study, which was on the ground floor. The house was shrouded in darkness, and the only sound that broke the silence was the ticking of the hall-clock.

"I was quietly preparing to go to sleep, when I was much surprised at hearing, with the most unquestionable distinctness, the sound of light, hurried footsteps, exactly suggestive of those of an active, restless young female, coming in from the hall door and traversing the hall. They then, apparently with some hesitation, followed the passage leading to the study door, on arriving at which they stopped. I then heard the sound of a light, agitated hand apparently searching for the handle of the door. By this time, being quite sure that my wife had come

[p. 150]

down and wanted to speak to me, I sat up in bed, and called to her by name, asking what was the matter. As there was no reply, and the sounds had ceased, I struck a match, lighted a candle, and opened the door. No one was visible or audible. I went upstairs, found all the doors shut and everyone asleep. Greatly puzzled, I returned to the study and went to bed, leaving the candle alight. Immediately the whole performance was circumstantially repeated, but this time the handle of the door was grasped by the invisible hand, and partly turned, then relinquished. I started out of bed and renewed my previous search, with equally futile results. The clock struck eleven, and from that time all disturbances ceased.

"On Friday morning I received a letter stating that Mrs. -- had died at about midnight on the previous Wednesday. I hastened off to Adare and had an interview with my bereaved friend. With one item of our conversation I will close. He told me that his wife sank rapidly on Wednesday, until when night came on she became delirious. She spoke incoherently, as if revisiting scenes and places once familiar. 'She thought

[p. 151]

she was in your house,' he said, 'and was apparently holding a conversation with you, as she used to keep silence at intervals as if listening to your replies.' I asked him if he could possibly remember the hour at which the imaginary conversation took place. He replied that, curiously enough, he could tell it accurately, as he had looked at his watch, and found the time between half-past ten and eleven o'clock--the exact time of the mysterious manifestations heard by me."

A lady sends the following personal experience: "I had a cousin in the country who was not very strong, and on one occasion she desired me to go to her, and accompany her to K--. I consented to do so, and arranged a day to go and meet her: this was in the month of February. The evening before I was to go, I was sitting by the fire in my small parlour about 5 P.M. There was no light in the room except what proceeded from the fire. Beside the fireplace was an armchair, where my cousin usually sat when she was with me. Suddenly that chair was illuminated by a light so intensely bright that it actually seemed to heave under it, though the remainder of

[p. 152]

the room remained in semi-darkness. I called out in amazement, 'What has happened to the chair?' In a moment the light vanished, and the chair was as before. In the morning I heard that my cousin had died about the same time that I saw the light."

We now come to the ordinary type, i.e. where a figure appears. The following tale illustrates a point we have already alluded to, namely, that the apparition is sometimes seen by a disinterested person, and not by those whom one would naturally expect should see it. A lady writes as follows: "At Island Magee is the Knowehead Lonan, a long, hilly, narrow road, bordered on either side by high thorn-hedges and fields. Twenty years ago, when I was a young girl, I used to go to the post-office at the Knowehead on Sunday mornings down the Lonan, taking the dogs for the run. One Sunday as I had got to the top of the hill on my return journey, I looked back, and saw a man walking rapidly after me, but still a good way off. I hastened my steps, for the day was muddy, and I did not want him to see me in a bedraggled state. But

[p. 153]

he seemed to come on so fast as to be soon close behind me, and I wondered he did not pass me, so on we went, I never turning to look back. About a quarter of a mile farther on I met A. B. on 'Dick's Brae,' on her way to church or Sunday school, and stopped to speak to her. I wanted to ask who the man was, but he seemed to be so close that I did not like to do so, and expected he had passed. When I moved on, I was surprised to find he was still following me, while my dogs were lagging behind with downcast heads and drooping tails.

"I then passed a cottage where C. D. was out feeding her fowls. I spoke to her, and then feeling that there was no longer anyone behind, looked back, and saw the man standing with her. I would not have paid any attention to the matter had not A. B. been down at our house that afternoon, and I casually asked her:

"'Who was the man who was just behind me when I met you on Dick's Brae?'

"'What man?' said she; and noting my look of utter astonishment, added, 'I give you my word I never met a soul but yourself

[p. 154]

from the time I left home till I went down to Knowehead Lonan.'

"Next day C. D. came to work for us, and I asked her who was the man who was standing beside her after I passed her on Sunday.

"'Naebody!' she replied, 'I saw naebody but yoursel'.'

"It all seemed very strange, and so they thought too. About three weeks later news. came that C. D.'s only brother, a sailor, was washed overboard that Sunday morning."

The following story is not a first-hand experience, but is sent by the gentleman to whom it was related by the percipient. The latter said to him:

"I was sitting in this same chair I am in at present one evening, when I heard a knock at the front door. I went myself to see who was there, and on opening the door saw my old friend P. Q. standing outside with his gun in his hand. I was surprised at seeing him, but asked him to come in and have something. He came inside the porch into the lamplight, and stood there for a few moments; then he muttered something about being sorry he had disturbed me, and

[p. 155]

that he was on his way to see his brother, Colonel Q., who lived about a mile farther on. Without any further explanation he walked away towards the gate into the dusk.

"I was greatly surprised and perplexed, but as he had gone I sat down again by the fire. About an hour later another knock came to the door, and I again went out to see who was there. On opening it I found P. Q.'s groom holding a horse, and he asked me where he was, as he had missed his way in the dark, and did not know the locality. I told him, and then asked him where he was going, and why, and he replied that his master was dead (at his own house about nine miles away), and that he had been sent to announce the news to Colonel Q."

Miss Grene, of Grene Park, Co. Tipperary, relates a story which was told her by the late Miss --, sister of a former Dean of Cashel. The latter, an old lady, stated that one time she was staying with a friend in a house in the suburbs of Dublin. In front of the house was the usual grass plot, divided into two by a short gravel path which led down to a gate which opened on to the street. She and her friend were one day

[p. 156]

engaged in needlework in one of the front rooms, when they heard the gate opening, and on looking out the window they saw an elderly gentleman of their acquaintance coming up the path. As he approached the door both exclaimed: "Oh, how good of him to come and see us!" As he was not shown into the sitting-room, one of them rang the bell, and said to the maid when she appeared, "You have not let Mr. So-and-so in; he is at the door for some little time." The maid went to the hall door, and returned to say that there was no one there. Next day they learnt that he had died just at the hour that they had seen him coming up the path.

The following tale contains a curious point. A good many years ago the Rev. Henry Morton, now dead, held a curacy in Ireland. He had to pass through the graveyard when leaving his house to visit the parishioners. One beautiful moonlight night he was sent for to visit a sick person, and was accompanied by his brother, a medical man, who was staying with him. After performing the religious duty they returned through the churchyard, and were chatting about

[p. 157]

various matters when to their astonishment a figure passed them, both seeing it. This figure left the path, and went in among the gravestones, and then disappeared. They could not understand this at all, so they went to the spot where the disappearance took place, but, needless to say, could find nobody after the most careful search. Next morning they heard that the person visited had died just after their departure, while the most marvellous thing of all was that the burial took place at the very spot where they had seen the phantom disappear.

The Rev. D. B. Knox communicates the following: In a girls' boarding-school several years ago two of the boarders were sleeping in a large double-bedded room with two doors. About two o'clock in the morning the girls were awakened by the entrance of a tall figure in clerical attire, the face of which they did not see. They screamed in fright, but the figure moved in a slow and stately manner past their beds, and out the other door. It also appeared to one or two of the other boarders, and seemed to be looking for some one. At length it reached the bed of one who was evidently

[p. 158]

known to it. The girl woke up and recognised her father. He did not speak, but gazed for a few moments at his daughter, and then vanished. Next morning a telegram was handed to her which communicated the sad news that her father had died on the previous evening at the hour when he appeared to her.

Here is a story of a very old type. It occurred a good many years ago. A gentleman named Miller resided in Co. Wexford, while his friend and former schoolfellow lived in the North of Ireland. This long friendship led them to visit at each other's houses from time to time, but for Mr. Miller there was a deep shadow of sorrow over these otherwise happy moments, for, while he enjoyed the most enlightened religious opinions, his friend was an unbeliever. The last time they were together Mr. Scott said, "My dear friend, let us solemnly promise that whichever of us shall die first shall appear to the other after death, if it be possible." "Let it be so, if God will," replied Mr. Miller. One morning some time after, about three o'clock, the latter was awakened by a brilliant light in his bedroom;

[p. 159]

he imagined that the house must be on fire, when he felt what seemed to be a hand laid on him, and heard his friend's voice say distinctly, "There is a God, just but terrible in His judgments," and all again was dark. Mr. Miller at once wrote down this remarkable experience. Two days later he received a letter announcing Mr. Scott's death on the night, and at the hour, that he had seen the light in his room.

The above leads us on to the famous "Beresford Ghost," which is generally regarded as holding the same position relative to Irish ghosts that Dame Alice Kyteler used to hold with respect to Irish witches and wizards. The story is so well known, and has been published so often, that only a brief allusion is necessary, with the added information that the best version is to be found in Andrew Lang's Dreams and Ghosts, chapter viii. (Silver Library Edition). Lord Tyrone appeared after death one night to Lady Beresford at Gill Hall, in accordance with a promise (as in the last story) made in early life. He assured her that the religion as revealed by Jesus Christ was the only true one (both he and Lady Beresford

[p. 160]

had been brought up Deists), told her that she was enceinte and would bear a son, and also foretold her second marriage, and the time of her death. In proof whereof he drew the bed-hangings through an iron hook, wrote his name in her pocket-book, and finally placed a hand cold as marble on her wrist, at which the sinews shrunk up.. To the day of her death Lady Beresford wore a black ribbon round her wrist; this was taken off before her burial, and it was. found the nerves were withered, and the sinews shrunken, as she had previously described to her children.

  

GROUP II

We now come to some stories of apparitions seen some time after the hour of death. Canon Ross-Lewin, of Limerick, furnishes the following incident in his own family. "My uncle, John Dillon Ross-Lewin, lieutenant in the 30th Regiment, was mortally wounded at Inkerman on November 5, 1854, and died on the morning of the 6th. He appeared that night to his mother, who was then on a visit in Co. Limerick, intimating

[p. 161]

his death, and indicating where the wound was. The strangest part of the occurrence is, that when news came later on of the casualties at Inkerman, the first account as to the wound did not correspond with what the apparition indicated to his mother, but the final account did. Mrs. Ross-Lewin was devoted to her son, and he was equally attached to her; she, as the widow of a field officer who fought at Waterloo, would be able to comprehend the battle scene, and her mind at the time was centred on the events of the Crimean War."

A clergyman, who desires that all names be suppressed, sends the following: "In my wife's father's house a number of female servants were kept, of whom my wife, before she was married, was in charge. On one occasion the cook took ill with appendicitis, and was operated on in the Infirmary, where I attended her as hospital chaplain. She died, however, and was buried by her friends. Some days after the funeral my wife was standing at a table in the kitchen which was so placed that any person standing at it could see into the

[p. 162]

passage outside the kitchen, if the door happened to be open. [The narrator enclosed a rough plan which made the whole story perfectly clear.] She was standing one day by herself at the table, and the door was open. This was in broad daylight, about eleven o'clock in the morning in the end of February or beginning of March. She was icing a cake, and therefore was hardly thinking of ghosts. Suddenly she looked up from her work, and glanced through the open kitchen door into the passage leading past the servants' parlour into the dairy. She saw quite distinctly the figure of the deceased cook pass towards the dairy; she was dressed in the ordinary costume she used to wear in the mornings, and seemed in every respect quite normal. My wife was not, at the moment, in the least shocked or surprised, but on the contrary she followed, and searched in the dairy, into which she was just in time to see her skirts disappearing. Needless to say, nothing was visible."

Canon Courtenay Moore, M.A., Rector of Mitchelstown, contributes a personal experience. "It was about eighteen years ago--I cannot fix the exact date--that Samuel

[p. 163]

[paragraph continues] Penrose returned to this parish from the Argentine. He was getting on so well abroad that he would have remained there, but his wife fell ill, and for her sake he returned to Ireland. He was a carpenter by trade, and his former employer was glad to take him into his service again. Sam was a very respectable man of sincere religious feelings. Soon after his return he met with one or two rather severe accidents, and had a strong impression that a fatal one would happen him before long; and so it came to pass. A scaffolding gave way one day, and precipitated him on to a flagged stone floor. He did not die immediately, but his injuries proved fatal. He died in a Cork hospital soon after his admission: I went to Cork to officiate at his funeral. About noon the next day I was standing at my hall door, and the form of poor Sam, the upper half of it, seemed to pass before me. He looked peaceful and happy--it was a momentary vision, but perfectly distinct. The truncated appearance puzzled me very much, until some time after I read a large book by F. W. H. Myers, in which he made a scientific analysis and induction of

[p. 164]

such phenomena, and said that they were almost universally seen in this half-length form. I do not profess to explain what I saw: its message, if it had a message, seemed to be that poor Sam was at last at rest and in peace."

A story somewhat similar to the above was related to us, in which the apparition seems certainly to have been sent with a definite purpose. Two maiden ladies, whom we shall call Miss A. X. and Miss B. Y., lived together for a good many years. As one would naturally expect, they were close friends, and had the most intimate relations with each other, both being extremely religious women. In process of time Miss B. Y. died, and after death Miss A. X. formed the impression, for some unknown reason, that all was not well with her friend--that, in fact, her soul was not at rest. This thought caused her great uneasiness and trouble of mind. One day she was sitting in her armchair thinking over this, and crying bitterly. Suddenly she saw in front of her a brilliant light, in the midst of which was her friend's face, easily recognisable, but transfigured, and wearing

[p. 165]

a most beatific expression. She rushed towards it with her arms outstretched, crying, "Oh! B., why have you come?" At this the apparition faded away, but ever after Miss A. X. was perfectly tranquil in mind with respect to her friend's salvation.

This group may be brought to a conclusion by a story sent by Mr. T. MacFadden. It is not a personal experience, but happened to his father, and in an accompanying letter he states that he often heard the latter describe the incidents related therein, and that he certainly saw the ghost.

"The island of Inishinny, which is the scene of this story, is one of the most picturesque islands on the Donegal coast. With the islands of Gola and Inismaan it forms a perfectly natural harbour and safe anchorage for ships during storms. About Christmas some forty or fifty years ago a small sailing-ship put into Gola Roads (as this anchorage is called) during a prolonged storm, and the captain and two men had to obtain provisions from Bunbeg, as, owing to their being detained so long, their supply was almost exhausted. They had previously visited the island on several occasions, and

[p. 166]

made themselves at home with the people from the mainland who were temporarily resident upon it.

"The old bar at its best was never very safe for navigation, and this evening it was in its element, as with every storm it presented one boiling, seething mass of foam. The inhabitants of the island saw the frail small boat from the ship securely inside the bar, and prophesied some dire calamity should the captain and the two sailors venture to return to the ship that night. But the captain and his companions, having secured sufficient provisions, decided (as far as I can remember the story), even in spite of the entreaties of those on shore, to return to the ship. The storm was increasing, and what with their scanty knowledge of the intricacies of the channel, and the darkness of the night, certain it was the next morning their craft was found washed ashore on the island, and the body of the captain was discovered by the first man who made the round of the shore looking for logs of timber, or other useful articles washed ashore from wrecks. The bodies of the two sailors were never recovered, and

[p. 167]

word was sent immediately to the captain's wife in Derry, who came in a few days and gave directions for the disposal of her husband's corpse.

"The island was only temporarily inhabited by a few people who had cattle and horses grazing there for some weeks in the year, and after this catastrophe they felt peculiarly lonely, and sought refuge from their thoughts by all spending the evening together in one house. This particular evening they were all seated round the fire having a chat, when they heard steps approaching the door. Though the approach was fine, soft sand, yet the steps were audible as if coming on hard ground. They knew there was no one on the island save the few who were sitting quietly round the fire, and so in eager expectation they faced round to the door. What was their amazement when the door opened, and a tall, broad-shouldered man appeared and filled the whole doorway--and that man the captain who had been buried several days previously. He wore the identical suit in which he had often visited the island and even the "cheese-cutter" cap, so common

[p. 168]

a feature of sea-faring men's apparel, was not wanting. All were struck dumb with terror, and a woman who sat in a corner opposite the door, exclaimed in Irish in a low voice to my father:

"'O God! Patrick, there's the captain.'

"My father, recovering from the first shock, when he saw feminine courage finding expression in words, said in Irish to the apparition:

"'Come in!'

"They were so certain of the appearance that they addressed him in his own language, as they invariably talked Irish in the district in those days. But no sooner had he uttered the invitation than the figure, without the least word or sign, moved back, and disappeared from their view. They rushed out, but could discover no sign of any living person within the confines of the island. Such is the true account of an accident, by which three men lost their lives, and the ghostly sequel, in which one of them appeared to the eyes of four people, two of whom are yet alive, and can vouch for the accuracy of this narrative."

[p. 169]

  

GROUP III

We now come to the third group of this chapter, in which we shall relate two firsthand experiences of tragedies being actually witnessed some time before they happened, as well as a reliable second-hand story of an apparition being seen two days before the death occurred. The first of these is sent by a lady, the percipient, who desires that her name be suppressed; with it was enclosed a letter from a gentleman who stated that he could testify to the truth of the following facts:

"The morning of May 18, 1902, was one of the worst that ever dawned in Killarney. All through the day a fierce nor'-wester raged, and huge white-crested waves, known locally as 'The O'Donoghue's white horses,' beat on the shores of Lough Leane. Then followed hail-showers such as I have never seen before or since. Hailstones quite as large as small marbles fell with such rapidity, and seemed so hard that the glass in the windows of the room in which I stood appeared to be about to break into fragments every moment. I remained

[p. 170]

at the window, gazing out on the turbulent waters of the lake. Sometimes a regular fog appeared, caused by the terrible downpour of rain and the fury of the gale.

"During an occasional lull I could see the islands plainly looming in the distance. In one of these clear intervals, the time being about 12.30 P.M., five friends of mine were reading in the room in which I stood. 'Quick! quick!' I cried. 'Is that a boat turned over?' My friends all ran to the windows, but could see nothing. I persisted, however, and said, 'It is on its side, with the keel turned towards us, and it is empty.' Still none of my friends could see anything. I then ran out, and got one of the men-servants to go down to a gate, about one hundred yards nearer the lake than where I stood. He had a powerful telescope, and remained with great difficulty in the teeth of the storm with his glass for several minutes, but could see nothing. When he returned another man took his place, but he also failed to see anything.

"I seemed so distressed that those around me kept going backwards and forwards to the windows, and then asked me what was

[p. 171]

the size of the boat I had seen. I gave them the exact size, measuring by landmarks. They then assured me that I must be absolutely wrong, as it was on rare occasions that a 'party' boat, such as the one I described, could venture on the lakes on such a day. Therefore there were seven persons who thought I was wrong in what I had seen. I still contended that I saw the boat, the length of which I described, as plainly as possible.

"The day wore on, and evening came. The incident was apparently more or less forgotten by all but me, until at 8 A.M. on the following morning, when the maid brought up tea, her first words were, 'Ah, miss, is it not terrible about the accident!' Naturally I said, 'What accident, Mary?' She replied, 'There were thirteen people drowned yesterday evening out of a four-oared boat.' That proved that the boat I had seen at 12.30 P.M. was a vision foreshadowing the wreck of the boat off Darby's Garden at 5.30 P.M. The position, shape, and size of the boat seen by me were identical with the one that was lost on the evening of May 18, 1902."

[p. 172]

The second story relates how a lady witnessed a vision (shall we call it) of a suicide a week before the terrible deed was committed. This incident surely makes it clear that such cannot be looked upon as special interventions of Providence, for if the lady had recognised the man, she might have prevented his rash act. Mrs. MacAlpine says: "In June 1889, I drove to Castleblaney, in Co. Monaghan, to meet my sister: I expected her at three o'clock, but as she did not come by that train, I put up the horse and went for a walk in the demesne. At length becoming tired, I sat down on a rock by the edge of a lake. My attention was quite taken up with the beauty of the scene before me, as it was a glorious summer's day. Presently I felt a cold chill creep through me, and a curious stiffness came over my limbs, as if I could not move, though wishing to do so. I felt frightened, yet chained to the spot, and as if impelled to stare at the water straight before me. Gradually a black cloud seemed to rise, and in the midst of it I saw a tall man, in a tweed suit, jump into the water, and sink. In a moment the darkness was

[p. 173]

gone, and I again became sensible of the heat and sunshine, but I was awed, and felt eerie. This happened about June 25, and on July 3 a Mr. --, a bank clerk, committed suicide by drowning himself in the lake." [*1]

The following incident occurred in the United States, but, as it is closely connected with this country, it will not seem out of place to insert it here. It is sent by Mr. Richard Hogan as the personal experience of his sister, Mrs. Mary Murnane, and is given in her own words.

"On the 4th of August 1886, at 10.30 o'clock in the morning, I left my own house, 21 Montrose St., Philadelphia, to do some shopping. I had not proceeded more than fifty yards when on turning the corner of the street I observed my aunt approaching me within five or six yards. I was greatly astonished, for the last letter I had from home (Limerick) stated that she was dying of consumption, but the thought occurred to me that she might have recovered somewhat, and come out to Philadelphia. This opinion was quickly changed as we

[p. 174]

approached each other, for our eyes met, and she had the colour of one who had risen from the grave. I seemed to feel my hair stand on end, for just as we were about to pass each other she turned her face towards me, and I gasped, 'My God, she is dead, and is going to speak to me!' but no word was spoken, and she passed on. After proceeding a short distance I looked back, and she continued on to Washington Avenue, where she disappeared from me. There was no other person near at the time, and being so close, I was well able to note what she wore. She held a sunshade over her head, and the clothes, hat, &c., were those I knew so well before I left Ireland. I wrote home telling what I had seen, and asking if she was dead. I received a reply saying she was not dead at the date I saw her, but had been asking if a letter had come from me for some days before her death. It was just two days before she actually died that I had seen her."

Footnotes

^173:1 Proceedings S.P.R., x. 332.

      
True Irish Ghost Stories, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 175]

  

CHAPTER VII

  

BANSHEES, AND OTHER DEATH-WARNINGS

OF all Irish ghosts, fairies, or bogies, the Banshee (sometimes called locally the "Boheentha" or "Bankeentha") is the best known to the general public: indeed, cross-Channel visitors would class her with pigs, potatoes, and other fauna and flora of Ireland, and would expect her to make manifest her presence to them as being one of the sights of the country. She is a spirit with a lengthy pedigree--how lengthy no man can say, as its roots go back into the dim, mysterious past. The most famous Banshee of ancient times was that attached to the kingly house of O'Brien, Aibhill, who haunted the rock of Craglea above Killaloe, near the old palace of Kincora. In A.D. 1014 was fought the battle of Clontarf, from which the aged king, Brian Boru, knew that he would never come away alive, for the previous night Aibhill had appeared to him to tell him of his impending fate.

[p. 176]

[paragraph continues] The Banshee's method of foretelling death in olden times differed from that adopted by her at the present day: now she wails and wrings her hands, as a general rule, but in the old Irish tales she is to be found washing human heads and limbs, or bloodstained clothes, till the water is all dyed with human blood--this would take place before a battle. So it would seem that in the course of centuries her attributes and characteristics have changed somewhat.

Very different descriptions are given of her personal appearance. Sometimes she is young and beautiful, sometimes old and of a fearsome appearance. One writer describes her as "a tall, thin woman with uncovered head, and long hair that floated round her shoulders, attired in something which seemed either a loose white cloak, or a sheet thrown hastily around her, uttering piercing cries." Another person, a coachman, saw her one evening sitting on a stile in the yard; she seemed to be a very small woman, with blue eyes, long light hair, and wearing a red cloak. Other descriptions will be found in this chapter. By the way, it does not seem to be true that the Banshee exclusively follows

[p. 177]

families of Irish descent, for the last incident had reference to the death of a member of a Co. Galway family English by name and origin.

One of the oldest and best-known Banshee stories is that related in the Memoirs of Lady Fanshaw. [*1] In 1642 her husband, Sir Richard, and she chanced to visit a friend, the head of an Irish sept, who resided in his ancient baronial castle, surrounded with a moat. At midnight she was awakened by a ghastly and supernatural scream, and looking out of bed, beheld in the moonlight a female face and part of the form hovering at the window. The distance from the ground, as well as the circumstance of the moat, excluded the possibility that what she beheld was of this world. The face was that of a young and rather handsome woman, but pale, and the hair, which was reddish, was loose and dishevelled. The dress, which Lady Fanshaw's terror did not prevent her remarking accurately, was that of the ancient Irish. This apparition continued to exhibit itself for some time, and then vanished with two

[p. 178]

shrieks similar to that which had first excited Lady Fanshaw's attention. In the morning, with infinite terror, she communicated to her host what she had witnessed, and found him prepared not only to credit, but to account for the superstition. "A near relation of my family," said he, "expired last night in this castle. We disguised our certain expectation of the event from you, lest it should throw a cloud over the cheerful reception which was your due. Now, before such an event happens in this family or castle, the female spectre whom you have seen is always visible. She is believed to be the spirit of a woman of inferior rank, whom one of my ancestors degraded himself by marrying, and whom afterwards, to expiate the dishonour done to his family, he caused to be drowned in the moat." In strictness this woman could hardly be termed a Banshee. The motive for the haunting is akin to that in the tale of the Scotch "Drummer of Cortachy," where the spirit of the murdered man haunts the family out of revenge, and appears before a death.

Mr. T. J. Westropp, M.A., has furnished

[p. 179]

the following story: "My maternal grandmother heard the following tradition from her mother, one of the Miss Ross-Lewins, who witnessed the occurrence. Their father, Mr. Harrison Ross-Lewin, was away in Dublin on law business, and in his absence the young people went off to spend the evening with a friend who lived some miles away. The night was fine and lightsome as they were returning, save at one point where the road ran between trees or high hedges not far to the west of the old church of Kilchrist. The latter, like many similar ruins, was a simple oblong building, with long side-walls and high gables, and at that time it and its graveyard were unenclosed, and lay in the open fields. As the party passed down the long dark lane they suddenly heard in the distance loud keening and clapping of hands, as the country-people were accustomed to do when lamenting the dead. The Ross-Lewins hurried on, and came in sight of the church, on the side wall of which a little gray-haired old woman, clad in a dark cloak, was running to and fro, chanting and wailing, and throwing up her arms. The girls were

[p. 180]

very frightened, but the young men ran forward and surrounded the ruin, and two of them went into the church, the apparition vanishing from the wall as they did so. They searched every nook, and found no one, nor did anyone pass out. All were now well scared, and got home as fast as possible. On reaching their home their mother opened the door, and at once told them that she was in terror about their father, for, as she sat looking out the window in the moonlight, a huge raven with fiery eyes lit on the sill, and tapped three times on the glass. They told her their story, which only added to their anxiety, and as they stood talking, taps came to the nearest window, and they saw the bird again. A few days later news reached them that Mr. Ross-Lewin had died suddenly in Dublin. This occurred about 1776."

Mr. Westropp also writes that the sister of a former Roman Catholic Bishop told his sisters that when she was a little girl she went out one evening with some other children for a walk. Going down the road, they passed the gate of the principal demesne near the town. There was a rock, or large

[p. 181]

stone, beside the road, on which they saw something. Going nearer, they perceived it to be a little dark, old woman, who began crying and clapping her hands. Some of them attempted to speak to her, but got frightened, and all finally ran home as quickly as they could. Next day the news came that the gentleman, near whose gate the Banshee had cried, was dead, and it was found on inquiry that he had died at the very hour at which the children had seen the spectre.

A lady who is a relation of one of the compilers, and a member of a Co. Cork family of English descent, sends the two following experiences of a Banshee in her family. My mother, when a young girl, was standing looking out of the window in their house at Blackrock, near Cork. She suddenly saw a white figure standing on a bridge which was easily visible from the house. The figure waved her arms towards the house, and my mother heard the bitter wailing of the Banshee. It lasted some seconds, and then the figure disappeared. Next morning my grandfather was walking as usual into the city of Cork. He accidentally

[p. 182]

fell, hit his head against the curbstone, and never recovered consciousness.

"In March 1900, my mother was very ill, and one evening the nurse and I were with her arranging her bed. We suddenly heard the most extraordinary wailing, which seemed to come in waves round and under her bed. We naturally looked everywhere to try and find the cause, but in vain. The nurse and I looked at one another, but made no remark, as my mother did not seem to hear it. My sister was downstairs sitting with my father. She heard it, and thought some terrible thing had happened to her little boy, who was in bed upstairs. She rushed up, and found him sleeping quietly. My father did not hear it. In the house next door they heard it, and ran downstairs, thinking something had happened to the servant; but the latter at once said to them, 'Did you hear the Banshee? Mrs. P--must be dying.'"

A few years ago (i.e. before 1894) a curious incident occurred in a public school in connection with the belief in the Banshee. One of the boys, happening to become ill, was at once placed in a room by himself,

[p. 183]

where he used to sit all day. On one occasion, as he was being visited by the doctor, he suddenly started up from his seat, and affirmed that he heard somebody crying. The doctor, of course, who could hear or see nothing, came to the conclusion that the illness had slightly affected his brain. However, the boy, who appeared quite sensible, still persisted that he heard someone crying, and furthermore said, "It is the Banshee, as I have heard it before." The following morning the head-master received a telegram saying that the boy's brother had been accidentally shot dead. [*1]

That the Banshee is not confined within the geographical limits of Ireland, but that she can follow the fortunes of a family abroad, and there foretell their death, is clearly shewn by the following story. A party of visitors were gathered together on the deck of a private yacht on one of the Italian lakes, and during a lull in the conversation one of them, a Colonel, said to the owner, "Count, who's that queer-looking woman you have on board?" The Count replied that there was nobody except the

[p. 184]

ladies present, and the stewardess, but the speaker protested that he was correct, and suddenly, with a scream of horror, he placed his hands before his eyes, and exclaimed, "Oh, my God, what a face!" For some time he was overcome with terror, and at length reluctantly looked up, and cried:

"Thank Heavens, it's gone!"

"What was it?" asked the Count.

"Nothing human," replied the Colonel--"nothing belonging to this world. It was a woman of no earthly type, with a queer-shaped, gleaming face, a mass of red hair, and eyes that would have been beautiful but for their expression, which was hellish. She had on a green hood, after the fashion of an Irish peasant."

An American lady present suggested that the description tallied with that of the Banshee, upon which the Count said:

"I am an O'Neill--at least I am descended from one. My family name is, as you know, Neilsini, which, little more than a century ago, was O'Neill. My great-grandfather served in the Irish Brigade, and on its dissolution at the time of the French Revolution had the good fortune to escape

[p. 185]

the general massacre of officers, and in company with an O'Brien and a Maguire fled across the frontier and settled in Italy. On his death his son, who had been born in Italy, and was far more Italian than Irish, changed his name to Neilsini, by which name the family has been known ever since. But for all that we are Irish."

"The Banshee was yours, then!" ejaculated the Colonel. "What exactly does it mean?"

"It means," the Count replied solemnly, "the death of some one very nearly associated with me. Pray Heaven it is not my wife or daughter."

On that score, however, his anxiety was speedily removed, for within two hours he was seized with a violent attack of angina pectoris, and died before morning. [*1]

Mr. Elliott O'Donnell, to whose article on "Banshees" we are indebted for the above, adds: "The Banshee never manifests itself to the person whose death it is prognosticating. Other people may see or hear it, but the fated one never, so that when everyone present is aware of it but one, the fate

[p. 186]

of that one may be regarded as pretty well certain."

We must now pass on from the subject of Banshees to the kindred one of "Headless Coaches," the belief in which is widespread through the country. Apparently these dread vehicles must be distinguished from the phantom coaches, of which numerous circumstantial tales are also told. The first are harbingers of death, and in this connection are very often attached to certain families; the latter appear to be spectral phenomena pure and simple, whose appearance does not necessarily portend evil or death.

"At a house in Co. Limerick," writes Mr. T. J. Westropp, "occurred the remarkably-attested apparition of the headless coach in June 1806, when Mr. Ralph Westropp, my great-grandfather, lay dying. The story was told by his sons, John, William, and Ralph, to their respective children, who told it to me. They had sent for the doctor, and were awaiting his arrival in the dusk. As they sat on the steps they suddenly heard a heavy rumbling, and saw a huge dark coach drive into the paved court before

[p. 187]

the door. One of them went down to meet the doctor, but the coach swept past him, and drove down the avenue, which went straight between the fences and hedges to a gate. Two of the young men ran after the coach, which they could hear rumbling before them, and suddenly came full tilt against the avenue gate. The noise had stopped, and they were surprised at not finding the carriage. The gate proved to be locked, and when they at last awoke the lodge-keeper, he showed them the keys under his pillow; the doctor arrived a little later, but could do nothing, and the sick man died a few hours afterwards."

Two other good stories come from Co. Clare. One night in April 1821, two servants were sitting up to receive a son of the family, Cornelius O'Callaghan, who had travelled in vain for his health, and was returning home. One of them, Halloran, said that the heavy rumble of a coach roused them. The other servant, Burke, stood on the top of the long flight of steps with a lamp, and sent Halloran down to open the carriage door. He reached out his hand to do so, saw a skeleton looking

[p. 188]

out, gave one yell, and fell in a heap. When the badly-scared Burke picked himself up there was no sign or sound of any coach. A little later the invalid arrived, so exhausted that he died suddenly in the early morning.

On the night of December 11, 1876, a servant of the MacNamaras was going his rounds at Ennistymon, a beautiful spot in a wooded glen, with a broad stream falling in a series of cascades. In the dark he heard the rumbling of wheels on the back avenue, and, knowing from the hour and place that no mortal vehicle could be coming, concluded that it was the death coach, and ran on, opening the gates before it. He had just time to open the third gate, and throw himself on his face beside it, when he heard a coach go clanking past. On the following day Admiral Sir Burton Macnamara died in London.

Mr. Westropp informs us that at sight or sound of this coach all gates should be thrown open, and then it will not stop at the house to call for a member of the family, but will only foretell the death of some relative at a distance. We hope our readers

[p. 189]

will carefully bear in mind this simple method of averting fate.

We may conclude this chapter with some account of strange and varied death-warnings, which are attached to certain families and foretell the coming of the King of Terrors.

In a Co. Wicklow family a death is preceded by the appearance of a spectre; the doors of the sitting-room open and a lady dressed in white satin walks across the room and hall. Before any member of a certain Queen's Co. family died a looking-glass was broken; while in a branch of that family the portent was the opening and shutting of the avenue gate. In another Queen's Co. family approaching death was heralded by the cry of the cuckoo, no matter at what season of the year it might occur. A Mrs. F-- and her son lived near Clonaslee. One day, in mid-winter, their servant heard a cuckoo; they went out for a drive, the trap jolted over a stone, throwing Mrs. F-- out, and breaking her neck. The ringing of all the house-bells is another portent which seems to be attached to several families. In another the aeolian harp is heard at or before death; an account

[p. 190]

of this was given to the present writer by a clergyman, who declares that he heard it in the middle of the night when one of his relatives passed away. A death-warning in the shape of a white owl follows the Westropp family. This last appeared, it is said, before a death in 1909, but, as Mr. T. J. Westropp remarks, it would be more convincing if it appeared at places where the white owl does not nest and fly out every night. No doubt this list might be drawn out to much greater length.

A lady correspondent states that her cousin, a Sir Patrick Dun's nurse, was attending a case in the town of Wicklow. Her patient was a middle-aged woman, the wife of a well-to-do shopkeeper. One evening the nurse was at her tea in the dining-room beneath the sick-room, when suddenly she heard a tremendous crash overhead. Fearing her patient had fallen out of bed, she hurried upstairs, to find her dozing quietly, and there was not the least sign of any disturbance. A member of the family, to whom she related this, told her calmly that that noise was always heard in their house before the death of any of them,

[p. 191]

and that it was a sure sign that the invalid would not recover. Contrary to the nurse's expectations, she died the following day.

Knocking on the door is another species of death-warning. The Rev. D. B. Knox writes: "On the evening before the wife of a clerical friend of mine died, the knocker of the hall-door was loudly rapped. All in the room heard it. The door was opened, but there was no one there. Again the knocker was heard, but no one was to be seen when the door was again opened. A young man, brother of the dying woman, went into the drawing-room, and looked through one of the drawing-room windows. The full light of the moon fell on the door, and as he looked the knocker was again lifted and loudly rapped."

The following portent occurs in a Co. Cork family. At one time the lady of the house lay ill, and her two daughters were aroused one night by screams proceeding from their mother's room. They rushed in, and found her sitting up in bed, staring at some object unseen to them, but which, from the motion of her eyes, appeared to be moving across the floor. When she became

[p. 192]

calm she told them, what they had not known before, that members of the family were sometimes warned of the death, or approaching death, of some other member by the appearance of a ball of fire, which would pass slowly through the room; this phenomenon she had just witnessed. A day or two afterwards the mother heard of the death of her brother, who lived in the Colonies.

A strange appearance, known as the "Scanlan Lights," is connected with the family of Scanlan of Ballyknockane, Co. Limerick, and is seen frequently at the death of a member. The traditional origin of the lights is connected with a well-known Irish legend, which we give here briefly. Scanlan Mor (died A.D. 640), King of Ossory, from whom the family claim descent, was suspected of disaffection by Aedh mac Ainmire, Ard-Righ of Ireland, who cast him into prison, and loaded him with fetters. When St. Columcille attended the Synod of Drom Ceat, he besought Aedh to free his captive, but the Ard-Righ churlishly refused; whereupon Columcille declared that he should be freed, and that that very night

[p. 193]

he should unloose his (the Saint's) brogues. Columcille went away, and that night a bright pillar of fire appeared in the air, and hung over the house where Scanlan was imprisoned. A beam of light darted into the room where he lay, and a voice called to him, bidding him rise, and shake off his fetters. In amazement he did so, and was led out past his guards by an angel. He made his way to Columcille, with whom he was to continue that night, and as the Saint stooped down to unloose his brogues Scanlan anticipated him, as he had prophesied. [*1]

Such appears to be the traditional origin of the "Scanlan lights." Our correspondent adds: "These are always seen at the demise of a member of the family. We have ascertained that by the present head of the family (Scanlan of Ballyknockane) they were seen, first, as a pillar of fire with radiated crown at the top; and secondly, inside the house, by the room being lighted up brightly in the night. By other members of the family now living these lights have

[p. 194]

been seen in the shape of balls of fire of various sizes." The above was copied from a private manuscript written some few years ago. Our correspondent further states: "I also have met with four persons in this county [Limerick] who have seen the lights on Knockfierna near Ballyknockane before the death of a Scanlan, one of the four being the late head of the family and owner, William Scanlan, J.P., who saw the flames on the hill-side on the day of his aunt's death some years ago. The last occasion was as late as 1913, on the eve of the death of a Scanlan related to the present owner of Ballyknockane."

In front of the residence of the G-- family in Co. Galway there is, or formerly was, a round ring of grass surrounded by a low evergreen hedge. The lady who related this story to our informant stated that one evening dinner was kept waiting for Mr. G--, who was absent in town on some business. She went out on the hall-door steps in order to see if the familiar trot of the carriage horses could be heard coming down the road. It was a bright moonlight night, and as she stood there she

[p. 195]

heard a child crying with a peculiar whining cry, and distinctly saw a small childlike figure running round and round the grass ring inside the evergreen hedge, and casting a shadow in the moonlight. Going into the house she casually mentioned this as a peculiar circumstance to Mrs. G--, upon which, to her great surprise, that lady nearly fainted, and got into a terrible state of nervousness. Recovering a little, she told her that this crying and figure were always heard and seen whenever any member met with an accident, or before a death. A messenger was immediately sent to meet Mr. G--, who was found lying senseless on the road, as the horses had taken fright and bolted, flinging him out, and breaking the carriage-pole.

But of all the death-warnings in connection with Irish families surely the strangest is the Gormanstown foxes. The crest of that noble family is a running fox, while the same animal also forms one of the supporters of the coat-of-arms. The story is, that when the head of the house is dying the foxes--not spectral foxes, but creatures of flesh and blood--leave the coverts and congregate at Gormanstown Castle.

[p. 196]

Let us see what proof there is of this. When Jenico, the 12th Viscount, was dying in 1860, foxes were seen about the house and moving towards the house for some days previously. Just before his death three foxes were playing about and making a noise close to the house, and just in front of the "cloisters," which are yew-trees planted and trained in that shape. The Hon. Mrs. Farrell states as regards the same that the foxes came in pairs into the demesne, and sat under the Viscount's bedroom window, and barked and howled all night. Next morning they were to be found crouching about in the grass in front and around the house. They walked through the poultry and never touched them. After the funeral they disappeared.

At the death of Edward, the 13th Viscount, in 1876, the foxes were also there. He had been rather better one day, but the foxes appeared, barking under the window, and he died that night contrary to expectation.

On October 28, 1907, Jenico, the 14th Viscount, died in Dublin. About 8 o'clock that night the coachman and gardener saw two foxes near the chapel (close to the

[p. 197]

house), five or six more round the front of the house, and several crying in the "cloisters." Two days later the Hon. Richard Preston, R.F.A., was watching by his father's body in the above chapel. About 3 A.M. he became conscious of a slight noise, which seemed to be that of a number of people walking stealthily around the chapel on the gravel walk. He went to the side door, listened, and heard outside a continuous and insistent snuffling or sniffing noise, accompanied by whimperings and scratchings at the door. On opening it he saw a full-grown fox sitting on the path within four feet of him. Just in the shadow was another, while he could hear several more moving close by in the darkness. He then went to the end door, opposite the altar, and on opening it saw two more foxes, one so close that he could have touched it with his foot. On shutting the door the noise continued till 5 A.M., when it suddenly ceased. [*1]

Footnotes

^177:1 Scott's Lady of the Lake, notes to Canto III (edition of 1811).

^183:1 A. G. Bradley, Notes on some Irish Superstitions, p. 9.

^185:1 Occult Review for September, 1913.

^193:1 Canon Carrigan, in his History of the Diocese of Ossory (l. 32 intro.), shows that this legend should rather be connected With Scanlan son of Ceannfaeladh.

^197:1 New Ireland Review for April 1908, by permission of the publishers, Messrs Sealy Bryers, & Walker.

      
True Irish Ghost Stories, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 198]

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

MISCELLANEOUS SUPERNORMAL EXPERIENCES

THE matter in this chapter does not seem, strictly speaking, to come under the head of any of the preceding ones: it contains no account of houses or places permanently haunted, or of warnings of impending death. Rather we have gathered up in it a number of tales relative to the appearance of the "wraiths" of living men, or accounts of visions, strange apparitions, or extraordinary experiences; some few of these have a purpose, while the majority are strangely aimless and purposeless--something is seen or heard, that is all, and no results, good or bad, follow.

We commence with one which, however, certainly indicates a purpose which was fulfilled. It is the experience of Mrs. Seymour, wife to one of the compilers. When she was a little girl she resided in Dublin; amongst the members of the family was

[p. 199]

her paternal grandmother. This old lady was not as kind as she might have been to her grand-daughter, and consequently the latter was somewhat afraid of her. In process of time the grandmother died. Mrs. Seymour, who was then about eight years of age, had to pass the door of the room where the death occurred in order to reach her own bedroom, which was a flight higher up. Past this door the child used to fly in terror with all possible speed. On one occasion, however, as she was preparing to make the usual rush past, she distinctly felt a hand placed on her shoulder, and became conscious of a voice saying, "Don't be afraid, Mary!" From that day on the child never had the least feeling of fear, and always walked quietly past the door.

The Rev. D. B. Knox sends a curious personal experience, which was shared by him with three other people. He writes as follows: "Not very long ago my wife and I were preparing to retire for the night. A niece, who was in the house, was in her bedroom and the door was open. The maid had just gone to her room. All four of us distinctly heard the heavy step of a

[p. 200]

man walking along the corridor, apparently in the direction of the bathroom. We searched the whole house immediately, but no one was discovered. Nothing untoward happened except the death of the maid's mother about a fortnight later. It was a detached house, so that the noise could not have been made by the neighbours."

In the following tale the "double" or "wraith" of a living man was seen by three different people, one of whom, our correspondent, saw it through a telescope. She writes: "In May 1883 the parish of A-- was vacant, so Mr. D--, the Diocesan Curate, used to come out to take service on Sundays. One day there were two funerals to be taken, the one at a graveyard some distance off, the other at A--churchyard. My brother was at both, the far-off one being taken the first. The house we then lived in looked down towards A--churchyard, which was about a quarter of a mile away. From an upper window my sister and I saw two surpliced figures going out to meet the coffin, and said, 'Why, there are two clergy!' having supposed that there would be only Mr. D--. I,

[p. 201]

being short-sighted, used a telescope, and saw the two surplices showing between the people. But when my brother returned he said, 'A strange thing has happened. Mr. D-- and Mr. W-- (curate of a neighbouring parish) took the far-off funeral. I saw them both again at A--, but when I went into the vestry I only saw Mr. W--. I asked where Mr. D-- was, and he replied that he had left immediately after the first funeral, as he had to go to Kilkenny, and that he (Mr. W--) had come on alone to take the funeral at A--.'"

Here is a curious tale from the city of Limerick of a lady's "double" being seen, with no consequent results. It is sent by Mr. Richard Hogan as the personal experience of his sister, Mrs. Mary Murnane. On Saturday, October 25, 1913, at half-past four o'clock in the afternoon, Mr. Hogan left the house in order to purchase some cigarettes. A quarter of an hour afterwards Mrs. Murnane went down the town to do some business. As she was walking down George Street she saw a group of four persons standing on the pavement engaged in conversation. They were: her brother,

[p. 202]

a Mr. O'S--, and two ladies, a Miss P. O'D--, and her sister, Miss M. O'D--. She recognised the latter, as her face was partly turned towards her, and noted that she was dressed in a knitted coat, and light blue hat, while in her left hand she held a bag or purse; the other lady's back was turned towards her. As Mrs. Murnane was in a hurry to get her business done she determined to pass them by without being noticed, but a number of people coming in the opposite direction blocked the way, and compelled her to walk quite close to the group of four; but they were so intent on listening to what one lady was saying that they took no notice of her. The speaker appeared to be Miss M. O'D--, and, though Mrs. Murnane did not actually hear her speak as she passed her, yet from their attitudes the other three seemed to be listening to what she was saying, and she heard her laugh when right behind her--not the laugh of her sister P.--and the laugh was repeated after she had left the group a little behind.

So far there is nothing out of the common. When Mrs. Murnane returned to her house

[p. 203]

about an hour later she found her brother Richard there before her. She casually mentioned to him how she had passed him and his three companions on the pavement. To which he replied that she was quite correct except in one point, namely that there were only three in the group, as M. O'D-- was not present, as she had not come to Limerick at all that day. She then described to him the exact position each one of the four occupied, and the clothes worn by them; to all of which facts he assented, except as to the presence of Miss M. O'D--. Mrs. Murnane adds, "That is all I can say in the matter, but most certainly the fourth person was in the group, as I both saw and heard her. She wore the same clothes I had seen on her previously, with the exception of the hat; but the following Saturday she had on the same coloured hat I had seen on her the previous Saturday. When I told her about it she was as much mystified as I was and am. My brother stated that there was no laugh from any of the three present."

Mrs. G. Kelly sends an experience of a "wraith," which seems in some mysterious

[p. 204]

way to have been conjured up in her mind by the description she had heard, and then externalised. She writes: "About four years ago a musical friend of ours was staying in the house. He and my husband were playing and singing Dvorak's Spectre's Bride, a work which he had studied with the composer himself. This music appealed very much to both, and they were excited and enthusiastic over it. Our friend was giving many personal reminiscences of Dvorak, and his method of explaining the way he wanted his work done. I was sitting by, an interested listener, for some time. On  up at last, and going into the drawing-room, I was startled and somewhat frightened to find a man standing there in a shadowy part of the room. I saw him distinctly, and could describe his appearance accurately. I called out, and the two men ran in, but as the apparition only lasted for a second, they were too late. I described the man whom I had seen, whereupon our friend exclaimed, 'Why, that was Dvorak himself!' At that time I had never seen a picture of Dvorak, but when our friend returned to London he sent me one which I recognised

[p. 205]

as the likeness of the man whom I had seen in our drawing-room."

A curious vision, a case of second sight, in which a quite unimportant event, previously unknown, was revealed, is sent by the percipient, who is a lady well known to both the compilers, and a life-long friend of one of them. She says: "Last summer I sent a cow to the fair of Limerick, a distance of about thirteen miles, and the men who took her there the day before the fair left her in a paddock for the night close to Limerick city. I awoke up very early next morning, and was fully awake when I saw (not with my ordinary eyesight, but apparently inside my head) a light, an intensely brilliant light, and in it I saw the back gate being opened by a red-haired woman and the cow I had supposed in the fair walking through the gate. I then knew that the cow must be home, and going to the yard later on I was met by the wife of the man who was in charge in a great state of excitement. 'Oh law! Miss,' she exclaimed, 'you'll be mad! Didn't Julia [a red-haired woman] find the cow outside the lodge gate as she was going out at 4 o'clock to the milking!'

[p. 206]

[paragraph continues] That's my tale--perfectly true, and I would give a good deal to be able to control that light, and see more if I could."

Another curious vision was seen by a lady who is also a friend of both the compilers. One night she was kneeling at her bedside saying her prayers (hers was the only bed in the room), when suddenly she felt a distinct touch on her shoulder. She turned round in the direction of the touch and saw at the end of the room a bed, with a pale, indistinguishable figure laid therein, and what appeared to be a clergyman standing over it. About a week later she fell into a long and dangerous illness.

An account of a dream which implied an extraordinary coincidence, if coincidence it be and nothing more, was sent as follows by a correspondent, who requested that no names be published. "That which I am about to relate has a peculiar interest for me, inasmuch as the central figure in it was my own grand-aunt, and moreover the principal witness (if I may use such a term) was my father. At the period during which this strange incident occurred my father was living with his aunt and some other relatives.

[p. 207]

"One morning at the breakfast-table, my grand-aunt announced that she had had a most peculiar dream during the previous night. My father, who was always very interested in that kind of thing, took down in his notebook all the particulars concerning it. They were as follows.

"My grand-aunt dreamt that she was in a cemetery, which she recognised as Glasnevin, and as she gazed at the memorials of the dead which lay so thick around, one stood out most conspicuously, and caught her eye, for she saw clearly cut on the cold white stone an inscription bearing her own name:

CLARE * S * D--

Died 14th of March, 1873

Dearly loved and ever mourned.

R*I*P*

while, to add to the peculiarity of it, the date on the stone as given above was, from the day of her dream, exactly a year in advance.

"My grand-aunt was not very nervous, and soon the dream faded from her mind. Months rolled by, and one morning at

[p. 208]

breakfast it was noticed that my grand-aunt had not appeared, but as she was a very religious woman it was thought that she had gone out to church. However, as she did not appear my father sent someone to her room to see if she were there, and as no answer was given to repeated knocking the door was opened, and my grand-aunt was found kneeling at her bedside, dead. The day of her death was March 14, 1873, corresponding exactly with the date seen in her dream a twelvemonth before. My grand-aunt was buried in Glasnevin, and on her tombstone (a white marble slab) was placed the inscription which she had read in her dream." Our correspondent sent us a photograph of the stone and its inscription.

The present Archdeacon of Limerick, Ven. J. A. Haydn, LL.D., sends the following experience: "In the year 1870 I was rector of the little rural parish of Chapel Russell. One autumn day the rain fell with a quiet, steady, and hopeless persistence from morning to night. Wearied at length from the gloom, and tired of reading and writing, I determined to walk

[p. 209]

to the church about half a mile away, and pass a half-hour playing the harmonium, returning for the lamp-light and tea.

"I wrapped up, put the key of the church in my pocket, and started. Arriving at the church, I walked up the straight avenue, bordered with graves and tombs on either side, while the soft, steady rain quietly pattered on the trees. When I reached the church door, before putting the key in the lock, moved by some indefinable impulse, I stood on the doorstep, turned round, and looked back upon the path I had just trodden. My amazement may be imagined when I saw, seated on a low, tabular tombstone close to the avenue, a lady with her back towards me. She was wearing a black velvet jacket or short cape, with a narrow border of vivid white: her head, and luxuriant jet-black hair, were surmounted by a hat of the shape and make that I think used to be called at that time a "turban"; it was also of black velvet, with a snow-white wing or feather at the right-hand side of it. It may be seen how deliberately and minutely I observed the

[p. 210]

appearance, when I can thus recall it after more than forty years.

"Actuated by a desire to attract the attention of the lady, and induce her to look towards me, I noisily inserted the key in the door, and suddenly opened it with a rusty crack. Turning round to see the effect of my policy--the lady was gone!--vanished! Not yet daunted, I hurried to the place, which was not ten paces away, and closely searched the stone and the space all round it, but utterly in vain; there were absolutely no traces of the late presence of a human being! I may add that nothing particular or remarkable followed the singular apparition, and that I never heard anything calculated to throw any light on the mystery."

Here is a story of a ghost who knew what it wanted--and got it! "In the part of Co. Wicklow from which my people come," writes a Miss D--, "there was a family who were not exactly related, but of course of the clan. Many years ago a young daughter, aged about twenty, died. Before her death she had directed her parents to bury her in a certain graveyard.

[p. 211]

[paragraph continues] But for some reason they did not do so, and from that hour she gave them no peace. She appeared to them at all hours, especially when they went to the well for water. So distracted were they, that at length they got permission to exhume the remains and have them reinterred in the desired graveyard. This they did by torchlight--a weird scene truly! I can vouch for the truth of this latter portion, at all events, as some of my own relatives were present."

Mr. T. J. Westropp contributes a tale of a ghost of an unusual type, i.e. one which actually did communicate matters of importance to his family. A lady who related many ghost stories to me, also told me how, after her father's death, the family could not find some papers or receipts of value. One night she awoke, and heard a sound which she at once recognised as the footsteps of her father, who was lame. The door creaked, and she prayed that she might be able to see him. Her prayer was granted: she saw him distinctly holding a yellow parchment book tied with tape. 'F--, child,' said he, 'this is the book

[p. 212]

your mother is looking for. It is in the third drawer of the cabinet near the cross-door; tell your mother to be more careful in future about business papers.' Incontinent he vanished, and she at once awoke her mother, in whose room she was sleeping, who was very angry and ridiculed the story, but the girl's earnestness at length impressed her. She got up, went to the old cabinet, and at once found the missing book in the third drawer."

Here is another tale of an equally useful and obliging ghost. "A gentleman, a relative of my own," writes a lady, "often received warnings from his dead father of things that were about to happen. Besides the farm on which he lived, he had another some miles away which adjoined a large demesne. Once in a great storm a fir-tree was blown down in the demesne, and fell into his field. The woodranger came to him and told him he might as well cut up the tree, and take it away. Accordingly one day he set out for this purpose, taking with him two men and a cart. He got into the fields by a stile, while his men went on to a gate. As he  a

[p. 213]

gap between two fields he saw, standing in it, his father as plainly as he ever saw him in life, and beckoning him back warningly. Unable to understand this, he still advanced, whereupon his father looked very angry, and his gestures became imperious. This induced him to turn away, so he sent his men home, and left the tree uncut. He subsequently discovered that a plot had been laid by the woodranger, who coveted his farm, and who hoped to have him dispossessed by accusing him of stealing the tree."

A clergyman in the diocese of Clogher gave a personal experience of table-turning to the present Dean of St. Patrick's, who kindly sent the same to the writer. He said: "When I was a young man, I met some friends one evening, and we decided to amuse ourselves with table-turning. The local dispensary was vacant at the time, so we said that if the table would work we should ask who would be appointed as medical officer. As we sat round it touching it with our hands it began to knock. We said:

"'Who are you?'

[p. 214]

"The table spelt out the name of a Bishop of the Church of Ireland. We asked, thinking that the answer was absurd, as we knew him to be alive and well:

"'Are you dead?'

"The table answered 'Yes.'

"We laughed at this and asked:

"'Who will be appointed to the dispensary?'

"The table spelt out the name of a stranger, who was not one of the candidates, whereupon we left off, thinking that the whole thing was nonsense.

"The next morning I saw in the papers that the Bishop in question had died that afternoon about two hours before our meeting, and a few days afterwards I saw the name of the stranger as the new dispensary doctor. I got such a shock that I determined never to have anything to do with table-turning again."

The following extraordinary personal experience is sent by a lady, well known to the present writer, but who requests that all names be omitted. Whatever explanation we may give of it, the good faith of the tale is beyond doubt.

[p. 215]

"Two or three months after my father-in-law's death my husband, myself, and three small sons lived in the west of Ireland. As my husband was a young barrister, he had to be absent from home a good deal. My three boys slept in my bedroom, the eldest being about four, the youngest some months. A fire was kept up every night, and with a young child to look after, I was naturally awake more than once during the night. For many nights I believed I distinctly saw my father-in-law sitting by the fireside. This happened, not once or twice, but many times. He was passionately fond of his eldest grandson, who lay sleeping calmly in his cot. Being so much alone probably made me restless and uneasy, though I never felt afraid. I mentioned this strange thing to a friend who had known and liked my father-in-law, and she advised me to 'have his soul laid,' as she termed it. Though I was a Protestant and she was a Roman Catholic (as had also been my father-in-law), yet I fell in with her suggestion. She told me to give a coin to the next beggar that came to the house, telling him (or her) to pray for the rest of Mr. So-and-so's soul. A few days later

[p. 216]

a beggar-woman and her children came to the door, to whom I gave a coin and stated my desire. To my great surprise I learned from her manner that such requests were not unusual. Well, she went down on her knees on the steps, and prayed with apparent earnestness and devotion that his soul might find repose. Once again he appeared, and seemed to say to me, 'Why did you do that, E--? To come and sit here was the only comfort I had.' Never again did he appear, and strange to say, after a lapse of more than thirty years I have felt regret at my selfishness in interfering.

"After his death, as he lay in the house awaiting burial, and I was in a house some ten miles away, I thought that he came and told me that I would have a hard life, which turned out only too truly. I was then young, and full of life, with every hope of a prosperous future."

Of all the strange beliefs to be found in Ireland that in the Black Dog is the most widespread. There is hardly a parish in the country but could contribute some tale relative to this spectre, though the majority of these are short, and devoid of interest.

[p. 217]

[paragraph continues] There is said to be such a dog just outside the avenue gate of Donohill Rectory, but neither of the compilers have had the good luck to see it. It may be, as some hold, that this animal was originally a cloud or nature-myth; at all events, it has now descended to the level of an ordinary haunting. The most circumstantial story that we have met with relative to the Black Dog is that related as follows by a clergyman of the Church of Ireland, who requests us to refrain from publishing his name.

"In my childhood I lived in the country. My father, in addition to his professional duties, sometimes did a little farming in an amateurish sort of way. He did not keep a regular staff of labourers, and consequently when anything extra had to be done, such as hay-cutting or harvesting, he used to employ day-labourers to help with the work. At such times I used to enjoy being in the fields with the men, listening to their conversation. On one occasion I heard a labourer remark that he had once seen the devil! Of course I was interested and asked him to give me his experience. He said he was walking along a certain road,

[p. 218]

and when he came to a point where there was an entrance to a private place (the spot was well known to me), he saw a black dog sitting on the roadside. At the time he paid no attention to it, thinking it was an ordinary retriever, but after he had passed on about two or three hundred yards he found the dog was beside him, and then he noticed that its eyes were blood-red. He stooped down, and picked up some stones in order to frighten it away, but though he threw the stones at it they did not injure it, nor indeed did they seem to have any effect. Suddenly, after a few moments, the dog vanished from his sight.

"Such was the labourer's tale. After some years, during which time I had forgotten altogether about the man's story, some friends of my own bought the place at the entrance to which the apparition had been seen. When my friends went to reside there I was a constant visitor at their house. Soon after their arrival they began to be troubled by the appearance of a black dog. Though I never saw it myself, it appeared to many members of the family. The avenue leading to the house was a long one,

[p. 219]

and it was customary for the dog to appear and accompany people for the greater portion of the way. Such an effect had this on my friends that they soon gave up the house, and went to live elsewhere. This was a curious corroboration of the labourer's tale."

As we have already stated in Chapter VII, a distinction must be drawn between the so-called Headless Coach, which portends death, and the Phantom Coach, which appears to be a harmless sort of vehicle. With regard to the latter we give two tales below, the first of which was sent by a lady whose father was a clergyman, and a gold medallist of Trinity College, Dublin.

"Some years ago my family lived in Co. Down. Our house was some way out of a fair-sized manufacturing town, and had a short avenue which ended in a gravel sweep in front of the hall door. One winter's evening, when my father was returning from a sick call, a carriage going at a sharp pace passed him on the avenue. He hurried on, thinking it was some particular friends, but when he reached the door no carriage was to be seen, so he concluded it must have

[p. 220]

gone round to the stables. The servant who answered his ring said that no visitors had been there, and he, feeling certain that the girl had made some mistake, or that some one else had answered the door, came into the drawing-room to make further inquiries. No visitors had come, however, though those sitting in the drawing-room had also heard the carriage drive up.

"My father was most positive as to what he had seen, viz. a closed carriage with lamps lit; and let me say at once that he was a clergyman who was known throughout the whole of the north of Ireland as a most level-headed man, and yet to the day of his death he would insist that he met that carriage on our avenue.

"One day in July one of our servants was given leave to go home for the day, but was told she must return by a certain train. For some reason she did not come by it, but by a much later one, and rushed into the kitchen in a most penitent frame of mind. 'I am so sorry to be late,' she told the cook, 'especially as there were visitors. I suppose they stayed to supper, as they were so late going away, for I met

[p. 221]

the carriage on the avenue.' The cook thereupon told her that no one had been at the house, and hinted that she must have seen the ghost-carriage, a statement that alarmed her very much, as the story was well known in the town, and car-drivers used to whip up their horses as they passed our gate, while pedestrians refused to go at all except in numbers. We have often heard the carriage, but these are the only two occasions on which I can positively assert that it was seen."

The following personal experience of the phantom coach was given to the present writer by Mr. Matthias Fitzgerald, coachman to Miss Cooke, of Cappagh House, Co. Limerick. He stated that one moonlight night he was driving along the road from Askeaton to Limerick when he heard coming up behind him the roll of wheels, the clatter of horses' hoofs, and the jingling of the bits. He drew over to his own side to let this carriage pass, but nothing passed. He then looked back, but could see nothing, the road was perfectly bare and empty, though the sounds were perfectly audible. This continued for about a quarter of an

[p. 222]

hour or so, until he came to a cross-road, down one arm of which he had to turn. As he turned off he heard the phantom carriage dash by rapidly along the straight road. He stated that other persons had had similar experiences on the same road.

      
True Irish Ghost Stories, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 223]

  

CHAPTER IX

  

LEGENDARY AND ANCESTRAL GHOSTS

WHATEVER explanations may be given of the various stories told in our previous chapters, the facts as stated therein are in almost every case vouched for on reliable authority. We now turn to stories of a different kind, most of which have no evidence of any value in support of the facts, but which have been handed down from generation to generation, and deserve our respect, if only for their antiquity. We make no apology for giving them here, for, in addition to the interesting reading they provide, they also serve a useful purpose as a contrast to authenticated ghost stories. The student of folklore will find parallels to some of them in the tales of other nations.

Lord Walter Fitzgerald sends us the following: "Garrett oge" (or Gerald the younger) Fitzgerald, 11th Earl of Kildare,

[p. 224]

died in London on the 16th November 1585; his body was brought back to Ireland and interred in St. Brigid's Cathedral, in Kildare. He was known as 'the Wizard Earl' on account of his practising the black art, whereby he was enabled to transform himself into other shapes, either bird or beast according to his choice; so notorious was his supernatural power that he became the terror of the countryside.

"His wife, the Countess, had long wished to see some proof of his skill, and had frequently begged him to transform himself before her, but he had steadily refused to do so, as he said if he did and she became afraid, he would be taken from her, and she would never see him again. Still she persisted, and at last he said he would do as she wished on condition that she should first of all undergo three trials to test her courage; to this she willingly agreed. In the first trial the river Greese, which flows past the castle walls, at a sign from the Earl overflowed its banks and flooded the banqueting hall in which the Earl and Countess were sitting. She showed no sign of fear, and at the Earl's command the

[p. 225]

river receded to its normal course. At the second trial a huge eel-like monster appeared, which entered by one of the windows, crawled about among the furniture of the banqueting hall, and finally coiled itself round the body of the Countess. Still she showed no fear, and at a nod from the Earl the animal uncoiled itself and disappeared. In the third test an intimate friend of the Countess, long since dead, entered the room, and passing slowly by her went out at the other end. She showed not the slightest sign of fear, and the Earl felt satisfied that he could place his fate in her keeping, but he again warned her of his danger if she lost her presence of mind while he was in another shape. He then turned himself into a black bird, flew about the room, and perching on the Countess's shoulder commenced to sing. Suddenly a black cat appeared from under a chest, and made a spring at the bird; in an agony of fear for its safety the Countess threw up her arms to protect it and swooned away. When she came to she was alone, the bird and the cat had disappeared, and she never saw the Earl again."

[p. 226]

It is said that he and his knights lie in an enchanted sleep, with their horses beside them, in a cave under the Rath on the hill of Mullaghmast, which stands, as the crow flies, five miles to the north of Kilkea Castle. Once in seven years they are allowed to issue forth; they gallop round the Curragh, thence across country to Kilkea Castle, where they re-enter the haunted wing, and then return to the Rath of Mullaghmast. The Earl is easily recognised as he is mounted on a white charger shod with silver shoes; when these shoes are worn out the enchantment will be broken, and he will issue forth, drive the foes of Ireland from the land, and reign for a seven times seven number of years over the vast estates of his ancestors.

Shortly before '98 he was seen on the Curragh by a blacksmith who was crossing it in an ass-cart from Athgarvan to Kildare. A fairy blast overtook him, and he had just time to say, "God speed ye Gentlemen" to the invisible "Good People," when he heard horses galloping up behind him; pulling to one side of the road he looked back and was terrified at seeing a troop of

[p. 227]

knights, fully armed, led by one on a white horse. The leader halted his men, and riding up to the blacksmith asked him to examine his shoes. Almost helpless from fear he stumbled out of the ass-cart and looked at each shoe, which was of silver, and then informed the knight that all the nails were sound. The knight thanked him, rejoined his troop, and galloped off. The blacksmith in a half-dazed state hastened on to Kildare, where he entered a public-house, ordered a noggin of whisky, and drank it neat. When he had thoroughly come to himself he told the men that were present what had happened to him on the Curragh; one old man who had listened to him said: "By the mortial! man, ye are after seeing 'Gerod Earla.'" This fully explained the mystery. Gerod Earla, or Earl Gerald, is the name by which the Wizard Earl is known by the peasantry.

One other legend is told in connection with the Wizard Earl of a considerably later date. It is said that a farmer was returning from a fair in Athy late one evening in the direction of Ballintore, and when passing within view of the Rath of Mullaghmast

[p. 228]

he was astonished to see a bright light apparently issuing from it. Dismounting from his car he went to investigate. On approaching the Rath he noticed that the light was proceeding from a cave in which were sleeping several men in armour, with their horses beside them. He cautiously crept up to the entrance, and seeing that neither man nor beast stirred he grew bolder and entered the chamber; he then examined the saddlery on the horses, and the armour of the men, and plucking up courage began slowly to draw a sword from its sheath; as he did so the owner's head began to rise, and he heard a voice in Irish say, "Is the time yet come?" In terror the farmer, as he shoved the sword back, replied, "It is not, your Honour," and then fled from the place.

It is said that if the farmer had only completely unsheathed the sword the enchantment would have been broken, and the Earl would have come to his own again.

In 1642 Wallstown Castle, the seat of the Wall family, in County Cork, was burnt down by the Cromwellian troops, and Colonel

[p. 229]

[paragraph continues] Wall, the head of the family, was captured and imprisoned in Cork jail, where he died. One of the defenders during the siege was a man named Henry Bennett, who was killed while fighting. His ghost was often seen about the place for years after his death. His dress was of a light colour, and he wore a white hat, while in his hand he carried a pole, which he used to place across the road near the Castle to stop travellers; on a polite request to remove the pole he would withdraw it, and laugh heartily. A caretaker in the place named Philip Coughlan used frequently to be visited by this apparition. He came generally about supper time, and while Coughlan and his wife were seated at table he would shove the pole through the window; Coughlan would beg him to go away and not interfere with a poor hard-worked man; the pole would then be withdrawn, with a hearty laugh from the ghost.

In the Parish Church of Ardtrea, near Cookstown, is a marble monument and inscription in memory of Thomas Meredith, D.D., who had been a Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, and for six years rector of

[p. 230]

the parish. He died, according to the words of the , on 2nd May 1819, as a result of "a sudden and awful visitation." A local legend explains this "visitation," by stating that a ghost haunted the rectory, the visits of which had caused his family and servants to leave the house. The rector had tried to shoot it but failed; then he was told to use a silver bullet; he did so, and next morning was found dead at his hall-door while a hideous object like a devil made horrid noises out of any window the servant man approached. This man was advised by some Roman Catholic neighbours to get the priest, who would "lay" the thing. The priest arrived, and with the help of a jar of whisky the ghost became quite civil, till the last glass in the jar, which the priest was about to empty out for himself, whereupon the ghost or devil made himself as thin and long as a Lough Neagh eel, and slipped himself into the jar to get the last drops. But the priest put the cork into its place and hammered it in, and, making the sign of the Cross on it, he had the evil thing secured. It was buried in the cellar of the rectory, where on some

[p. 231]

nights it can still be heard calling to be let out.

A story of a phantom rat, which comes from Limerick, is only one of many which show the popular Irish belief in hauntings by various animals. Many years ago, the legend runs, a young man was making frantic and unacceptable love to a girl. At last, one day when he was following her in the street, she turned on him and, pointing to a rat which some boys had just killed, said, "I'd as soon marry that rat as you." He took her cruel words so much to heart that he pined away and died. After his death the girl was haunted at night by a rat, and in spite of the constant watch of her mother and sisters she was more than once bitten. The priest was called in and could do nothing, so she determined to emigrate. A coasting vessel was about to start for Queenstown, and her friends, collecting what money they could, managed to get her on board. The ship had just cast off from the quay, when shouts and screams were heard up the street. The crowd scattered, and a huge rat with fiery eyes galloped down to the quay. It sat upon

[p. 232]

the edge screaming hate, sprang off, and did not reappear. After that, we are told, the girl was never again haunted.

A legend of the Tirawley family relates how a former Lord Tirawley, who was a very wild and reckless man, was taken from this world. One evening, it is said, just as the nobleman was preparing for a night's carouse, a carriage drove up to his door, a stranger asked to see him and, after a long private conversation, drove away as mysteriously as he had come. Whatever words had passed they had a wonderful effect on the gay lord, for his ways were immediately changed, and he lived the life of a reformed man. As time went on the effect of whatever awful warning the mysterious visitor had given him wore off, and he began to live a life even more wild and reckless than before. On the anniversary of the visit he was anxious and gloomy, but he tried to make light of it. The day passed, and at night there was high revelry in the banqueting hall. Outside it was wet and stormy, when just before midnight the sound of wheels was heard in the courtyard. All the riot stopped; the servants opened the

[p. 233]

door in fear and trembling: outside stood a huge dark coach with four black horses. The "fearful guest" entered and beckoned to Lord Tirawley, who followed him to a room off the hall. The friends, sobered by fear, saw through the door the stranger drawing a ship on the wall; the piece of wall then detached itself and the ship grew solid, the stranger climbed into it, and Lord Tirawley followed without a struggle. The vessel then sailed away into the night, and neither it nor its occupants were ever seen again.

The above tale is a good example of how a legend will rise superior to the ordinary humdrum facts of life, for it strikes us at once that the gloomy spectre went to unnecessary trouble in constructing a ship, even though the task proved so simple to his gifted hands. But the coach was at the door, and surely it would have been less troublesome to have used it.

A strange legend is told of a house in the Boyne valley. It is said that the occupant of the guest chamber was always wakened on the first night of his visit, then he would see a pale light and the shadow of a skeleton

[p. 234]

[paragraph continues] "climbing the wall like a huge spider." It used to crawl out on to the ceiling, and when it reached the middle would materialise into apparent bones, holding on by its hands and feet; it would break in pieces, and first the skull and then the other bones would fall on the floor. One person had the courage to get up and try to seize a bone, but his hand passed through to the carpet though the heap was visible for a few seconds.

The following story can hardly be called legendary, though it may certainly be termed ancestral. The writer's name is not given, but he is described as a rector and Rural Dean in the late Established Church of Ireland, and a Justice of the Peace for two counties. It has this added interest that it was told to Queen Victoria by the Marchioness of Ely.

"Loftus Hall, in County Wexford, was built on the site of a stronghold erected by Raymond, one of Strongbow's followers. His descendants forfeited it in 1641, and the property subsequently fell into the hands of the Loftus family, one of whom built the house and other buildings. About the

[p. 235]

middle of the eighteenth century, there lived at Loftus Hall Charles Tottenham, a member of the Irish Parliament, known to fame as 'Tottenham and his Boots,' owing to his historic ride to the Irish capital in order to give the casting vote in a motion which saved L80,000 to the Irish Treasury.

"The second son, Charles Tottenham, had two daughters, Elizabeth and Anne, to the latter of whom our story relates. He came to live at Loftus Hall, the old baronial residence of the family, with his second wife and the two above-mentioned daughters of his first wife. Loftus Hall was an old rambling mansion, with no pretence to beauty: passages that led nowhere, large dreary rooms, small closets, various unnecessary nooks and corners, panelled or wainscotted walls, and a tapestry chamber. Here resided at the time my story commences Charles Tottenham, his second wife and his daughter Anne: Elizabeth, his second daughter, having been married. The father was a cold austere man; the stepmother such as that unamiable relation is generally represented to be. What and how great the state of lonely solitude and depression

[p. 236]

of mind of poor Anne must have been in such a place, without neighbours or any home sympathy, may easily be imagined.

"One wet and stormy night, as they sat in the large drawing-room, they were startled by a loud knocking at the outer gate, a most surprising and unusual occurrence. Presently the servant announced that a young gentleman on horseback was there requesting lodging and shelter. He had lost his way, his horse was knocked up, and he had been guided by the only light which he had seen. The stranger was admitted and refreshed, and proved himself to be an agreeable companion and a finished gentleman--far too agreeable for the lone scion of the House of Tottenham, for a sad and mournful tale follows, and one whose strange results continued almost to the present day.

"Much mystery has involved the story at the present point, and in truth the matter was left in such silence and obscurity, that, but for the acts of her who was the chief sufferer in it through several generations, nothing would now be known. The fact, I believe, was--which was not unnatural under the circumstances--that this lonely

[p. 237]

girl formed a strong attachment to this gallant youth chance had brought to her door, which was warmly returned. The father, as was his stern nature, was obdurate, and the wife no solace to her as she was a step-mother. It is only an instance of the refrain of the old ballad, 'He loved, and he rode away'; he had youth and friends, and stirring scenes, and soon forgot his passing attachment. Poor Anne's reason gave way.

"The fact is but too true, she became a confirmed maniac, and had to be confined for the rest of her life in the tapestried chamber before mentioned, and in which she died. A strange legend was at once invented to account for this calamity: it tells how the horseman proved such an agreeable acquisition that he was invited to remain some days, and made himself quite at home, and as they were now four in number whist was proposed in the evenings. The stranger, however, with Anne as his partner, invariably won every point; the old couple never had the smallest success. One night, when poor Anne was in great delight at winning so constantly, she dropped a ring on the floor,

[p. 238]

and, suddenly diving under the table to recover it, was terrified to see that her agreeable partner had an unmistakably cloven foot. Her screams made him aware of her discovery, and he at once vanished in a thunder-clap leaving a brimstone smell behind him. The poor girl never recovered from the shock, lapsed from one fit into another, and was carried to the tapestry room from which she never came forth alive.

"This story of his Satanic majesty got abroad, and many tales are told of how he continued to visit and disturb the house. The noises, the apparitions, and disturbances were innumerable, and greatly distressed old Charles Tottenham, his wife, and servants. It is said that they finally determined to call in the services of their parish priest, a Father Broders, who, armed with all the exorcisms of the Church, succeeded in confining the operations of the evil spirit to one room--the tapestry room.

"Here, then, we have traced from the date of the unhappy girl's misfortune that the house was disturbed by something supernatural, and that the family sought the aid

[p. 239]

of the parish priest to abate it, and further that the tapestry room was the scene of this visitation.

"But the matter was kept dark, all reference to poor Anne was avoided, and the belief was allowed to go abroad that it was Satan himself who disturbed the peace of the family. Her parents were ready to turn aside the keen edge of observation from her fate, preferring rather that it should be believed that they were haunted by the Devil, so that the story of her wrongs should sink into oblivion, and be classed as an old wives' tale of horns and hoofs. The harsh father and stepmother have long gone to the place appointed for all living. The Loftus branch of the family are in possession of the Hall. Yet poor Anne has kept her tapestried chamber by nearly the same means which compelled her parents to call in the aid of the parish priest so long ago.

"But to my tale: About the end of the last century my father was invited by Mrs. Tottenham to meet a large party at the Hall. He rode, as was then the custom in Ireland, with his pistols in his holsters. On arriving he found the house full, and

[p. 240]

[paragraph continues] Mrs. Tottenham apologised to him for being obliged to assign to him the tapestry chamber for the night, which, however, he gladly accepted, never having heard any of the stories connected with it.

"However, he had scarcely covered himself in the bed when suddenly something heavy leaped upon it, growling like a dog. The curtains were torn back, and the clothes stripped from the bed. Supposing that some of his companions were playing tricks, he called out that he would shoot them, and seizing a pistol he fired up the chimney, lest he should wound one of them. He then struck a light and searched the room diligently, but found no sign or mark of anyone, and the door locked as he had left it on retiring to rest. Next day he informed his hosts how he had been annoyed, but they could only say that they would not have put him in that room if they had had any other to offer him.

"Years passed on, when the Marquis of Ely went to the Hall to spend some time there. His valet was put to sleep in the tapestry chamber. In the middle of the

[p. 241]

night the whole family was aroused by his dreadful roars and screams, and he was found lying in another room in mortal terror. After some time he told them that, soon after he had lain himself down in bed, he was startled by the rattling of the curtains as they were torn back, and looking up he saw a tall lady by the bedside dressed in stiff brocaded silk; whereupon he rushed out of the room screaming with terror.

"Years afterwards I was brought by my father with the rest of the family to the Hall for the summer bathing. Attracted by the quaint look of the tapestry room, I at once chose it for my bedroom, being utterly ignorant of the stories connected with it. For some little time nothing out of the way happened. One night, however, I sat up much later than usual to finish an article in a magazine I was reading. The full moon was shining clearly in through two large windows, making all as clear as day. I was just about to get into bed, and, happening to glance towards the door, to my great surprise I saw it open quickly and noiselessly, and as quickly and noiselessly shut again, while the tall figure of a

[p. 242]

lady in a stiff dress passed slowly through the room to one of the curious closets already mentioned, which was in the opposite corner. I rubbed my eyes. Every possible explanation but the true one occurred to my mind, for the idea of a ghost did not for a moment enter my head. I quickly reasoned myself into a sound sleep and forgot the matter.

"The next night I again sat up late in my bedroom, preparing a gun and ammunition to go and shoot sea-birds early next morning, when the door again opened and shut in the same noiseless manner, and the same tall lady proceeded to cross the room quietly and deliberately as before towards the closet. I instantly rushed at her, and threw my right arm around her, exclaiming 'Ha! I have you now!' To my utter astonishment my arm passed through her and came with a thud against the bedpost, at which spot she then was. The figure quickened its pace, and as it passed the skirt of its dress lapped against the curtain and I marked distinctly the pattern of her gown--a stiff brocaded silk.

"The ghostly solution of the problem

[p. 243]

did not yet enter my mind. However, I told the story at breakfast next morning. My father, who had himself suffered from the lady's visit so long before, never said a word, and it passed as some folly of mine. So slight was the impression it made on me at the time that, though I slept many a night after in the room, I never thought of watching or looking out for anything.

"Years later I was again a guest at the Hall. The Marquis of Ely and his family, with a large retinue of servants, filled the house to overflowing. As I passed the housekeeper's room I heard the valet say: 'What! I to sleep in the tapestry chamber? Never! I will leave my lord's service before I sleep there!' At once my former experience in that room flashed upon my mind. I had never thought of it during the interval, and was still utterly ignorant of Anne Tottenham: so when the housekeeper was gone I spoke to the valet and said, 'Tell me why you will not sleep in the tapestry room, as I have a particular reason for asking.' He said, 'Is it possible that you do not know that Miss Tottenham passes through that room every

[p. 244]

night, and, dressed in a stiff flowered silk dress, enters the closet in the corner?' I replied that I had never heard a word of her till now, but that I had, a few years before, twice seen a figure exactly like what he had described, and passed my arm through her body. 'Yes,' said he, 'that was Miss Tottenham, and, as is well known, she was confined--mad--in that room, and died there, and, they say, was buried in that closet.'

"Time wore on and another generation arose, another owner possessed the property--the grandson of my friend. In the year 185-, he being then a child came with his mother, the Marchioness of Ely, and his tutor, the Rev. Charles Dale, to the Hall for the bathing season. Mr. Dale was no imaginative person--a solid, steady, highly educated English clergyman, who had never even heard the name of Miss Tottenham. The tapestry room was his bed-chamber. One day in the late autumn of that year I received a letter from the uncle of the Marquis, saying, 'Do tell me what it was you saw long ago in the tapestry chamber, for something strange must have

[p. 245]

happened to the Rev. Charles Dale, as he came to breakfast quite mystified. Something very strange must have occurred, but he will not tell us, seems quite nervous, and, in short, is determined to give up his tutorship and return to England. Every year something mysterious has happened to any person who slept in that room, but they always kept it close. Mr. D--, a Wexford gentleman, slept there a short while ago. He had a splendid dressing-case, fitted with gold and silver articles, which he left carefully locked on his table at night; in the morning he found the whole of its contents scattered about the room.'

"Upon hearing this I determined to write to the Rev. Charles Dale, then Incumbent of a parish near Dover, telling him what had occurred to myself in the room, and that the evidence of supernatural appearances there were so strong and continued for several generations, that I was anxious to put them together, and I would consider it a great favour if he would tell me if anything had happened to him in the room, and of what nature. He then for the first time mentioned the matter, and from his

[p. 246]

letter now before me I make the following extracts:

"'For three weeks I experienced no inconvenience from the lady, but one night, just before we were about to leave, I had sat up very late. It was just one o'clock when I retired to my bedroom, a very beautiful moonlight night. I locked my door, and saw that the shutters were properly fastened, as I did every night. I had not lain myself down more than about five minutes before something jumped on the bed making a growling noise; the bed-clothes were pulled off though I strongly resisted the pull. I immediately sprang out of bed, lighted my candle, looked into the closet and under the bed, but saw nothing.'

"Mr. Dale goes on to say that he endeavoured to account for it in some such way as I had formerly done, having never up to that time heard one word of the lady and her doings in that room. He adds, 'I did not see the lady or hear any noise but the growling.'

"Here then is the written testimony of a beneficed English clergyman, occupying the responsible position of tutor to the young

[p. 247]

[paragraph continues] Marquis of Ely, a most sober-minded and unimpressionable man. He repeats in 1867 almost the very words of my father when detailing his experience in that room in 1790--a man of whose existence he had never been cognisant, and therefore utterly ignorant of Miss Tottenham's doings in that room nearly eighty years before.

"In the autumn of 1868 I was again in the locality, at Dunmore, on the opposite side of the Waterford Estuary. I went across to see the old place and what alterations Miss Tottenham had forced the proprietors to make in the tapestry chamber. I found that the closet into which the poor lady had always vanished was taken away, the room enlarged, and two additional windows put in: the old tapestry had gone and a billiard-table occupied the site of poor Anne's bed. I took the old housekeeper aside, and asked her to tell me how Miss Tottenham bore these changes in her apartment. She looked quite frightened and most anxious to avoid the question, but at length hurriedly replied, 'Oh, Master George! don't talk about her: last night

[p. 248]

she made a horrid noise knocking the billiard-balls about!'

"I have thus traced with strict accuracy this most real and true tale, from the days of 'Tottenham and his Boots' to those of his great-great-grandson. Loftus Hall has since been wholly rebuilt, but I have not heard whether poor Anne Tottenham has condescended to visit it, or is wholly banished at last."

      
True Irish Ghost Stories, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 249]

  

CHAPTER X

  

MISTAKEN IDENTITY--CONCLUSION

WE have given various instances of ghostly phenomena wherein the witnesses have failed at first to realise that what they saw partook in any way of the abnormal. There are also many cases where a so-called ghost has turned out to be something very ordinary. Though more often than not such incidents are of a very trivial or self-explanatory nature (e.g. where a sheep in a churchyard almost paralysed a midnight wayfarer till he summoned up courage to investigate), there are many which have an interest of their own and which often throw into prominence the extraordinary superstitions and beliefs which exist in a country.

Our first story, which is sent us by Mr. De Lacy of Dublin, deals with an incident that occurred in the early part of last century. An epidemic which was then rife in the

[p. 250]

city was each day taking its toll of the unhappy citizens. The wife of a man living in Merrion Square was stricken down and hastily buried in a churchyard in Donnybrook which is now closed. On the night after the funeral one of the city police, or "Charlies" as they were then called, passed through the churchyard on his rounds. When nearing the centre he was alarmed to hear a sound coming from a grave close at hand, and turning, saw a white apparition sit up and address him. This was all he waited for; with a shriek he dropped his lantern and staff and made off as fast as his legs would carry him. The apparition thereupon took up the lamp and staff, and walked to Merrion Square to the house of mourning, was admitted by the servants, and to the joy of the whole household was found to be the object of their grief returned, Alcestis-like, from the grave. It seems that the epidemic was so bad that the bodies of the victims were interred hastily and without much care: the unfortunate lady had really been in a state of coma or trance, and as the grave was lightly covered, when she came to she was able to force her way

[p. 251]

up, and seeing the "Charlie" passing, she called for assistance.

An occurrence which at first had all the appearance of partaking of the supernormal, and which was afterwards found to have a curious explanation, is related by Dean Ovenden of St. Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. "At Dunluce Rectory, Co. Antrim," he writes, "I had a strange experience. There was a force-pump attached to the back wall of the house, and many people drew water from it, as it was better than any obtained at that time in Bushmills. We used to notice, when going to bed, the sound of someone working the pump. All the servants denied that they ever used the pump between 11 P.M. and 12 midnight. I often looked out of the back window when I heard the pump going, but could not see anyone. I tied threads to the handle, but although they were found unbroken in the morning the pumping continued, sometimes only for three or four moves of the handle. On many nights no pumping was heard. The man-servant sat up with a gun and the dog, but he neither saw nor heard anything. We gave it up as a bad job, and still the

[p. 252]

pumping went on. After about two years of this experience, I was one night alone in the house. It was a calm and frosty night and I went to bed about 11.30 P.M. and lay awake; suddenly the pump began to work with great clearness, and mechanically I counted the strokes: they were exactly twelve. I exclaimed, 'The dining-room clock!' I sprang from bed and went down, and found that the clock was fast, as it showed two minutes past twelve o'clock. I set back the hands to 11.55 and lay in bed again, and soon the pumper began as usual. The explanation was that the vibration of the rising and falling hammer was carried up to the bedroom by the wall, but the sound of the hell was never heard. I found afterwards that the nights when there was no pumping were always windy."

A man was walking along a country lane at night and as he was coming round a bend he saw a coffin on the road in front of him. At first he thought it was a warning to him that he was soon to leave this world; but after some hesitation, he finally summoned up courage to give the

[p. 253]

thing a poke with his stick, when he found that the coffin was merely an outline of sea-weed which some passer-by had made. Whereupon he went on his way much relieved.

The unbeliever will state that rats or mice are more often than not the cause of so-called ghostly noises in a house. That, at any rate, instances have happened where one or other of these rodents has given rise to fear and trepidation in the inmates of a house or bedroom is proved by the following story from a Dublin lady. She tells how she was awakened by a most mysterious noise for which she could give no explanation. Overcome by fear, she was quite unable to get out of bed, and lay awake the rest of the night. When light came she got up: there was a big bath in the room, and in it she found a mouse which had been drowned in its efforts to get out. So her haunting was caused by what we may perhaps call a ghost in the making.

The devil is very real to the average countryman in Ireland. He has given his name to many spots which for some reason

[p. 254]

or other have gained some ill-repute--the Devil's Elbow, a very nasty bit of road down in Kerry, is an instance in point. The following story shows how prevalent the idea is that the devil is an active agent in the affairs of this world.

A family living at Ardee, Co. Louth, were one night sitting reading in the parlour. The two maids were amusing themselves at some card game in the kitchen. Suddenly there was a great commotion and the two girls--both from the country--burst into the sitting-room, pale with fright, and almost speechless. When they had recovered a certain amount, they were asked what was the matter; the cook immediately exclaimed, "Oh, sir! the devil, the devil, he knocked three times at the window and frightened us dreadfully, and we had just time to throw the cards into the fire and run in here before he got us." One of the family, on hearing this, immediately went out to see what had caused all this trepidation, and found a swallow with a broken neck lying on the kitchen windowsill. The poor bird had evidently seen the light in the room, and in its efforts to get

[p. 255]

near it had broken its neck against the glass of the window.

An amusing account of a pseudo-haunting comes from County Tipperary, and shows how extraordinarily strong is the countryman's belief in supernatural phenomena. The incidents related occurred only a very short time ago. A farmer in the vicinity of Thurles died leaving behind him a young widow. The latter lived alone after her husband's death, and about three months after the funeral she was startled one night by loud knocking at the door. On opening the door she was shocked at seeing the outline of a man dressed in a shroud. In a solemn voice he asked her did she know who he was: on receiving a reply in the negative, he said that he was her late husband and that he wanted L10 to get into heaven. The terrified woman said she had not got the money, but promised to have it ready if he would call again the next night. The "apparition" agreed, then withdrew, and the distracted woman went to bed wondering how she was to raise the money. When morning came she did not take long in telling her friends

[p. 256]

of her experience, in the hope that they would be able to help her. Their advice, however, was that she should tell the police, and she did so. That night the "apparition" returned at the promised hour, and asked for his money. The amount was handed to him, and in a low sepulchral voice he said, "Now I leave this earth and go to heaven." Unfortunately, as he was leaving, a sergeant and a constable of the R. I. Constabulary stopped him, questioned him, and hauled him off to the barracks to spend the remainder of the night in the cell, where no doubt he decided that the haunting game has its trials. [*1]

An occurrence of very much the same description took place in County Clare about three years ago. Again the departed husband returns to his sorrowing wife, sits by the fire with her, chatting no doubt of old times, and before he leaves for the other world is regaled with pig's head and plenty of whisky. The visit is repeated the next night, and a request made for money to play cards with down below: the wife willingly gives him the money. Again

[p. 257]

he comes, and again he borrows on the plea that he had lost the night before, but hoped to get better luck next time. On the woman telling a neighbour a watch was kept for the dead man's return, but he never came near the place again.

An account of a police-court trial which appeared in the Irish Times of 31st December 1913 emphasizes in a very marked degree the extraordinary grip that superstition has over some of the country people. A young woman was on her trial for stealing L300 from the brother of her employer, Patrick McFaul of Armagh. District Inspector Lowndes, in opening the case for the Crown, told the bench that the money had been taken out of the bank by McFaul to buy a holding, for the purchase of which negotiations were going on. The money was carelessly thrown into a drawer in a bedroom, and left there till it would be wanted. A short time afterwards a fire broke out in the room, and a heap of ashes was all that was found in the drawer, though little else in the room besides a few clothes was injured. "The McFauls appeared to accept their loss with a complacency,

[p. 258]

which could only be accounted for by the idea they entertained that the money was destroyed through spiritual intervention--that there were ghosts in the question, and that the destruction of the money was to be taken as a warning directed against a matrimonial arrangement, into which Michael McFaul was about to enter." The accused girl was servant to the McFauls, who discharged her a few days after the fire: but before this she had been into Derry and spent a night there; during her stay she tried to change three L20 notes with the help of a friend. But change was refused, and she had to abandon the attempt. "If some of the money was burned, some of it was certainly in existence three days later, to the amount of L60. One thing was manifest, and that was that an incredible amount of superstition appeared to prevail amongst families in that neighbourhood when the loss of such a sum as this could be attributed to anything but larceny, and it could for a moment be suggested that it was due to spiritual intervention to indicate that a certain course should be abandoned."

[p. 259]

The foregoing tales have been inserted, not in order that they may throw ridicule on the rest of the book, but that they may act as a wholesome corrective. If all ghost stories could be subjected to such rigid examination it is probable that the mystery in many of them would be capable of equally simple solution--yet a remnant would be left.

And here, though it may seem somewhat belated, we must offer an apology for the use of the terms "ghost" and "ghost story." The book includes such different items as hauntings, death-warnings, visions, and hallucinations, some of which obviously can no more be attributed to discarnate spirits than can the present writer's power of guiding his pen along the lines of a page; whether others of these must be laid to the credit of such unseen influences is just the question. But in truth there was no other expression than "ghost stories" which we could have used, or which could have conveyed to our readers, within reasonable verbal limits, as they glanced at its cover, or at an advertisement of it, a general idea of the contents of this book.

[p. 260]

[paragraph continues] The day will certainly come when, before the steady advance of scientific investigation, and the consequent influencing of public opinion, the word "ghost" will be relegated to limbo, and its place taken by a number of expressions corresponding to the results obtained from the analysis of phenomena hitherto grouped under this collective title. That day is approaching. And so, though we have used the term throughout the pages of this book, it must not therefore be assumed that we necessarily believe in "ghosts," or that we are bound to the theory that all, or any, of the unusual happenings therein recorded are due to the action of visitants from the Otherworld.

We may now anticipate one or two possible points of criticism. It might be alleged that the publication of such a book as this would tend to show that the Irish nation was enslaved in superstition. Without stopping to review the question as to what should, or should not, be classed as "superstition," we would rejoin by gleefully pointing to a leading article in the Irish Times of Jan. 27, 1914, which gives a short account of a lecture by Mr. Lovett

[p. 261]

on the folklore of London. Folklore in London! in the metropolis of the stolid Englishman! The fact is that the Irish people are not one whit more superstitious than their cross-channel neighbours, while they are surely on a far higher level in this respect than many of the Continental nations. They seem to be more superstitious because (we speak without wishing to give any offence) the popular religion of the majority has incorporated certain elements which may be traced back to pre-Christian times; but that they are actually more superstitious we beg leave to doubt.

Another and more important series of objections is stated by one of our correspondents as follows. "I must confess that I can never reconcile with my conception of an All-Wise Creator the type of 'ghost' you are at present interested in; it seems to me incredible that the spirits of the departed should be permitted to return and indulge in the ghostly repertoire of jangling chains, gurgling, &c., apparently for the sole purpose of scaring housemaids and other timid or hysterical people." The first and most obvious remark on this is, that our correspondent

[p. 262]

has never read or heard a ghost story, save of the Christmas magazine type, else he would be aware that the above theatrical display is not an integral part of the "ghostly repertoire "; and also that persons, who are not housemaids, and who can not be classed as timid or hysterical, but who, on the other hand, are exceedingly sober-minded, courageous, and level-headed, have had experiences (and been frightened by them too!) which cannot be explained on ordinary grounds. But on the main point our correspondent is begging the question, or at least assuming as fully proved a conclusion which is very far from being so. Is he quite sure that the only explanation of these strange sights and weird noises is that they are brought about by the action of departed spirits (we naturally exclude cases of deliberate fraud, which in reality are very unusual)? And if so, what meaning would he put upon the word "spirits"? And even if it be granted that the phenomena are caused by the inhabitants of another world, why should it be impossible to accept such a theory, because of its apparent incompatibility with any conception of an

[p. 263]

[paragraph continues] All-Wise Creator, of whose workings we are so profoundly ignorant? Are there not many things in the material world which to the limited human mind of our correspondent must seem puzzling, meaningless, useless, and even harmful? He does not therefore condemn these offhand; he is content to suspend judgment, is he not? Why cannot he adopt the same attitude with respect to psychic phenomena? Our correspondent might here make the obvious retort that it is we who are begging the question, not he, because such happenings as are described in this book have no existence apart from the imaginative or inventive faculties of certain persons. This would be equivalent to saying bluntly that a considerable number of people in Ireland are either liars or fools, or both. This point we shall deal with later on.

Our correspondent belongs to a type which knows nothing at all about psychical research, and is not aware that some of the cleverest scientists and deepest thinkers of the day have interested themselves in such problems. They have not found the answer to many of them--goodness knows if they ever will this side of the grave--but at least they have

[p. 264]

helped to broaden and deepen our knowledge of ourselves, our surroundings, and our God. They have revealed to us profundities in human personality hitherto unsuspected, they have suggested means of communication between mind and mind almost incredible, and (in the writer's opinion at least) these points have a very important bearing on our conceptions of the final state of mankind in the world to come, and so they are preparing the way for that finer and more ethical conception of God and His Creation which will be the heritage of generations yet unborn. The materialist's day is far spent, and its sun nears the horizon.

Another objection to the study of the subjects dealt with in this book is that we are designedly left in ignorance of the unseen world by a Wise Creator, and therefore that it is grossly presumptuous, not to say impious, on the part of man to make any attempt to probe into questions which he has not been intended to study. Which is equivalent to saying that it is impious to ride a bicycle, because man was obviously created a pedestrian. This might be true if we were confined within a self-contained

[p. 265]

world which had, and could have, no connection with anything external to itself. But the very essence of our existence here is that the material and spiritual worlds interpenetrate, or rather that our little planet forms part of a boundless universe teeming with life and intelligence, yet lying in the hollow of God's hand. He alone is "Supernatural," and therefore Transcendent and Unknowable; all things in the universe are "natural," though very often they are beyond our normal experience, and as such are legitimate objects for man's research. Surely the potential energy in the human intellect will not allow it to remain at its present stage, but will continually urge it onwards and upwards. What limits God in His Providence has seen fit to put upon us we cannot tell, for every moment the horizon is receding, and our outlook becoming larger, though some still find it difficult to bring their eyesight to the focus consequently required. The marvellous of to-day is the commonplace of to-morrow: "our notion of what is natural grows with our greater knowledge."

Throughout the pages of this book we have,

[p. 266]

in general, avoided offering explanations of; or theories to account for, the different stories. Here something may be said on this point. As we have already pointed out, the expression "ghost stories" covers a multitude of different phenomena. Many of these may be explained as "hallucinations," which does not imply that they are simply the effect of imagination and nothing more. "The mind receives the hallucination as if it came through the channels of sense, and accordingly externalises the impression, seeking its source in the world outside itself, whereas in all hallucinations the source is within the mind, and is not derived from an impression received through the recognised organ of sense." [*1]

Many of these hallucinations are termed veridical, or truth-telling, because they coincide with real events occurring to another person. Illustrations of this will be found in Chapter VI, from which it would appear that a dying person (though the power is not necessarily confined to such) occasionally has the faculty of telepathically communicating with another; the latter receives the

[p. 267]

impression, and externalises it, and so sees a ghost," to use the popular expression. Some hallucinations are auditory, i.e. sounds are heard which apparently do not correspond to any objective reality. Incomprehensible though it may appear, it may be possible for sounds, and very loud ones too, to be heard by one or more persons, the said sounds being purely hallucinatory, and not causing any disturbance in the atmosphere.

Some of the incidents may be explained as due to telepathy, that mysterious power by which mind can communicate with mind, though what telepathy is, or through what medium it is propagated, no one can tell as yet. Belief in this force is increasing, because, as Professor Sir W. Barrett remarks: "Hostility to a new idea arises largely from its being unrelated to existing knowledge," and, as telepathy seems to the ordinary person to be analogous to wireless telegraphy, it is therefore accepted, or at least not laughed at, though how far the analogy really holds good is not at all certain.

Again there is the question of haunted houses and places, to accounts of which the

[p. 268]

first five chapters of this book are devoted. The actual evidence for many of these may not come up to the rigorous standard set by the S.P.R., but it is beyond all doubt that persons who are neither fools, liars, nor drunkards firmly believe that they have seen and heard the things related in these chapters (not to speak of Chapters VI-VIII), or that they have been told such by those in whose statements they place implicit confidence; while so certain are they that they are telling the truth that they have not only written down the stories for the compilers, but have given their names and addresses as well, though not always for publication. Can we contemptuously fling aside such a weight of evidence as unworthy of even a cursory examination? This would hardly be a rational attitude to adopt. Various theories to account for these strange hauntings have been formulated, which may be found on pp. 199-200 of Sir William Barrett's Psychical Research, and so need not be given here.

Yet, when all is said and done, the very formulating of theories, so far from solving problems, only raises further and more complex

[p. 269]

ones, perhaps the greatest of which is, Have the spirits of the departed anything to do with the matter? As we have shown, we hope with success, in the preceding paragraphs, many "ghosts" have no necessary connection with the denizens of the unseen world, but may be explained as being due to laws of nature which at present are very obscure. Does this hold good of all "ghosts," or are some of them to be placed to the credit of those who have passed beyond the veil, or perhaps to spirits, good or evil, which have never been incarnate? That is the problem for the future, for in the present state of our knowledge it would be premature to give a direct answer, either positive or negative.

This book was written with a twofold purpose: first, that of entertaining our readers, in which we trust we have been successful; secondly, to stimulate thought. For, strange though it may seem, authenticated "ghost stories" have a certain educative value. Taking them at their lowest they suggest inquiry into the strange workings of the human mind: at their highest how many strange lines of inquiry do they

[p. 270]

not suggest? For it is obvious that we have now arrived at one of those interesting periods in the history of human thought which might be described as the return of the pendulum. We are in the process of emerging from a very materialistic age, when men either refused to believe anything that was contrary to their normal experience, or else leavened their spiritual doctrines and beliefs with the leaven of materialism. The pendulum has swung to its highest point in this respect, and is now commencing to return, so perhaps the intellectual danger of the future will be that men, instead of believing too little, will believe too much. Now is the time for laying a careful foundation. Psychical research, spiritualism, and the like, are not ends in themselves, they are only means to an end. At the present state of thought, the transition from the old to the new, from the lower to the higher, it is inevitable that there must be confusion and doubt, and the earnest thinker must be prepared to suspend judgment on many points; but at a later stage, when all absurdity, error, and fraud, now so closely connected with

[p. 271]

psychical research in its various branches, will have been swept away, Truth will emerge and lift the human race to a purer and loftier conception of God and His universe.

Footnotes

^256:1 Evening Telegraph for Dec. 10, 1913

^266:1 Prof. Sir W. Barrett, Psychical Research, p. iii.

     
True Irish Ghost Stories, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 272] [p. 273]

  

INDEX OF PLACE NAMES

ABBEYSHRULE, <page 134>

Ardee, <page 254>

Ardtrea, <page 229>

Armagh, <page 257>

 

BLACKROCK, near Cork, <page 181>

Blanchardstown, <page 27>

Boyne valley, <page 233>

Bray, <page 131>

 

CASTLEBLANEY, <page 172>

Cavan, Co., <page 39>

Charles Fort, <page 65>

Clare, Co., <page 75>, <page 77>, <page 179>, <page 18>: <page 256>

Clogher, Div. of, <page 213>

Clonmel, <page 122>

Cork, Co., <page 130>, <page 191>

 

DONEGAL, CO., <page 51>

Down, Co., <page 219>

Drogheda, <page 48>

Dublin city, <page 4> ff., <page 198>, <page 250>

Dunluce, <page 251>

 

ENNISCORTHY, <page 101>

Ennistymon, <page 188>

 

FERMANAGH, CO., <page 109>

 

GALWAY, CO., <page 194>

-- town of, <page 47>

Gill Hall, <page 159>

Glasnevin, <page 207>

Gormanstown Castle, <page 195>

 

INISHINNY, island of, <page 165>

Island Magee, <page 152>

 

K-- CASTLE, <page 91>

Kildare, Co., <page 224>

Kilkenny, Co., <page 60>, <page 128>

Killarney, <page 169>

"Kilman" Castle, <page 94>

Kimmage Road, near Dublin, <page 132>

Kingstown, <page 28>

 

LARNE, <page 113>

Leitrim, Co., <page 129>

Lifford, near town of, <page 145>

Limerick, Co., <page 73>, <page 79>, <page 139>, <page 148>, <page 160>, <page 186>, <page 192>, <page 205>, <page 208>, <page 221>,

Limerick, city of, <page 173>, <page 201>, <page 231>

Loftus Hall, <page 234>

 

[p. 274]

MARSH'S LIBRARY, <page 15>

Mitchelstown, <page 162>

Monaghan, Co., <page 50>

Mullaghmast, Rath of, <page 226>, <page 227>

 

NORTH OF IRELAND, <page 35>, <page 37>

 

PASSAGE EAST, <page 119>

Portarlington, <page 55>, <page 57>, <page 118>

 

QUEEN'S CO., <page 58>, <page 189>

 

RATHFARNHAM CASTLE, <page 126>

Rathgar, <page 18>

Rathmines, <page 19>

 

STRABANE, <page 136>

 

TIPPERARY, CO., <page 85>, <page 155>, <page 255>

 

WALLSTOWN CASTLE, <page 228>

Waterford, Co., <page 135>

Westmeath, Co., <page 32>

Wexford, Co., <page 115>, <page 158>

Wicklow, Co., <page 189>, <page 210>

-- town of, <page 190>

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: tlc.txt =====


    
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE LOST CONTINENT

  

Cutcliffe Hyne

  

Illustrated

  

Harper & Brothers

  

New York and London

  

MDCCCC

  

[1900]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, November 2007. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Frontispiece: "A GREAT MAN-EATING BIRD" [P. 150

Click to enlarge
Verso

Click to enlarge
Front cover and spine

Click to enlarge
Cover of the December 1944 issue of Famous Fantastic Mysteries, featuring an abridged text of The Lost Continent

Click to enlarge
Cover of the Ballantine edition of 1972: Note misspelling of Cutcliffe.

DEDICATED
 TO
 ALFRED LEWIS JONES

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS

          CHAPTER

        

       PAGE

     
       

       PREFATORY. THE LEGATEES OF DEUCALION

       <page 1>

     
      I.

       MY RECALL

       <page 15>

     
      II.

       BACK TO ATLANTIS

       <page 31>

     
      III.

       A RIVAL NAVY

       <page 45>

     
      IV.

       THE WELCOME OF PHORENICE

       <page 57>

     
      V.

       ZAEMON'S CURSE

       <page 73>

     
      VI.

       THE BITERS OF THE CITY WALLS

       <page 95>

     
      VII.

       THE BITERS OF THE WALLS (FURTHER ACCOUNT)

       <page 115>

     
      VIII.

       THE PREACHER FROM THE MOUNTAINS

       <page 130>

     
      IX.

       PHORENICE, GODDESS

       <page 146>

     
      X.

       A WOOING

       <page 161>

     
      XI.

       AN AFFAIR WITH THE BARBAROUS FISHERS

       <page 181>

     
      XII.

       THE DRUG OF OUR LADY THE MOON

       <page 201>

     
      XIII.

       THE BURYING ALIVE OF NAIS

       <page 223>

     
      XIV.

       AGAIN THE GODS MAKE CHANGE

       <page 241>

     
      XV.

       ZAEMON'S SUMMONS

       <page 261>

     
      XVI.

       SIEGE OF THE SACRED MOUNTAIN

       <page 273>

     
      XVII.

       NAIS THE REGAINED

       <page 295>

     
      XVIII.

       STORM OF THE SACRED MOUNTAIN

       <page 314>

     
      XIX.

       DESTRUCTION OF ATLANTIS

       <page 333>

     
      XX.

       ON THE BOSOM OF THE DEEP

       <page 349>

     
   
     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

ILLUSTRATIONS

          "A GREAT MAN-EATING BIRD"

       Frontispiece

     
      "I DROVE IN THE LANCE AT ITS OOZY EYE'"

       Facing   p. 42

     
      "TOB WITH HIS BLOODY AYE"

       "      54

     
      "THE GREAT CAVE-TIGER"

       "     104

     
      "THE BOUND MAN WAS SHOT AWAY"

       "     126

     
      "BACK WITH YOU, OUTSIDE THIS CIRCLE"

       "     162

     
      "'WE TWO KEPT A CIRCLE AROUND US"

       "     194

     
      "'SHE FLUNG HER ARMS ABOUT MY NECK"

       "     250

     
   
     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

PREFATORY

  

THE LEGATEES OF DEUCALION

WE were both of us not a little stiff as the result of sleeping out in the open all that night, for even in Grand Canary the dew-fall and the comparative chill of darkness are not to be trifled with. For myself, on these occasions I like a bit of a run as an early refresher. But here on this rough ground in the middle of the island there were not three yards of level to be found, and so as Coppinger proceeded to go through some sort of dumb-bell exercises with a couple of lumps of bristly lava, I followed his example. Coppinger has done a good deal of roughing it in his time, but being a doctor of medicine among other things--he takes out a new degree of some sort on an average every other year--he is great on health theories, and practises them like a religion.

There had been rain two days before, and as there was still a bit of stream trickling along at the bottom of the barranca, we went down there and had a wash, and brushed our teeth. Greatest luxury imaginable, a tooth-brush, on this sort of expedition.

"Now," said Coppinger when we had emptied our

[p. 2]

pockets, "there's precious little grub left, and it's none the better for being carried in a local Spanish newspaper."

"Yours is mostly tobacco ashes."

"It'll get worse if we leave it. We've a lot more bad scrambling ahead of us."

That was obvious. So we sat down beside the stream there at the bottom of the barranca, and ate up all of what was left. It was a ten-mile tramp in to the fonda at Santa Brigida, where we had set down our traps; and as Coppinger wanted to take a lot more photographs and measurements before we left this particular group of caves, it was likely we should be pretty sharp set before we got our next meal and our next taste of the patron's splendid old country wine. My faith, if only they knew down in the English hotels in Las Palmas what magnificent wines one could get--with diplomacy--up in some of the mountain villages, the old vintages would become a thing of the past in a week.

Now, to tell the truth, the two mummies he had gathered already quite satisfied my small ambition. The goat-skins in which they were sewn up were as brittle as paper, and the poor old things themselves gave out dust like a puff-ball whenever they were touched. But you know what Coppinger is. He thought he'd come upon traces of an old Guanche university, or sacred college, or something of that kind, like the one there is on the other side of the island, and he wouldn't be satisfied till he'd ransacked every cave in the whole face of the cliff. He'd plenty of stuff left for the flash-light thing, and twenty-eight

[p. 3]

more films in his kodak, and said we might as well get through with the job then as make a return journey all on purpose. So he took the crowbar, and I shouldered the rope, and away we went up to the ridge of the cliff where we had got such a baking from the sun the day before.

Of course these caves were not easy to come at, or else they would have been raided years before. Coppinger, who on principle makes out he knows all about these things, says that in the old Guanche days they had ladders of goat-skin rope which they could pull up when they were at home, and so keep out undesirable callers; and as no other plan occurs to me, perhaps he may be right. Anyway the mouths of the caves were in a more or less level row thirty feet below the ridge of the cliff, and fifty feet above the bottom; and Spanish curiosity doesn't go in much where it cannot walk.

Now laddering such caves from below would have been cumbersome, but a light knotted rope is easily carried, and though it would have been hard to climb up this, our plan was to descend on each cave mouth from above, and then slip down to the foot of the cliffs, and start again ab initio for the next.

Coppinger is plucky enough, and he has a good head on a height, but there is no getting over the fact that he is portly and nearer fifty than forty-five. So you can see he must have been pretty keen. Of course I went first each time, and got into the cave mouth, and did what I could to help him in; but when you have to walk down a vertical cliff face fly-fashion, with only a thin bootlace of a rope for

[p. 4]

support, it is not much real help the man below can give, except offer you his best wishes.

I wanted to save him as much as I could, and as the first three caves I climbed to were small and empty, seeming to be merely store-places, I asked him to take them for granted, and save himself for the rest. But he insisted on clambering down to each one in person, and as he decided that one of my granaries was a prison, and another a pot-making factory, and another a school-room for young priests, he naturally said he hadn't much reliance on my judgment, and would have to go through the whole lot himself. You know what these thorough-going archaeologists are for imagination.

But as the day went on and the sun rose higher, Coppinger began clearly to have had enough of it, though he was very game, and insisted on going on much longer than was safe. I must say I didn't like it. You see, the drop was seldom less than eighty feet from the top of the cliffs. However, at last he was forced to give it up. I suggested marching off to Santa Brigida forthwith, but he wouldn't do that. There were three more cave openings to be looked into, and if I wouldn't do them for him, he would have to make another effort to get there himself. He tried to make out he was conferring a very great favor on me by offering to take a report solely from my untrained observation, but I flatly refused to look at it in that light. I was pretty tired also; I was soaked with perspiration from the heat; my head ached from the violence of the sun; and my hands were cut raw with the rope.

[p. 5]

Coppinger might be tired, but he was still enthusiastic. He tried to make me enthusiastic also. "Look here," he said, "there's no knowing what you may find up there, and if you do lay hands on anything, remember it's your own. I shall have no claim whatever."

"Very kind of you, but I've got no use for any more mummies done up in goat-skin bags."

"Bah! That's not a burial cave up there. Don't you know the difference yet in the openings? Now be a good fellow. It doesn't follow that because we have drawn all the rest blank, you won't stumble across a good find for yourself up there."

"Oh, very well," I said, as he seemed so set on it; and away I stumbled over the fallen rocks, and along the ledge, and then scrambled up by that fissure in the cliff which saved us the two-mile round which we had had to take at first. I wrenched out the crowbar, and jammed it down in a new place, and then away I went over the side, with hands smarting worse at every new grip of the rope. It was an awkward job swinging into the cave mouth, because the rock above overhung, or else (what came to the same thing) it had broken away below; but I managed it somehow, although I landed with an awkward thump on my back, and at the same time I didn't let go the rope. It wouldn't do to have lost the rope then: Coppinger couldn't have flicked it in to me from where he was below.

Now from the first glance I could see that this cave was of different structure to the others. They were for the most part mere dens, rounded out anyhow:

[p. 6]

this had been faced up with cutting-tools, so that all the angles were clean, and the sides smooth and flat. The walls inclined inward to the roof, reminding me of an architecture I had seen before but could not recollect where, and, moreover, there were several rooms connected up with passages. I was pleased to find that the other cave-openings which Coppinger wanted me to explore were merely the windows or the doorways of two of these other rooms.

Of inscriptions or markings on the walls there was not a trace, though I looked carefully, and, except for bats, the place was entirely bare. I lit a cigarette and smoked it through--Coppinger always thinks one is slurring over work if it is got through too quickly--and then I went to the entrance where the rope was, and leaned out, and shouted down my news.

He turned up a very anxious face. " Have you searched it thoroughly?" he bawled back.

"Of course I have. What do you think I've been doing all this time?"

"No, don't come down yet. Wait a minute. I say, old man, do wait a minute. I'm making fast the kodak and the flash-light apparatus on the end of the rope. Pull them up, and just make me half a dozen exposures, there's a good fellow."

"Oh, all right," I said, and hauled the things up, and got them inside. The photographs would be absolutely dull and uninteresting, but that wouldn't matter to Coppinger. He rather preferred them that way. One has to be careful about halation in photographing these dark interiors, but there was a

[p. 7]

sort of ledge like a seat by the side of each doorway, and so I lodged the camera on that to get a steady stand, and snapped off the flash-light from behind and above.

I got pictures of four of the chambers this way, and then came to one where the ledge was higher and wider. I put down the camera, wedged it level with scraps of stone, and then sat down myself to recharge the flash-light machine. But the moment my weight got on that ledge there was a sharp crackle, and down I went half a dozen inches.

Of course I was up again pretty sharply, and snapped up the kodak just as it was going to slide off to the ground. I will confess, too, I was feeling pleased. Here, at any rate, was a Guanche cupboard of sorts, and as they had taken the trouble to hermetically seal it with cement, the odds were that it had something inside worth hiding. At first there was nothing to be seen but a lot of dust and rubble, so I lit a bit of candle and cleared this away. Presently, however, I began to find that I was shelling out something that was not cement. It chipped away, in regular layers, and when I took it to the daylight I found that each layer was made up of two parts. One side was shiny stuff that looked like talc, and on this was smeared a coating of dark toffee-colored material, that might have been wax. The toffee-colored surface was worked over with some kind of pattern.

Now I do not profess to any knowledge on these matters, and as a consequence took what Coppinger had told me about Guanche habits and acquirements

[p. 8]

as more or less true. For instance, he had repeatedly impressed upon me that this old people could not write, and having this in my memory, I did not guess that the patterns scribed through the wax were letters in some obsolete character, which, if left to myself, probably I should have done. But still at the same time I came to the conclusion that the stuff was worth looting, and so set to work quarrying it out with the heel of my boot and a pocket-knife.

The sheets were all more or less stuck together, and so I did not go in for separating them further. They fitted exactly to the cavity in which they were stored, but by smashing down its front I was able to get at the foot of them, and then I hacked away through the bottom layers with the knife till I got the bulk out in one solid piece. It measured some twenty inches by fifteen, by fifteen, but it was not so heavy as it looked, and when I had taken the remaining photographs I lowered it down to Coppinger on the end of the rope.

There was nothing more to do in the caves then, so I went down myself next. The lump of sheets was on the ground, and Coppinger was on all fours beside it. He was pretty nearly mad with excitement.

"What is it?" I asked him.

"I don't know yet. But it is the most valuable find ever made in the Canary Islands, and it's yours, you unappreciative beggar; at least what there is left of it. Oh, man, man, you've smashed up the beginning, and you've smashed up the end of some history that is probably priceless. It's my own fault.

[p. 9]

[paragraph continues] I ought to have known better than set an untrained man to do important exploring work."

"I should say it's your fault if anything's gone wrong. You said there was no such thing as writing known to these ancient Canarios, and I took your word for it. For anything I knew the stuff might have been something to eat."

"It isn't Guanche work at all," said he, testily. "You ought to have known that from the talc. Great Heavens, man, have you no eyes? Haven't you seen the general formation of the island? Don't you know there's no talc here?"

"I'm no geologist. Is this imported literature then?"

"Of course. It's Egyptian: that's obvious at a glance. Though how it's got here I can't tell yet. It isn't stuff you can read off like a newspaper. The character's a variant on any of those that have been discovered so far. And as for this waxy stuff spread over the talc, it's unique. It's some sort of a mineral, I think: perhaps asphalt. It doesn't scratch up like animal wax. I'll analyze that later. Why they once invented it and then let such a splendid notion drop out of use is just a marvel. I could stay gloating over this all day."

"Well," I said, "if it's all the same for you, I'd rather gloat over a meal. It's a good ten miles hard going to the fonda, and I'm as hungry as a hawk already. Look here, do you know it is four o'clock already? It takes longer than you think, climbing down to each of these caves, and then getting up again for the next."

[p. 10]

Coppinger spread his coat on the ground, and wrapped the lump of sheets with tender care, but would not allow it to be tied with a rope for fear of breaking more of the edges. He insisted on carrying it himself, too, and did so for the larger part of the way to Santa Brigida, and it was only when he was within an ace of dropping himself with sheer tiredness that he condescended to let me take my turn. He was tolerably ungracious about it too. "I suppose you may as well carry the stuff," he snapped, "seeing that after all it's your own."

Personally, when we got to the fonda, I had as good a dinner as was procurable, and a bottle of that old Canary wine, and turned in to bed after a final pipe. Coppinger dined also, but I have reason to believe he did not sleep much. At any rate I found him still poring over the find next morning, and looking very heavy-eyed, but brimming with enthusiasm.

"Do you know," he said, "that you've blundered upon the most valuable historical manuscript that the modern world has ever yet seen? Of course, with your clumsy way of getting it out, you've done an infinity of damage. For instance, those top sheets you shelled away and spoiled, contained probably an absolutely unique account of the ancient civilization of Yucatan."

"Where's that, anyway?"

"In the middle of the Gulf of Mexico. It's all ruins to-day, but once it was a very prosperous colony of the Atlanteans."

"Never heard of them. Oh yes, I have though.

[p. 11]

[paragraph continues] They were the people Herodotus .wrote about, didn't he? But I thought they were mythical."

"They were very real, and so was Atlantis, the continent where they lived, which lay just north of the Canaries here."

"What's that crocodile sort of thing with wings drawn in the margin?"

"Some sort of beast that lived in those bygone days. The pages are full of them. That's a cave-tiger. And that's some sort of colossal bat. Thank goodness he had the sense to illustrate fully, the man who wrote this, or we should never have been able to reconstruct the tale, or at any rate we could not have understood half of it. Whole species have died out since this was written, just as a whole continent has been swept away and three civilizations quenched. The worst of it is, it was written by a highly educated man who somewhat naturally writes a very bad fist. I've hammered at it all the night through, and have only managed to make out a few sentences here and there,"--he rubbed his hands appreciatively. "It will take me a year's hard work to translate this properly."

"Every man to his taste. I'm afraid my interest in the thing wouldn't last as long as that. But how did it get there? Did your ancient Egyptian come to Grand Canary for the good of his lungs, and write it because he felt dull up in that cave?"

"I made a mistake there. The author was not an Egyptian. It was the similarity of the inscribed character which misled me. The book was written by one Deucalion, who seems to have been a priest

[p. 12]

or general--or perhaps both--and he was an Atlantean. How it got there I don't know yet. Probably that was told in the last few pages, which a certain vandal smashed up with his pocket-knife, in getting them away from the place where they were stowed."

"That's right, abuse me. Deucalion, you say? There was a Deucalion in the Greek mythology. He was one of the two who escaped from the Flood: their Noah, in fact."

"The swamping of the continent of Atlantis might very well correspond to the Flood."

"Is there a Pyrrha then? She was Deucalion's wife."

"I haven't come across her yet. But there's a Phorenice, who may be the same. She seems to have been the reigning Empress, as far as I can make out at present."

I looked with interest at illustrations in the margin. They were quite understandable, although the perspective was all wrong. "Weird beasts they seem to have had knocking about the country in those days. Whacking big size, too, if one may judge. By Jove! that'll be a cave-tiger trying to pull down a mammoth. I shouldn't care to have lived in those days."

"Probably they had some way of fighting the creatures. However, that will show itself as I get along with the translation." He looked at his watch--"I suppose I ought to be ashamed of myself, but I haven't been to bed. Are you going out?"

"I shall drive back to Las Palmas. I promised a man to have a round at golf this afternoon."

"Very well, see you at dinner. I hope they've

[p. 13]

sent back my dress-shirts from the wash. Oh, Lord! I am sleepy."

I left him going up to bed, and went outside and ordered a carriage to take me down, and there I may say we parted for a considerable time. A cable was waiting for me in the hotel at Las Palmas to go home for business forthwith, and there was a Liverpool boat in the harbor which I just managed to catch as she was steaming out. It was a close thing, and the boatmen made a small fortune out of my hurry.

Now Coppinger was only an hotel acquaintance, and as I was up to the eyes in work when I got back to England, I'm afraid I didn't think very much more about him at the time. One doesn't with people one just meets casually abroad like that. And it must have been at least a year later that I saw by a paragraph in one of the papers, that he had given the lumps of sheets to the British Museum, and that the estimated worth of them was ten thousand pounds at the lowest valuation.

Well, this was a bit of revelation, and as he had so repeatedly impressed on me that the things were mine by right of discovery, I wrote rather a pointed note to him mentioning that he seemed to have been making rather free with my property. Promptly came back a stilted letter beginning, "Doctor Coppinger regrets," and so on, and with it the English translation of the wax-upon-talc MSS. He "quite admitted" my claim, and "trusted that the profits of publication would be a sufficient reimbursement for any damage received."

[p. 14]

Now I had no idea that he would take me unpleasantly like this, and wrote back a pretty warm reply to that effect; but the only answer. I got to this was through a firm of solicitors, who stated that all further communications with Dr. Coppinger must be made through them.

I will say here publicly that I regret the line he has taken over the matter; but as the affair has gone so far, I am disposed to follow out his proposition. Accordingly the old history is here printed; the credit (and the responsibility) of the translation rests with Dr. Coppinger; and whatever revenue accrues from readers, goes to the finder of the original talc-upon-wax sheets, myself.

If there is a further alteration in this arrangement, it will be announced publicly at a later date. But at present this appears to be most unlikely.

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 15]

  

THE LOST CONTINENT

  

CHAPTER I

  

MY RECALL

THE public official reception was over. The sentence had been read, the name of Phorenice the Empress adored, and the new Viceroy installed with all that vast and ponderous ceremonial which had gained its pomp and majesty from the ages. Formally, I had delivered up the reins of my government; formally, Tatho had seated himself on the snake-throne, and had put over his neck the chain of gems which symbolized the supreme office; and then, while the drums and the trumpets made their proclamation of clamor, he had risen to his feet for his first state progress round that gilded council chamber, as Viceroy of the Province of Yucatan.

With folded arms and bended head I followed him between the glittering lines of soldiers, and the brilliant throng of courtiers, and chiefs, and statesmen. The roof-beams quivered to the cries of "Long live Tatho!" "Flourish the Empress!" which came forth as in duty bound, and the new ruler acknowledged

[p. 16]

the welcome with stately inclinations of the head. In turn he went to the three lesser thrones of the lesser governors--in the East, the North, and the South, and received homage from each as the ritual was; and I, the man whom his coming had deposed, followed with the prescribed meekness in his train.

It was a hard task, but we who hold the higher offices learn to carry before the people a passionless face. Once, twenty years before, these same fine obeisances had been made to me; now the Gods had seen fit to make fortune change. But as I walked bent and humbly on behind the heels of Tatho, though etiquette forbade noisy salutations to myself, it could not inhibit kindly glances, and these came from every soldier, every courtier, and every chief who stood there in that gilded hall, and they fell upon me very gratefully. It is not often that the fallen meet such tender looks.

The form goes, handed down from immemorial custom, that on these great ceremonial days of changing a ruler, those of the people being present may bring forward petitions and requests; may make accusations against their retiring head with sure immunity from his vengeance; or may state their own private theories for the better government of the State in the future. I think it may be pardoned to my vanity if I record that not a voice was raised against me, or against any of the items of my twenty years of rule. Nor did any speak out for alterations in the future. Yes, even though we made the circuit for the three prescribed times, all present showed their approval in generous silence.

[p. 17]

Then, one behind the other, the new Viceroy and the old, we marched with formal step over golden tiles of that council hall beneath the pyramid, and the great officers of state left their stations and joined in our train; and at the farther wall we came to the door of those private chambers which an hour ago had been mine own.

Ah, well! I had no home now in any of those wondrous cities of Yucatan, and I could not help feeling a bitterness, though in sooth I should have been thankful enough to return to the Continent of Atlantis with my head still in its proper station.

Tatho gave his formal summons of "Open ye to the Viceroy," which the ritual commands, and the slaves within sent the massive stone valves of the door gaping wide. Tatho entered, I at his heels; the others halted, sending valedictions from the threshold; and the valves of the door clanged on the lock behind us. We passed on to the chamber beyond, and then, when for the first time we were alone together, and the forced etiquette of courts was behind us, the new Viceroy turned with meekly folded arms, and bowed low before me.

"Deucalion," he said, "believe me that I have not sought this office. It was thrust upon me. Had I not accepted, my head would have paid forfeit, and another man--your enemy--would have been sent out as viceroy in your place. The Empress does not permit that her will shall ever be questioned."

"My friend," I made answer, "my brother in all but blood, there is no man living in all Atlantis or her territories to whom I had liefer hand over my government.

[p. 18]

[paragraph continues] For twenty years now have I ruled this country of Yucatan, and Mexico beyond, first under the old King, and then as minister to this new Empress. I know my colony like a book. I am intimate with all her wonderful cities, with their palaces, their pyramids, and their peoples. I have hunted the beasts and the savages in the forests. I have built roads, and made the rivers so that they will carry shipping. I have fostered the arts and crafts like a merchant; I have discoursed, three times each day, the cult of the Gods with mine own lips. Through evil years and through good have I ruled here, striving only for the prosperity of the land and the strengthening of Atlantis, and I have grown to love the peoples like a father. To you I bequeath them, Tatho, with tender supplications for their interest."

"It is not I that can carry on Deucalion's work with Deucalion's power, but rest content, my friend, that I shall do my humble best to follow exactly on in your footsteps. Believe me, I came out to this government with a thousand regrets, but I would have died sooner than take your place had I known how vigorously the supplanting would trouble you."

"We are alone here," I said, "away from the formalities of formal assemblies, and a man may give vent to his natural self without fear of tarnishing a ceremony. Your coming was something of the suddenest. Till an hour ago, when you demanded audience, I had thought to rule on longer; and even now I do not know for what cause I am deposed."

"The proclamation said: 'We relieve our well-beloved

[p. 19]

[paragraph continues] Deucalion of his present service, because we have great need of his powers at home in our kingdom of Atlantis.'"

"A mere formality."

Tatho looked uneasily round the hangings of the chamber, and drew me with him to its centre, and lowered his voice.

"I do not think so," he whispered. "I believe she has need of you. There are troublous times on hand, and Phorenice wants the ablest men in the kingdom ready to her call."

"You may speak openly," I said, "and without fear of eavesdroppers. We are in the heart of the pyramid here, built in every way by a man's length of solid stone. Myself, I oversaw the laying of every course. And besides, here in Yucatan, we have not the niceties of your old-world diplomacy, and do not listen, because we count it shame to do so."

Tatho shrugged his shoulders. "I acted only according to mine education. At home, a loose tongue makes a loose head, and there are those whose trade it is to carry tales. Still, what I say is this: The throne shakes, and Phorenice sees the need of sturdy props. So she has sent this proclamation."

"But why come to me? It is twenty years since I sailed to this colony, and from that day I have not returned to Atlantis once. I know little of the old country's politics. What small parcel of news drifts out to us across the ocean reads with slender interest here. Yucatan is another world, my Tatho, as you in the course of your government will learn, with new interests, new people, new everything. To us here

[p. 20]

[paragraph continues] Atlantis is only a figment, a shadow, far away across the waters. It is for this new world of Yucatan that I have striven through all these years."

"If Deucalion has small time to spare from his government for brooding over his fatherland, Atlantis, at least, has found leisure to admire the deeds of her brilliant son. Why, sir, over yonder at home, your name carries magic with it. When you and I were lads together, it was the custom in the colleges to teach that the men of the past were the greatest this world has ever seen; but to-day this teaching is changed. It is Deucalion who is held up as the model and example. Mothers name their sons Deucalion, as the most valuable birth-gift they can make. Deucalion is a household word. Indeed, there is only one name that is near to it in familiarity."

"You trouble me," I said, frowning. "I have tried to do my duty for its own sake, and for the country's sake, not for the pattings and fondlings of the vulgar. And besides, if there are names to be in every one's mouth, they should be the names of the Gods."

Tatho shrugged his shoulders. "The Gods? They occupy us very little these latter years. With our modern science, we have grown past the tether of the older Gods, and no new one has appeared. No, my Lord Deucalion, if it were merely the Gods who were your competitors on men's lips, your name would be a thousand times the better known."

"Of mere human names," I said, "the name of this new Empress should come first in Atlantis, our lord the old King being now dead."

[p. 21]

"She certainly would have it so," replied Tatho; and there was something in his tone which made me see that more was meant behind the words. I drew him to one of the marble seats, and bent myself familiarly towards him. "I am speaking," I said, "not to the new Viceroy of Yucatan, but to my old friend Tatho, a member of the Priests' Clan, like myself, with whom I worked side by side in a score of the smaller home governments, in hamlets, in villages, in smaller towns, in greater towns, as we gained experience in war and knowledge in the art of ruling people, and so tediously won our promotion. I am speaking in Tatho's private abode, that was mine own not two hours since, and I would have an answer with that plainness which we always then used to one another."

The new Viceroy sighed whimsically. "I almost forget how to speak in plain words now," he said. "We have grown so polished in these latter days, that mere bald truth would be hissed as indelicate. But for the memory of those early years, when we expended as much law and thought over the ownership of a hay-byre as we should now over the fate of a rebellious city, I will try and speak plain to you even now, Deucalion. Tell me, old friend, what is it?"

"What of this new Empress?"

He frowned. " I might have guessed your subject," he said.

"Then speak upon it. Tell me of all the changes that have been made. What has this Phorenice done to make her throne unstable in Atlantis?"

[p. 22]

Tatho frowned still. "If I did not know you to be as honest as our Lord the Sun, your questions would carry mischief with them. Phorenice has a short way with those who are daring enough to discuss her politics for other purpose than politely to praise them."

"You can leave me ignorant if you wish," I said, with a touch of chill. This Tatho seemed to be different from the Tatho I had known at home--Tatho my workmate, Tatho who had read with me in the College of Priests, who had run with me in many a furious charge, who had labored with me so heavily that the peoples under us might prosper. But he was quick enough to see my change of tone.

"You force me back to my old self," he said, with a half-smile, "though it is hard enough to forget the caution one has learned during this last twenty years, even when speaking with you. Still, whatever may have happened to the rest of us, it is clear to see that you at least have not changed, and, old friend, I am ready to trust you with my life if you ask it. In fact, you do ask me that very thing when you tell me to speak all I know of Phorenice."

I nodded. This was more like the old times, when there was full confidence between us. " The Gods will it now that I return to Atlantis," I said, "and what happens after that the Gods alone know. But it would be of service to me if I could land on her shores with some knowledge of this Phorenice, for at present I am as ignorant concerning her as some savage from Europe or mid-Africa."

"What would you have me tell?"

[p. 23]

"Tell all. I know only that she, a woman, reigns, where, by the ancient law of the land, a man should rule; that she is not even of the Priestly Clan from which the law says all rulers must be drawn; and that, from what you say, she has caused the throne to totter. The throne was as firm as the everlasting hills in the old King's day, Tatho."

"History has moved with pace since then, and Phorenice has spurred it. You know her origin?"

"I know only the exact little I have told you."

"She was a swine-herd's daughter from the mountains, though this is never even whispered now, as she has declared herself to be a daughter of the Gods, with a miraculous birth and upbringing. As she has decreed it a sacrilege to question this parentage, and has ordered to be burned all those that seem to recollect her more earthly origin, the fable passes current for truth. You see the faith I put in you, Deucalion, by telling you what you wish to learn."

"There has always been trust between us."

"I know; but this habit of suspicion is hard to cast off, even with you. However, let me put your good faith between me and the torture further. Zaemon, you remember, was governor of the swineherd's province, and Zaemon's wife saw Phorenice and took her away to adopt and bring up as her own. It is said that the swine-herd and his woman objected; perhaps they did; anyway, I know they died; and Phorenice was taught the arts and graces, and brought up as a daughter of the Priestly Clan."

"But still she was an adopted daughter only," I objected.

[p. 24]

"The omission of the 'adopted' was her will at an early age," said Tatho, dryly, "and she learned early to have her wishes carried into fact. It was notorious that before she had grown to fifteen years she ruled not only the women of the household, but Zaemon also, and the province that was beyond Zaemon."

"Zaemon was learned," I said, "and a devout follower of the Gods, and searcher into the higher mysteries; but, as a ruler, he was always a flabby fellow."

"I do not say that opportunities have not come usefully in Phorenice's way, but she has genius as well. For her to have raised herself at all from what she was, was remarkable. Not one woman, out of a thousand, placed as she was, would have grown to be aught higher than a mere wife of some sturdy countryman, who was sufficiently simple to care nothing for pedigree. But look at Phorenice: it was her whim to take exercise as a man-at-arms and practise with all the utensils of war; and then, before any one quite knows, how or why it happened, a rebellion had broken out in the province, and here was she, a slip of a girl, leading Zaemon's troops."

"Zaemon, when I knew him, was a mere derision in the field."

"Hear me on. Phorenice put down the rebellion in masterly fashion, and gave the conquered a choice between sword and service. They fell into her ranks at once, and were faithful to her from that moment. I tell you, Deucalion, there is a marvellous fascination about the woman."

[p. 25]

"Her present historian seems to have felt it."

"Of course I have. Every one who sees her comes under her spell. And frankly, I am in love with her also, and look upon my coming here as detestable exile. Every one near to Phorenice, high and low, loves her just the same, even though they know it may be her whim to send them to execution next minute."

Perhaps I let my scorn of this appear.

"You feel contempt for our weakness? You were always a strong man, Deucalion."

"At any rate you see me still unmarried. I have found no time to palter with the fripperies of i women."

"Ah, but these colonists here are crude and un-fascinating. Wait till you see the ladies of the court, my ascetic."

"It comes to my mind," I said, dryly, "that I lived in Atlantis before I came out here, and at that time I used to see as much of court life as most men. Yet then, also, I felt no inducement to marry."

Tatho chuckled. " Atlantis has changed so that you would hardly know the country to-day. A new era has come over everything, especially over the other sex. Well do I remember the women of the old King's time, how monstrous uncomely they were, how little they knew how to walk or carry themselves, how painfully barbaric was their notion of dress. I dare swear that your ladies here in Yucatan are not so provincial to-day as ours were then. But you should see them now at home. They are delicious. And above all in charm is the Empress. Oh, Deucalion,

[p. 26]

you shall see Phorenice in all her glorious beauty and her magnificence one of these fine days soon, and believe me you will go down on your knees and repent."

"I may see, and (because you say so) I may alter my life's ways. The Gods make all things possible. But for the present I remain as I am, celibate, and not wishful to be otherwise; and so in the meantime I would hear the continuance of your history."

"It is one long story of success. She deposed Zaemon from his government in name as well as in fact, and the news was spread, and the Priestly Clan rose in its wrath. The two neighboring governors were bidden join forces, take her captive, and bring her for execution. Poor men! they tried to obey their orders; they attacked her surely enough, but in battle she could laugh at them. She killed both, and made some slaughter among their troops; and to those that remained alive and became her prisoners she made her usual offer--the sword or service. Naturally they were not long over making their choice: to these common people one ruler is much the same as another: and so again her army was reinforced.

"Three times were bodies of soldiery sent against her, and three times was she victorious. The last was a final effort. Before, it had been customary to despise this adventuress who had sprung up so suddenly. But then the priests began to realize their peril, to see that the throne itself was in danger, and to know that if she were to be crushed they would have to put forth their utmost. Every man

[p. 27]

who could carry arms was pressed into the service. Every known art of war was ordered to be put into employment. It was the largest army, and the best equipped army that Atlantis then had ever raised, and the Priestly Clan saw fit to put in supreme command their general, Tatho."

"You!" I cried.

"Even myself, Deucalion. And mark you, I fought my utmost. I was not her creature then.; and when I set out (because they wanted to spur me to the uttermost) the High Council of the priests pointed out my prospects. The King we had known so long, was ailing and wearily old; he was so wrapped up in the study of the mysteries, and the joy of closely knowing them, that earthly matters had grown nauseous to him; and at any time he might decide to die. The Priestly Clan uses its own discretion in the election of a new king, but it takes note of popular sentiment; and a general who at the critical time could come home victorious from a great campaign, which moreover would release a harassed people from the constant application of arms, would be the idol of the moment. These things were pointed out to me solemnly and in the full council."

"What! they promised you the throne?"

"Even that. So you see I set out with a high stake before me. Phorenice I had never seen, and I swore to take her alive, and give her to be the sport of my soldiery. I had a fine confidence in my own strategy then, Deucalion. But the old Gods, in whom I trusted then, remained old, and taught me no new thing. I drilled and exercised my army according

[p. 28]

to the forms you and I learned together, old comrade, and in many a tough fight found to serve well; I armed them with the choicest weapons we knew of then, with sling and mace, with bow and spear, with axe and knife, with sword and the throwing fire; their bodies I covered with metal plates; even their bellies I cared for, with droves of cattle driven in the rear of the fighting troops.

"But, when the encounter came, they might have been men of straw for all the harm they did. Out of her own brain Phorenice had made fire-tubes that cast a dart which would kill beyond two bowshots, and the fashion in which she handled her troops dazzled me. They threatened us on one flank, they harassed us on the other. It was not war as we had been accustomed to it. It was a newer and more deadly game, and I had to watch my splendid army eaten away as waves eat a sand-hill. Never once did I get a chance of forcing close action. These new tactics that had come from Phorenice's invention were beyond my art to meet or understand. We were eight to her one, and our close-packed numbers only made us so much the more easy for slaughter. A panic came, and those who could fled. Myself, I had no wish to go back and earn the axe that waits for the unsuccessful general. I tried to die there fighting where I stood. But death would not come. It was a fine melee, Deucalion, that last one."

"And so she took you?"

"I stood with three others back to back, with a ring of dead round us, and a ring of the enemy hemming us in. We taunted them to come on. But

[p. 29]

at hand-to-hand courtesies we had shown we could hold our own, and so they were calling for fire-tubes with which they could strike us down in safety from a distance. Then up came Phorenice. 'What is this to-do?' says she. 'We seek to kill Lord Tatho, who led against you,' say they. 'So that is Tatho?' says she. 'A fine figure of a man indeed, and a pretty fighter seemingly, after the old manner. Doubtless he is one who would acquire the newer method. See now, Tatho,' says she, 'it is my custom to offer those I vanquish either the sword (which, believe me, was never nearer your neck than now) or service under my banner. Will you make a choice?'

"'Woman,' I said, 'fairest that ever I saw, finest general the world has ever borne, you tempt me sorely by your qualities, but there is a tradition in our Clan that we should be true to the salt we eat. I am the King's man still, and so I can take no service from you.'

"'The King is dead,' says she. 'A runner has just brought the tidings, meaning them to have fallen into your hands. And I am the Empress.'

"'Who made you Empress?' I asked.

"'The same most capable hand that has given me this battle,' says she. 'It is a capable hand, as you have seen: it can be a kind hand also, as you may learn if you choose. With the King dead, Tatho is masterless man now. Is Tatho in want of a mistress?'

"'Such a glorious mistress as you,' I said, 'yes.' And from that moment, Deucalion, I have been her

[p. 30]

slave. Oh, you may frown; you may get up from this seat and walk away if you will. But I ask you this: keep back your worst judgment of me, old friend, till after you have seen Phorenice herself in the warm and lovely flesh. Then your own ears and your own senses will be my advocates, to win me back your old esteem."

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 31]

  

CHAPTER II

  

BACK TO ATLANTIS

THE words of Tatho were no sleeping draught for me that night. I began to think that I had made somewhat a mistake in wrapping myself up so entirely in my government of Yucatan, and not contriving to keep more in touch with events that were passing at home in Atlantis. For many years past it had been easy to see that the mariner folk who did traffic across the seas spoke with restraint, and that only what news the Empress pleased was allowed to ooze out beyond her borders. But, as I say, I was fully occupied with my work in the colony, and had no curiosity to pull away a veil intentionally placed. Besides, it has always been against my principles to put to the torture men who had received orders for silence from their superiors, merely that they shall break these orders for my private convenience.

However, the iron discipline of our Priestly Clan left me no choice of procedure. As was customary, I had been deprived of my office at a moment's notice. From that time on, all papers and authority belonged to my successor, and, although by courtesy I might be permitted to remain as a guest in the pyramid that had so recently been mine, to see another sunrise, it was clearly enjoined that I must leave the territory

[p. 32]

then at the topmost of my speed and hasten to report in Atlantis.

Tatho, to give him credit, was anxious to further my interests to the utmost in his power. He was by my side again before the dawn, putting all his resources at my disposal.

I had little enough to ask him. "A ship to take me home," I said, "and I shall be your debtor."

The request seemed to surprise him. "That you may certainly have if you wish it. But my ships are foul with the long passage, and are in need of a careen. If you take them, you will make a slow voyage of it to Atlantis. Why do you not take your own navy? The ships are in harbor now, for I saw them there when we came in. Brave ships they are too."

"But not mine. That navy belongs to Yucatan."

"Well, Deucalion, you are Yucatan; or, rather, you were yesterday, and have been these twenty years."

I saw what he meant, and the idea did not please me. I answered stiffly enough that the ships were owned by private merchants, or belonged to the State, and I could not claim so much as a ten-slave galley.

Tatho shrugged his shoulders. "I suppose you know your own policies best," he said, "though to me it seems but risky for a man who has attained to a position like yours and mine not to have provided himself with a stout navy of his own. One never knows when a recall may be sent, and, through lack of these precautions, a life's earnings may very well be lost in a dozen hours."

"I have no fear for mine," I said, coldly.

[p. 33]

"Of course not, because you know me to be your friend. But had another man been appointed to this viceroyalty, you might have been sadly shorn, Deucalion. It is not many fellows who can resist a snug hoard ready and waiting in the very coffers they have come to line."

"My lord Tatho," I said, "it is clear to me that you and I have grown to be of different tastes. All of the hoard that I have made for myself in this colony, few men would covet. I have the poor clothes you see me in this moment, and a box of drugs such as I have found useful to the stomach. I possess also three slaves, two of them scribes and the third a sturdy savage from Europe, who cooks my victual and fills for me the bath. For my maintenance during my years of service here I have bled the State of a soldier's ration and nothing beyond; and if in my name any man has mulcted a creature in Yucatan of so much as an ounce of bronze, I request you as a last service to have that man hanged for me as a liar and a thief."

Tatho looked at me curiously. "I do not know whether I admire you most or whether I pity. I do not know whether to be astonished or to despise. We had heard of much of your uprightness over yonder in Atlantis, of your sternness and your justice, but I swear by the old Gods that no soul guessed you carried your fancy so far as this. Why, man, money is power. With money and the resources money can buy, nothing could stop a fellow like you; while without it you may be tripped up and trodden down irrevocably at the first puny reverse."

[p. 34]

"The Gods will choose my fate."

"Possibly; but for mine, I prefer to nourish it myself. I tell you with frankness that I have not come here to follow in the pattern you have made for a viceroyalty. I shall govern Yucatan wisely and well to the best of my ability; but I shall govern it also for the good of Tatho, the viceroy. I have brought with me here my navy of eight ships and a personal body-guard. There is my wife also, and her women and her slaves. All these must be provided for. And why indeed should it be otherwise? If a people is to be governed, it should be their privilege to pay handsomely for their prince."

"We shall not agree on this. You have the power now, and can employ it as you choose. If I thought it would be of any use, I should like to supplicate you most humbly to deal with lenience when you come to tax these people who are under you. They have grown very dear to me."

"I have disgusted you with me, and I am grieved for it. But even to retain your good opinion, Deucalion--which I value more than that of any man living--I cannot do here as you have done. It would be impossible, even if I wished it. You must not judge all other men by your own strong standard; a Tatho is by no means a colossus like a Deucalion. And, besides, I have a wife and children, and they must be provided for, even if I neglect myself."

"Ah, there," I said, "it does seem that I possess the advantage. I have no wife to clog me."

He caught up my word quickly. "It seems to

[p. 35]

me you have nothing that makes life worth living. You have neither wife, children, riches, cooks, retinue, dresses, nor anything else in proportion to your station. You will pardon my saying it, old comrade, but you are plaguey ignorant about some matters. For example, you do not know how to dine. During every day of a very weary voyage, I have promised myself, when sitting before the meagre sea victual, that presently the abstinence would be more than repaid by Deucalion's welcoming feast. Oh, I tell you, that feast was one of the vividest things that ever came before my eyes. And then when we get to the actuality, what was it? Why, a country farmer every day sits down to more delicate fare. You told me how it was prepared. Well, your savage from Europe may be lusty, and perchance is faithful, but he is a devil-possessed cook. Gods! I have lived better on a campaign.

"I know this is a colony here, without any of the home refinements; but if in the days to come, the deer of the forest, the fish of the stream, and the other resources of the place are not put to better use than heretofore, I shall see it my duty as ruler to fry some of the kitchen staff alive in grease so as to encourage better cookery. Gods! Deucalion, have you forgotten what it is to have a palate? And have you no esteem for your own dignity? Man, look at your clothes. You are garbed like a herdsman, and you have not a gaud or a jewel to brighten you."

"I eat," I said, coldly, "when my hunger bids me, and I carry this one robe upon my person till it is worn out and needs replacement. The grossness of

[p. 36]

excessive banqueting, and the effeminacy of many clothes are attainments that never met my fancy. But I think we have talked here over long, and there seems little chance of our finding agreement. You have changed, Tatho, with the years, and perhaps I have changed also. These alterations creep imperceptibly into one's being as time advances. Let us part now, and, forgetting these present differences, remember only our friendship of twenty years agone. That for me, at any rate, has always had a pleasant savor when called up into the memory."

Tatho bowed his head. "So be it," he said.

"And I would still charge myself upon your bounty for that ship. Dawn cannot be far off now, and it is not decent that the man who has ruled here so long should walk in daylight through the streets on the morning after his dismissal."

"So be it," said Tatho. "You shall have my poor navy. I could have wished that you had asked me something greater."

"Not the navy, Tatho; one small ship. Believe me, more is wasted."

"Now there," said Tatho, "I shall act the tyrant. I am viceroy here now, and will have my way in this. You may go naked of all possessions: that I cannot help. But depart for Atlantis unattended, that you shall not."

And so, in fine, as the choice was set beyond me, it was in the Bear, Tatho's own private ship, with all the rest of his navy sailing in escort, that I did finally make my transit.

But the start was not immediate. The vessels lay

[p. 37]

moored against the stone quays of the inner harbor, gutted of their stores, and with crews exhausted, and it would have been suicide to have forced them out then and there to again take the seas.

So the courtesies were fulfilled by the craft whereon I abode hauling out into the entrance basin, and anchoring there in the swells of the fairway; and forthwith she and her consorts took in wood and water, cured meat and fish ashore, and refitted in all needful ways with all speed attainable.

For myself there came then, as the first time during twenty busy years, a breathing space from work. I had no further connection with the country of my labors; indeed, officially, I had left it already. Into the working of the ship it was contrary to rule that I should make any inspection or interest, since all sea matters were the exclusive property of the Mariners' Guild, secured to them by royal patent, and most jealously guarded.

So there remained to me in my day hours, to gaze (if I would) upon the quays, the harbors, the palaces, and the pyramids of the splendid city before me, which I had seen grow stone by stone from its foundations; or to roam my eye over the pastures and the grain lands beyond the walls, and to look longingly at the dense forests behind, from which field by field we had so tediously ripped our territory.

Would Tatho continue the work so healthily begun? I trusted so, even in spite of his selfish words. And at all hours, during the radiance of our Lord the Sun, or under the stare of night, I was free to pursue that study of the higher mysteries, on which we of

[p. 38]

the Priests' Clan are trained to set our minds, without aid of book or instrument, of image or temple.

The refitting of the navy was gone about with speed. Never, it is said, had ships been reprovisioned and caulked and remanned with greater speed for the over-ocean voyage. Indeed, it was barely over a month from the day that they brought up in the harbor, they put out beyond the walls, and began their voyage eastward over the hill and dale of that ocean.

Rowing-slaves from Europe for this long passage of sea are not taken now, owing to the difficulty in provisioning them, for modern humanity forbids the practice of letting them eat one another according to the home custom of their continent; sails alone are but an indifferent stand-by; but modern science has shown how to extract force from the Sun, when He is free from cloud, and this (in a manner kept secret by mariners) is made to draw sea-water at the forepart of the vessel, and eject it with such force at the stern that she is appreciably driven forward, even with the wind adverse.

In another matter also has navigation vastly improved. It is not necessary now, as formerly, to trust wholly to a starry night (when beyond sight of land) to find direction. A little image has been made, and is stood balanced in the forepart of every vessel, with an arm outstretched, pointing constantly to the direction where the Southern Cross lies in the heavens. So, by setting an angle, can a just course be correctly steered. Other instruments have they also for finding a true position on the ocean wastes,

[p. 39]

for the newer mariner, when he is at sea, puts little trust in the Gods, and confides mightily in his own thews and wits.

Still, it is amusing to see these tarry fellows, even in this modern day, take their last farewell of the harbor town. The ship is stowed, and all ready for sea, and they wash and put on all their bravery of attire. Ashore they go, their faces long with piety, and seek some obscure temple whose God has little flavor with shore folk, and here they make sacrifice with clamor and lavish outlay. And, finally, there follows a feast in honor of the God, and they arrive back on board, and put to sea for the most part drunken, and all heavy and evil-humored with gluttony and their other excesses.

The voyage was very different to my previous seagoing. There was no creeping timorously along in touch with the coasts. We stood straight across the open gulf in the direction of home, came up with the band of the Carib Islands, and worked confidently through them, as though they had been sign-posts to mark the sea highway; and stopped only twice to replenish with wood, water, and fruit. These commodities, too, the savages brought us freely, so great was their subjection, and in neither place did we have even the semblance of a fight. It was a great certificate of the growing power of Atlantis and her finest over-sea colony.

Then boldly on we went across the vast ocean beyond, with never a sacrifice to implore the Gods that they should help our direction. One might feel censure towards those rugged mariners for their impiety,

[p. 40]

but one could not help an admiration for their lusty skill and confidence.

The dangers of the desolate sea are dealt out as the Gods will, and man can only take them as they come. Storms we encountered, and the mariners fought them with stubborn endurance; twice a blazing stone from Heaven hissed into the sea beside us, though without injuring any of our ships; and, as was unavoidable, the great beasts of the sea hunted us with their accustomed savagery. But only once did we suffer material loss from these last, and that was when three of the greater sea-lizards attacked the Bear, the ship whereon I travelled, at one and the same time.

The hour of their onset was during the blazing midday heat, and the Sun being at the full of His power, our machines were getting full force from Him. The vessel was travelling forward faster than a man on dry land could walk. But for power of escape she might as well have been standing still when the beasts sighted her. There were three of them, as I have said, and we saw them come up over the curve of the horizon, beating the sea into foam with their flappers, and waving their great necks like masts as they swam. Our navy was spread out in a long line of ships, and in olden days each of the beasts would have selected a separate prey, and proceeded for it; but, like man, these beasts have learned the necessities of warfare, and they hunt in pack now and do not separate their forces.

It was plain they were making for our ship, and Tob, the captain, would have had me go into the

[p. 41]

aftercastle, and there be secure from their marauding. He was responsible to the lord Tatho, he said, for my safe conduct; it was certain that the beasts would contrive to seize some of the ship's company before they were satiated; and if the hap came to the lord Deucalion, he (the captain) would have to give himself voluntarily to the beasts then, to escape a very painful death at Tatho's hands later on.

However, my mind was set. A man can never have too much experience in fighting enemies, whether human or bestial, and the attack of these creatures was new to me, and I was fain to learn its method. So I gave the captain a letter to Tatho, saying how the matter lay (and for which, it may be mentioned, the rude fellow seemed little enough grateful), and stayed in my chair under the awning.

The beasts surged up to us with champing jaws, and all the shipmen stood armed on their defence. They came up alongside, two females (the smaller) on one flank of the ship, the giant male by himself on the other. Their great heads swooped about, as high as the yards that held the sails, and the reek from them gave one physical sickness.

The shipmen faced the monsters with a sturdy courage. Arrows were useless against the smooth, bull-like hides. Even the throwing fire could not so much as singe them; nothing but twenty axe blows delivered on an attacking head together could beat it back, and even these succeeded only through sheer weight of metal, and did not make so much as the scratch of a wound.

During all time beasts have disputed with man

[p. 42]

the mastery of the earth, and it is only in Atlantis and Egypt and Yucatan that man has dared to hold his own, and fight them with a mind made strong by many previous victories. In Europe and mid-Africa the greater beasts hold full dominion, and man admits his puny number and force, and lives in earth crannies and the higher tree-tops, as a fugitive confessed. And upon the great oceans the beasts are lords, unchecked.

Still here, upon this desolate sea, although the giant lizards were new to me, it was a pleasure to pit my knowledge of war against their brute strength and courage. Ever Wince the first men did their business upon the great waters, they fulfilled their instincts in fighting the beasts with desperation. Hiding coward-like in a hold was useless, for if this enemy could not find men above decks to glut them, they would break a ship with their paddles, and so all would be slain. And so it was recognized that the fight should go forward as desperately as might be, and that it could only end when the beasts had got their prey and had gone away satisfied.

It was in a one-sided conflict after this fashion then, that I found myself, and felt the joy once more to have my thews in action. But after my axe had got in that dozen lusty blows, which, for all the harm they did, might have been delivered against some city wall, or, indeed, against the Ark of the Mysteries itself, I sought about me till I found a lance, and with that made very different play.

The eyes of these lizards are small, and set deep in a bony socket, but I judged them to be vulnerable,

Click to enlarge
"'I DROVE IN THE LANCE AT ITS OOZY EYE'"

[p. 43]

and it was upon the eyes of the beast that I made my attack. The decks were slippery with the horrid slime of them. The crew surged about in their battling, and, moreover, constantly offered themselves as a rampart before me by reason of Tob, the captain's, threats. But I gave a few shrewd progues with the lance to show that I did not choose my will to be overridden, and presently was given room for manoeuvre.

Deliberately I placed myself in the sight of one of the lizards, and offered my body to its attack. The challenge was accepted. It swooped like a dropping stone, and I swerved and drove in the lance at its oozy eye. I thanked the Gods then that I had been trained with the lance till certain aim was a matter of instinct with me. The blade went true to its mark and stuck there, and the shaft broke in my hand. The beast drew off, blinded and bellowing, and beating the sea with its paddles. In a great cataract of foam I saw it bend its great long neck, and rub its head (with the spear still fixed) against its back, thereby enduring new agonies, but without dislodging the weapon. And then presently, finding this of no avail, it set off for the place from which it came with extraordinary quickness, and rapidly grew smaller against the horizon.

The male and the other female lizard had also left us, but not in similar plight. Tob, the captain, seeing my resolve to take hazards, deliberately thrust a shipman into the jaws of each of the others, so that they might be sated and get them gone. It was clear

[p. 44]

that Tob dreaded very much for his own skin if I came by harm, and I thought with a warming heart of the threats that Tatho must have used in his kind anxiety for my safety. It is pleasant when one's old friends do not omit to pay these little attentions.

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 45]

  

CHAPTER III

  

A RIVAL NAVY

NOW when we came up with the coasts of Atlantis, though Tob, with the aid of his modern instruments, had made his landfall with most marvellous skill and nearness, there still remained some ten days more journey in which we had to retrace our course, till we came to that arm of the sea up which lies the great city of Atlantis, the capital.

The sight of the land, and the breath of earth and herbage which came off from it with the breezes, were, I believe, under the Gods, the means of saving the lives of all of us. For, as is necessary with long cross-ocean voyages, many of our ship's companies had died, and still more were sick with scurvy through the unnatural tossing, or (as some have it) through the salt, unnatural food inseparable from shipboard. But these last the sight and the smells of land heartened up in extraordinary fashion, and from being helpless logs, unable to move even under blows of the scourge, they became active again, able to help in the shipwork, and lusty (when the time came) to fight for their lives and their vessels.

From the moment that I was deposed in Yucatan, despite Tatho's assurances, there had been doubts in my mind as to what nature would be my reception in

[p. 46]

[paragraph continues] Atlantis. But I had faced this event of the future without concern: it was in the hands of the Gods. The Empress Phorenice might be supreme on earth; she might cause my head to be lopped from its proper shoulders the moment I set foot ashore; but my Lord the Sun was above Phorenice, and if my head fell, it would be because He saw best that it should be so. On which account, therefore, I had not troubled myself about the matter during the voyage, but had followed out my calm study of the higher mysteries with an unloaded mind.

But when our navy had retraced sufficiently the course that had been overrun, and came up with the two vast headlands which marked the entrance to the inland waters, there, a bare two days from the Atlantis capital, we met with another navy which was beyond doubt waiting to give us a reception. The ships were riding at anchor in a bay which lent them shelter, but they had scouts on the high land above, who cried the alarm of our approach, and when we rounded the headland, they were standing out to dispute our passage.

Of us there were now but five ships, the rest having been lost in storms, or fallen behind because all their crews were dead from the scurvy; and of the strangers there were three fine ships, and three galleys of many oars apiece. They were clean and bright and black; our ships were storm-ragged and weather-worn, and had bottoms that were foul with trailing ocean weed. Our ships hung out the colors and signs of Tatho and Deucalion openly and without shame, so that all who looked might know their origin and

[p. 47]

errand; but the other navy came on without banner or antient, as though they were some low creatures feeling shame for their birth.

Clear it seemed also that they would not let us pass without a fight, and in this there was nothing uncommon; for no law carries out over the seas, and a brother in one ship feels quite free to harry his brother in another vessel if he meets him out of earshot of the beach--more especially if that other brother be coming home laden from foray or trading tour. So Tob, with system and method, got our vessel into fighting trim, and the other four captains did the like with theirs, and drew close in to us to form a compact squadron. They had no wish to smell slavery, now that the voyage had come so near to its end.

Our Lord the Sun shone brilliantly, giving full speed to the machines, as though He was fully willing for the affair to proceed, and the two navies approached one another with quickness, the three galleys holding back to stay in line with their consorts. But when some bare hundred ship-lengths separated us, the other navy halted, and one of the galleys drawing ahead, flew green branches from her masts, seeking for a parley.

The course was unusual, but we in our sea-battered state were no navy to invite a fight unnecessarily. So in hoarse sea-bawls word was passed, and we too halted, and Tob hoisted a withered stick (which had to do duty for greenery), to show that we were ready for talk, and would respect the person of an ambassador.

[p. 48]

The galley drew on, swung round, and backed till its stern rasped on our shield rail, and one of her people clambered up and jumped down upon our decks. He was a dandily rigged-out fellow, young and lusty, and all healthy from the land and land victual, and he looked round him with a sneer at our sea-tatteredness, and with a fine self-confidence. Then seeing Tob, he nodded as one who meets an acquaintance. "Old pot-mate," he said, "your woman waits for you up by the quay-side in Atlantis yonder, with four youngsters at her heels. I saw her not half a month ago."

"You didn't come out here to tell me home news," said Tob; "that I'll be sworn. I've drunk enough pots with you, Dason, to know your pleasantries thoroughly."

"I wanted to point out to you that your home is still there, with your wife and children ready to welcome you."

"I am not a man that ever forgets it," said Tob, grimly; "and because I've got them always at the back of my mind, I've sailed this ship over the top of more than one pirate, when, if I'd been a single man, I might have been e'en content to take the hap of slavery."

"Oh, I know you're a desperate enough fellow," said Dason, "and I'm free to confess that if it does come to blows we are likely to lose a few men before we get you and your cripples here and your crazy ships comfortably sunk. Our navy has its orders to carry out, and the cause of my embassage is this: we wish to see if you will act the sensible part and give

[p. 49]

us what we want, and so be permitted to go on your way home, with a skin that is unslit and dry."

"You have come to the wrong bird here for a plucking," said Tob, with a heavy laugh. "We took no treasure or merchandise on board in Yucatan. We stayed in harbor long enough to cure our sea victual and fill with wood and water, and no longer. We sail back as we sailed out, barren ships. You will not believe me, of course; I would not have believed you had our places been changed; but you may go into the holds and search if you choose. You will find there nothing but a few poor sailormen half in pieces with the scurvy. No, you can steal nothing here but blows, Dason, and we will give you those with but little asking."

"I am glad to see that you state your cargo at such slender value," said the envoy, "for it is the cargo I must take back with me on the galley, if you are to earn your safe conduct to home."

Tob knit his brows. " You had better speak more plain," he said. "I am a common sailor, and do not understand fancy talk."

"It is clear to see," said Dason, "that you have been set to bring Deucalion back to Atlantis as a prop for Phorenice. Well, we others find Phorenice hard enough to fight against without further reinforcements, and so we want Deucalion in our own custody to deal with after our own fashion."

"And if I do the miser, and deny you this piece of my freight?"

The spruce envoy looked round at the splintered ship and the battered navy beside her. "Why, then,

[p. 50]

[paragraph continues] Tob, we shall send you all to the fishes in very short time, and instead of Deucalion standing before the Gods alone, he will go down with a fine ragged company limping at his heels."

"I doubt it," said Tob, "but we shall see. As for letting you have my lord Deucalion, that is out of the question. For see here, pot-mate Dason; in the first place, if I went to Atlantis without Deucalion, my other lord, Tatho, would come back one of these days, and in his hands I should die by the slowest of slow inches; in the second, I have seen my lord Deucalion kill a great sea-lizard, and he showed himself such a proper man that day that I would not give him up against his will, even to Tatho himself; and in the third place, you owe me for your share in our last wine-bout ashore, and I'll see you with the nether Gods before I give you aught till you've settled that score."--

"Well, Tob, I hope you'll drown easy. As for that wife of yours, I've always had a fancy for her myself, and I shall know how to find a use for the woman."

"I'll draw your neck for that, you son of a European," said Tob; "and if you do not clear off this deck I'll draw it here. Go!" he cried, "you father of monkey children! Get away, and let me fight you fairly, or by my honor I'll stamp the inwards out of you, and make your silly crew wear them as necklaces."

Upon which Dason went to his galley.

Promptly Tob set going the machine on our own Bear, and bawled his orders right and left to the

[p. 51]

other ships. The crew might be weak with scurvy, but they were quick to obey. Instantly the five vessels were all started, and, because our Lord the Sun was shining brightly, got soon to the full of their pace. The whole of our small navy converged, singling out one ship of their opponents, and she, not being ready for so swift an attack, got flurried, and endeavored to turn and run for room, instead of trying to meet us bows on. As a consequence, the whole of our five ships hit her together on the broadside, tearing her planking with their underwater beaks, and sinking her before we had backed clear from the engage.

But if we thus brought the enemy's number down to five, and so equal to our own, the advantage did not remain with us for long. The three nimble galleys formed into line: their boatswain's whips cracked as the slaves bent to their oars, and presently one of our own ships was gored and sunk, the men on her being killed in the water without hope of rescue.

And then commenced a tight-locked melee that would have warmed the heart of the greatest warrior alive. The ships and the galleys were forced together and lay savagely grinding one another upon the swells, as though they had been sentient animals. The men on board of them shot their arrows, slashed with axes, thrust and hacked with swords, and hurled the throwing fire. But in every way the fight converged upon the Bear. It was on her that the enemy spent the fiercest of their spite; it was to the Bear that the other crews of Tatho's navy rallied as their own vessels caught fire, or were sunk or taken.

[p. 52]

Battle is an old acquaintance with us of the Priestly Clan, and for those of us who have had to carve out territories for the new colonies, it comes with enough frequency to cloy even the most chivalrous appetite. So I can speak here as a man of experience. Up till that time, for half a life-span, I had heard men shout "Deucalion" as a battle-cry, and in my day had seen some lusty encounters. But this sea-fight surprised even me in its savage fierceness. The bleak, unstable element which surrounded us; the swaying decks on which we fought; the throwing fire, which burned flesh and wood alike with its horrid flame; the great, gluttonous, man-eating birds that hovered in the sky overhead; the man-eating fish that swarmed up from the seas around, gnawing and quarrelling over those that fell into the waters, all went to make up a circumstance fit to daunt the bravest men-at-arms ever gathered for an army.

But these tarry shipmen faced it all with an indomitable courage, and never a cry of quailing. Life on the seas is so hard, and (from the beasts that haunt the great waters) so full of savage dangers, that Death has lost half his terrors to them through sheer familiarity. They were fellows who from pure lust for a fray would fight to a finish among themselves in the taverns ashore; and so here, in this desperate sea-battle, the passion for killing burned in them, as a fire stone from Heaven rages in a forest; and they took even their death-wounds laughing.

On our side the battle-cry was "Tob!" and the name of this obscure ship-captain seemed to carry a confidence with it for our own crews that many a

[p. 53]

well-known commander might have envied. The enemy had a dozen rallying cries, and these confused them. But as their other ship commanders one by one were killed, and Dason remained, active with mischief, "Dason!" became the shout which was thrown back at us in response to our "Tob!"

However, I will not load my page with further long account of this obscure sea-fight, whose only glory was its ferocity. One by one all the ships of either side were sunk, or lay with all their people killed, till finally only Dason's galley and our own Bear were left. For the moment we were being mastered. We had a score of men remaining out of all those that manned the navy when it sailed from Yucatan, and the enemy had boarded us and made the decks of the Bear the field of battle. But they had been over busy with the throwing fire, and presently, as we raged at one another, the smoke and the flame from the sturdy vessel herself let us very plainly know that she was past salvation.

But Tob was nothing daunted. "They may stay here and fry if they choose," he shouted, with his great boisterous laugh, "but for ourselves the galley is good enough now. Keep a guard on Deucalion, and come with me, shipmates!"

"Tob!" our fellows shouted in their ecstasy of fighting madness, and I too could not forbear sending out a "Tob!" for my battle-cry. It was a change for me not to be leader, but it was a luxury for once to fight in the wake of this Tob, despite his uncouthness of mien and plan. There was no stopping this new rush, though progress still was slow. Tob with

[p. 54]

his bloody axe cut the road in front, and we others, with the lust of battle filling us to the chin, raged like furies in his wake. Gods! but it was a fight.

Ten of us won to the galley, with the flames and the smoke from the poor Bear spurting at our heels. We turned and stabbed madly at all who tried to follow, and hacked through the grapples that held the vessels to their embrace. The sea-swells spurned the Bear away.

The slaves chained to the rowing-galley's benches had interest neither one way nor the other, and looked on the contest with dull concern, save when some stray missile found a billet among them. But a handful of the fighting men had scrambled desperately on board of the galley after us, preferring any fate to a fiery death on the Bear, and these had to be dealt with promptly. Three, with their fighting fury still red-hot in them, had most wastefully to be killed out of mischief's way; five, who had pitched their weapons into the sea, were chained to oar looms, in place of slaves who were dead; and there remained only Dason to have a fate apportioned.

The fight had cooled out of him, and he had thrown his arms to the sea, and stood sullenly ready for what might befall; and to him Tob went up with an exulting face.

"Ho, pot-mate Dason," cried he, "you made a lot of talk an hour ago about that woman of mine, who lives with her brats on the quay-side in Atlantis yonder. Now, I'll give you a pleasant choice; either I'll take you along home, and tell her what you said before the whole ships' company (that are for the

Click to enlarge
"TOB WITH HIS BLOODY AXE"

[p. 55]

most part dead now, poor souls!), and I'll leave her to perform on your carcass as she sees fit by way of payment; or, as the other choice, I'll deal with you here now myself."

"I thank you for the chance," said Dason, and knelt and offered his neck to the axe. So Tob cut off his head, sticking it on the galley's beak as an advertisement of what had been done. The body he threw over the side, and one of the great man-eating birds that hovered near picked it up and flew away with it to its nest among the crags. And so we were free to get a meal of the fruits and the fresh meats which the galley offered, while the oar-slaves sent the galley rushing onward towards the capital.

There was a wine-skin in the aftercastle, and I filled a horn and poured some out at Tob's feet in salutation. "My man," I said, "you have shown me a fight."

"Thanks," said he, "and I know you are a judge. 'Twas pretty while it lasted; and, seeing that my lads were, for the most, scurvy-rotten, I will say they fought with credit. I have lost my lord Tatho's navy, but I think Phorenice will see me righted there. If those that are against her took so much trouble to kill my lord Deucalion before he could come to her aid, I can fancy she will not be niggard in her joy when I put Deucalion safe, if somewhat dented and blood-bespattered, on the quay."

"The Gods know," I said, for it is never my custom to discuss policies with my inferiors, even though etiquette be for the moment loosened, as ours was then by the thrill of battle. "The Gods will decide

[p. 56]

what is best for you, Tob, even as They have decided that it is best that I should go on to Atlantis."

The sailor held a horn filled from the wine-skin in his hand, and I think was minded to pour a libation at my feet, even as I had done at his. But he changed his mind, and emptied it down his throat instead. "It is thirsty work, this fighting," he said, "and that drink comes very useful."

I put my hand on his blood-smeared arm. "Tob," I said, "whether I step into power again, or whether I go to the block to-morrow, is another matter which the Gods alone know, but hear me tell you now, that if a chance is given me of showing my gratitude, I shall not forget the way you have served me in this voyage, and the way you have fought this day."

Tob filled another brimming horn from the wineskin and splashed it at my feet. "That's good enough surety for me," he said, "that my woman and brats never want from this day onward. The lord Deucalion for the block, indeed!"

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 57]

  

CHAPTER IV

  

THE WELCOME OF PHORENICE

NOW I can say it with all truth that, till the rival navy met us in the mouth of the gulf, I had thought little enough of my importance as a recruit for the Empress. But the laying in wait for us of those ships, and the wild ferocity with which they fought so that I might fall into their hands, were omens which the blindest could not fail to read. It was clear that I was expected to play a lusty part in the fortunes of the nation.

But if our coming had been watched for by enemies, it seemed that Phorenice also had her scouts; and these saw us from the mountains, and carried news to the capital. The arm of the sea at the head of which the vast city of Atlantis stands, varies greatly in width. In places where the mountains have overboiled, and sent their liquid contents down to form hard stone below, the channel has barely a river's wideness, and then beyond, for the next half-day's sail, it will widen out into a lake, with the sides barely visible. Moreover, its course is winding, and so a runner who knows his way across the flats and the swamps, and between the smoking hills which lie along the shore, and did not get overcome by fire-streams, or water, or wandering beasts, could carry

[p. 58]

news overland from sea-coast to capital far speedier than even the most shrewdly whipped of galleys could ferry it along the water.

Of course there were heavy risks that a lone traveller would not make a safe passage by this land route, if he were bidden to sacrifice all precautions to speed. But Phorenice was no niggard with her couriers. She sent a corps of twenty to the headland that overlooks the sea-entrance to the straits; they started with the news, each on his own route; and it says much for their speed and cleverness, that no fewer than seven of these agile fellows came through scathless with their tidings, and of the others it was said that quite three were known to have survived.

Still, about this we had no means of knowing at the time, and pushed on in the fancy that our coming was quite unheralded. The slaves on the galley's row-banks were for the most part savages from Europe, and the smell of them was so offensive that the voyage lost all its pleasures; and as, moreover, the wind carried with it an infinite abundance of small grit from some erupting fire mountain, we were anxious to linger as little as possible. Besides, if I may confess to such a thing without being unduly degraded, although by my priestly training I had been taught stoicism, and knew that all the future was in the hands of the Gods, I was frailly human still to have a very vast curiosity as to what would be the form of my own reception at Atlantis. I could imagine myself taken a formal prisoner on landing, and set on a formal trial to answer for my cure of the colony of Yucatan; I could imagine myself

[p. 59]

stepping ashore unknown and unnoticed, and after a due lapse being sent for by the Empress to take up new duties; but the manner of my real welcome was a thing I did not even guess at.

We came in sight of the peak of the sacred mountain, with its glare of eternal fires which stand behind the city, one morning with the day's break, and the whips of the boatswains cracked more vehemently, so that those offensive slaves should give the galley a final spurt. The wind was adverse, and no sail could be spread, but under oars alone we made a pretty pace, and the sides of the sacred mountain grew longer, and presently the peaks of the pyramids in the city, the towers of the higher buildings, began to show themselves as though they floated upon the gleaming water. It was twenty years since I had seen Atlantis last, and my heart glowed with the thought of treading again upon her paving stones.

The splendid city grew out of the sea as we approached, and to every throb of the oars the shores leaped nearer. I saw the temple where I had been admitted first to manhood; I saw the pyramid in whose heart I had been initiated to the small mysteries; and then (as the lesser objects became discernible) I made out the house where a father and a mother had reared me, and my eyes became dim as the memories rose.

We drew up outside the white walls of the harbor, as the law was, and the slaves panted and sobbed in quietude over the oar-looms. For vessels thus stationed there is, generally, a sufficiency of waiting, for a port-captain is apt to be so uncertain of his own

[p. 60]

dignity that he must e'en keep folks waiting to prove it to them. But here for us it might have been that the port-captain's boat was waiting. The signal was sounded from the two castles at the harbor's entrance, the chain which hung between them was dropped, and a ten-oared boat shot out from behind the walls as fast as oars could drive her. She raced up alongside and the questions were put:

"That should be Dason's galley?"

"It was," said Tob.

"Oh, I saw Dason's head on your beak," said the port-captain. "You were Tatho's captain?"

"And am still. Tatho's fleet was sent by Dason and his friends to the sea-floor, and so we took this stinking galley to finish the voyage in, seeing that it was the only craft left afloat."

The port-captain was roving his eye over the group of us who stood on the after-deck. "I fear me, captain, that you'll have but a dangerous reception. I do not see my lord Deucalion. Or does he come with some other navy? Gods, captain, if you have let him get killed while under your charge, the Empress will have the skin torn slowly off you living."

"What with Phorenice and Tatho both so curious for his welfare," said Tob, "my lord Deucalion seems but a dangerous passenger. But I shall save my hide this voyage." He jerked at me with his thumb. "He's there to put in a word for me himself."

The port-captain stared for a moment as if unbelieving, and then, as though satisfied, made obeisance like a fellow well used to ceremonial. "I trust my lord, in his infinite strength, will pardon my sin

[p. 61]

in not knowing him by his nobleness before. But truth to tell, I had looked to see my lord more suitably apparelled."

"Pish," I said; "if I choose to dress simply, I cannot object to being mistaken for a simple man. It is not my pleasure to advertise my quality by the gauds on my garb. If you think amends are due to me, I pray of your charity that this inquisition may end."

The fellow was all bows and obsequiousness. "I am the humblest of my lord's servants," he said. "It will be my exceeding honor to pilot my lord's galley into the berth appointed in harbor."

The boat shot ahead, and our galley-slaves swung into stroke again. Tob watched me with a dry smile as he stood directing the men at the helms.

"Well," I said, humoring his whim, "what is it?"

"I'm thinking," said Tob, "that my lord Deucalion will remember me only as a very rude fellow when he steps ashore among all this fine gentility."

"You don't think," said I, "anything of the kind."

"Then I must prove my refinement," said Tob, "and not contradict." He picked up my hand in his huge, hard fist, and pressed it. "By the Gods, Deucalion, you may be a great prince, but I've only known you as a man. You're the finest fighter of beasts and men that walks this world to-day, and I love you for it. That spear-stroke of yours on the lizard is a thing the singers in the taverns shall make chants about."

We drew rapidly into the harbor, the soldiers in

[p. 62]

the entrance castle blowing their trumpets in welcome as we passed between them. The captain of the port had run up my banner to the mast-head of his boat, having been provided with one apparently for this purpose of announcement, and from the quays, across the vast basin of the harbor, there presently came to us the noises of musicians, and the pale glow of welcoming fires, dancing under the sunlight. I was almost awed to think that an Empress of Atlantis had come to such straits as to feel an interest like this in any mere returning subject.

It was clear that nothing was to be done by halves. The port-captain's boat led, and we had no choice but to follow. Our galley was run up alongside the royal quay and moored to its posts and rings of gold, all of which are sacred to the reigning house.

"If Dason could only have foreseen this honor," said Tob, with grisly jest, "I'm sure he'd have laid in a silken warp to make fast on the bollards instead of mere plebeian hemp. I'm sure there'd be a frown on Dason's head this minute, if the sun hadn't scorched it stiff. My lord Deucalion, will you pick your way with niceness over this common ship, and tread on the genteel carpet they've spread for you on the quay yonder?"

The port-captain heard Tob's rude banter and looked up with a face of horror, and I remembered, with a small sigh, that colonial freedom would have no place here in Atlantis. Once more I must prepare myself for all the dignity of rank, and make ready to tread the formalities of vast and gorgeous ceremonial.

[p. 63]

But, be these things how they may, a self-respecting man must preserve his individuality also; and though I consented to enter a pavilion of crimson cloth, specially erected to shelter me till the Empress should deign to arrive, there my complaisance ended. Again the matter of clothes was harped upon. The three gorgeously caparisoned chamberlains, who had inducted me to the shelter, laid before me changes of raiment bedecked with every imaginable kind of frippery, and would have me transform myself into a popinjay in fashion like their own.

Curtly enough, I refused to alter my garb; and when one of them stammeringly referred to the Empress's tastes I asked him with plainness if he had got any definite commands on this paltry matter from her mightiness.

Of course he had to confess that there were none.

Upon which I retorted that Phorenice had commanded Deucalion, the man, to attend before her, and had sent no word of her pleasure as to his outer casing.

"This dress," I said, "suits my temper well. It shields my poor body from the heat and the wind, and, moreover, it is clean. It seems to me, sirs," I added, "that your interfering savors somewhat of an impertinence."

With one accord the chamberlains drew their swords and pushed the hilts towards me.

"It would be a favor," said their spokesman, "if the great lord Deucalion would take his vengeance now, instead of delivering us to the tormentors hereafter."

[p. 64]

"Poof!" I said; "the matter is forgotten. You make too much of a little."

Nevertheless, their action gave me some enlightenment. They were perfectly in earnest in offering me the swords, and I recognized that this was a different Atlantis that I had come home to, where a man had dread of the torture for a mere difference concerning the cut of a coat.

There was a bath in the pavilion, and in that I regaled myself gladly, though there was some paltry scent added to the water that took away half its refreshing power; and then I set myself to wait with all outward composure and placidity. The chamberlains were too well-bred to break into my calm, and I did not condescend to small talk. So there we remained, the four of us, I sitting, they standing, with our Lord the Sun smiting heavily on the scarlet roof of the pavilion, while the music blared, and the welcoming fires dispersed their odors from the great paved square without, which faced upon the quay.

It has been said that the great should always collect dignity by keeping those of lesser degree waiting their pleasure, though for myself I must say I have always thought the stratagem paltry and beneath me. Phorenice also seemed of this same opinion, for (as she herself told me later) at the moment that Tob's galley was reported as having its flank against the marble of the royal quay, at that precise moment did she start out from the palace. The gorgeous procession was already marshalled, bedecked, and waiting only for its chiefest ornament; and as soon as she

[p. 65]

had mounted to her steed, trumpets gave the order, and the advance began.

Sitting in the doorway of the pavilion, I saw the soldiery who formed the head of this vast concourse emerge from the great broad street where it left the houses. They marched straight across to give me the salute, and then ranged themselves on the farther side of the square. Then came the Mariners' Guild, then more soldiers, all making obeisance in their turn, and passing on to make room for others. Following were the merchants, the tanners, the spear-makers, and all the other acknowledged guilds, deliberately attired (so it seemed to me) that they might make a pageant; and while most walked on foot, there were some who proudly rode on beasts which they had tamed into rendering them this menial service.

But presently came the two wonders of all that dazzling spectacle. From out of the eclipse of the houses there swung into the open no less a beast than a huge bull mammoth. The sight had sufficient surprise in it almost to make me start. Many a time during my life had I led hunts to kill the mammoth, when a herd of them had raided some village or corn-land under my charge. I had seen the huge brutes in the wild ground, shaggy, horrid, monstrous; more fierce than even the cave-tiger or the cave-bear; most dangerous beast of all that fight with man for dominion of the earth, save only for a few of the greater lizards. And here was this creature, a giant even among mammoths, yet tame as any well-whipped slave, and bearing upon its back a great half-castle of gold, stamped with the outstretched hand, and bedecked

[p. 66]

with silver snakes. Its murderous tusks were gilded, its hairy neck was garlanded with flowers, and it trod on in the procession as though assisting at such pageantry was the beginning and end of its existence. Its tameness seemed a fitting symbol of the masterful strength of this new ruler of Atlantis.

Simultaneously with the mammoth there came into sight that other and greater wonder, the mammoth's mistress, the Empress Phorenice. The beast took my eye at the first, from its very uncouth hugeness, from its show of savage power restrained; but the lady who sat in the golden half-castle on its lofty back quickly drew away my gaze, and held it immovable from then onward with an infinite attraction.

I stood to my feet when the people first shouted at Phorenice's approach, and remained in the porch-way of my scarlet pavilion till her vast steed had halted in the centre of the square, and then I advanced across the pavement towards her.

"On your knees, my lord," said one of the chamberlains behind me, in a scared whisper.

"At least with bent head," urged another.

But I had my own notions of what is due to one's own self-respect in these matters, and I marched across the bare open space with head erect, giving the Empress gaze for gaze. She was clearly summing me up. I was frankly doing the like by her. Gods! but those few short seconds made me see a woman such as I never imagined could have lived.

I know I have placed it on record earlier in this writing that, during all the days of a long official

[p. 67]

life, women have had no influence over me. But I have been quick to see that they often had a strong swaying power over the policies of others, and as a consequence I have made it my business to study them even as I have studied men. But this woman who sat under the sacred snakes in her golden half-castle on the mammoth's back fairly baffled me. Of her thoughts I could read no single syllable. I could see a body slight, supple, and beautifully moulded; in figure rather small. Her face was a most perfect book of cleverness, yet she was fair, too, beyond belief, with hair of a lovely ruddiness, cut short in the new fashion, and bunching on her shoulders. And eyes! Gods! who could plumb the depths of Phorenice's eyes, or find in mere tint a trace of their heaven-made color?

It was plain, also, that she in her turn was searching me down to my very soul, and it seemed that her scrutiny was not without its satisfaction. She moved her head in little nods as I drew near, and when I did the requisite obeisance permitted to my rank, she bade me, in a voice loud and clear enough for all at hand to hear, never to put forehead on the ground again on her behalf so long as she ruled in Atlantis.

"For others," she said, "it is fitting that they should do so, once, twice, or several times, according to their rank and station, for I am Empress, and they are all so far beneath me; but you are Deucalion, my lord; and though till to-day I knew you only from pictures drawn with tongues, I have seen you now, and have judged for myself. And so I make this decree: Deucalion is above all other men in

[p. 68]

[paragraph continues] Atlantis, and if there is one who does not render him obedience, that man is enemy also of Phorenice, and shall feel her anger."

She made a sign, and a stair was brought, and then she called to me, and I mounted and sat beside her in the golden half-castle under the canopy of royal snakes. The girl who stood behind in attendance fanned us both with perfumed feathers, and at a word from Phorenice the mammoth was turned, bearing us back towards the royal pyramid by the way through which it had come. At the same time also all the other machinery of splendor was put in motion. The soldiers and the gaudily bedecked civil traders fell into procession before and behind, and I noted that a body of troops, heavily armed, marched on each of the mammoth's flanks.

Phorenice turned to me with a smile. "You piqued me," she said, "at first."

"Your majesty overwhelms me with so much notice."

"You looked at my steed before you looked at me. A woman finds it hard to forgive a slight like that."

"I envied you the greatest of your conquests, and do still. I have fought mammoths myself, and at times have killed, but I never dared even to think of taking one alive and bringing it into tameness."

"You speak boldly," she said, still smiling, "and yet you can turn a pretty compliment. Faugh! Deucalion, the way these people fawn on me gives me a nausea. I am not of the same clay as they are, I know; but just because I am the daughter of Gods they must needs feed me on the pap of insincerity."

[p. 69]

So Tatho was right, and the swineherd was forgotten. Well, if she chose to keep up the fiction she had made, it was not my part to contradict her. Rightly or wrongly, she was Empress, and without competitor, and anyway I was her servant.

"I have been pining this long enough for a stronger meat than they can give," she went on, "and at last I have sent for you. I have been at some pains to procure my tongue-pictures of you, Deucalion, and though you do not know me yet, I may say I knew you with all thoroughness even before we met. I can admire a man with a mind great enough to forego the silly gauds of clothes, or the excesses of feasts, or the pamperings of women." She looked down at her own silks and her glittering jewels. "We women like to carry colors upon our persons, but that is a different matter. And so I sent for you here to be my minister, and bear with me the burden of ruling."

"There should be better men in broad Atlantis."

"There are not, my lord, and I who know them all by heart tell you so. They are all enamoured of my poor person; they weary me with their empty phrases and their importunities; and, though they are always brimming with their cries of service, their own advancement and the filling of their own treasuries ever comes first with them. So I have sent for you, Deucalion, the one strong man in all the world. You at least will not sigh to be my lover?"

I saw her watching for my answer from the corner of her eyes. "The Empress," I said, "is my mistress, and I will be an honest minister to her. With

[p. 70]

[paragraph continues] Phorenice, the woman, it is likely that I shall have little enough to do. Besides, I am not the sort that sports with this toy they call love."

"And yet you are a personable man enough," she said, rather thoughtfully. "But that still further proves your strength, Deucalion. You at least will not lose your head through weak infatuation for my poor looks and graces." She turned to the girl who stood behind us. "Ylga, fan not so violently."

Our talk broke off then for the moment, and I had time to look about me. We were passing through the chief street in the fairest, the most wonderful city this world has ever seen. I had left it a score of years before, and was curious to note its increase.

In public buildings the city had certainly made growth; there were new temples, new pyramids, new palaces, and statuary everywhere. Its greatness and magnificence impressed me more strongly even than usual, returning to it as I did from such a distance of time and space, for, though the many cities of Yucatan might each of them be princely, this great capital was a place not to be compared with any of them. It was imperial and gorgeous beyond descriptive words.

Yet most of all was I struck by the poverty and squalor which stood in such close touch with all this magnificence. In the throngs that lined the streets there were gaunt bodies and hungry faces everywhere. Here and there stood one, a man or a woman, as naked as a savage in Europe, and yet dull to shame. Even the trader, with trumpery gauds on his coat,

[p. 71]

aping the prevailing fashion for display, had a scared, uneasy look to his face, as though he had forgotten the mere name of safety, and hid a frantic heart with his tawdry outward vauntings of prosperity.

Phorenice read the direction of my looks.

"The season," she said, "has been unhealthy of recent months. These lower people will not build fine houses to adorn my city, and because they choose to live on in their squalid, unsightly kennels, there have been calentures and other sicknesses among them, which make them disinclined for work. And then, too, for the moment, earning is not easy. Indeed, you may say trade is nearly stopped this last half-year, since the rebels have been hammering so lustily at my city gates."

I was fairly startled out of my decorum.

"Rebels!" I cried, "who are hammering at the gates of Atlantis? Is the city in a state of siege?"

"Of their condescension," said Phorenice, lightly, "they are giving us holiday to-day, and so, happily, my welcome to you comes undisturbed. If they were fighting, your ears would have told you of it. To give them their due, they are noisy enough in all their efforts. My spies say they are making ready new engines for use against the walls, which you may sally out to-morrow and break if it gives you amusement. But for to-day, Deucalion, I have you, and you have me, and there is peace round us, and some prettiness of display. If you ask for more I will give it you."

"I did not know of this rebellion," I said, "but as your Majesty has made me your minister, it is

[p. 72]

well that I should know all about its scope at once. This is a matter we should be serious upon."

"And do you think I cannot take it seriously also?" she retorted. "Ylga," she said to the girl that stood behind, "set loose my dress at the shoulder."

And when the attendant had unlinked the jewelled clasp (as it seemed to me with a very ill grace), she herself stripped down the fabric, baring the pure skin beneath, and showing me just below the curve of the left breast a bandage of blood-stained linen.

"There is a guarantee of my seriousness yesterday, at any rate," she said, looking at me sidelong. "The arrow struck on a rib, and that saved me. If it had struck between, Deucalion would have been standing beside my funeral-pyre to-day instead of riding on this pretty steed of mine which he admires so much. Your eye seems to feast itself most on the mammoth, Deucalion. Ah, poor me. I am not one of your shaggy creatures, and so it seems I shall never be able to catch your regard. Ylga," she said to the girl behind, "you may link my dress up again with its clasp. My lord Deucalion has seen wounds before, and there is nothing else here to interest him."

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 73]

  

CHAPTER V

  

ZAEMON'S CURSE

IT appeared that for the present, at any rate, I was to have my residence in the royal pyramid. The glittering cavalcade drew up in the great paved square which lies before the building, and massed itself in groups. The mammoth was halted before the doorway, and when a stair had been brought, the trumpets sounded, and we three who had ridden in the golden half-castle under the canopy of snakes, descended to the ground.

It was plain that we were going from beneath the open sky to the apartments which lay inside the vast stone mazes of the pyramid, and without thinking, the instinct of custom and reverence that had become part of my nature caused me to turn to where the towering rocks of the Sacred Mountain frowned above the city, and make the usual obeisance, and offer up in silence the prescribed prayer. I say I did this thing unthinking, and as a matter of common custom, but when I rose to my feet, I could have sworn I heard a titter of laughter from somewhere in that fancifully bedecked crowd of onlookers.

I glanced in the direction of the scoffers, frowningly enough, and then I turned to Phorenice to demand their prompt punishment for the disrespect.

[p. 74]

[paragraph continues] But here was a strange thing. I had looked to see her in the act and article of rising from an obeisance; but there she was, standing erect, and had clearly never touched her forehead to the ground. Moreover, she was regarding me with a queer look, which I could not fathom.

But whatever was in her mind, she had no plan to bawl it about then before the people collected in the square. She said to me: "Come," and, turning to the doorway, cried for entrance, giving the secret word appointed for the day. The ponderous stone blocks which barred the porch swung back on their hinges, and with stately tread she passed out of the hot sunshine into the cool gloom beyond, with the fan-girl following decorously at her heels. With a heaviness beginning to grow at my heart, I too went inside the pyramid, and the stone doors, with a sullen thud, closed behind us.

We did not go far just then. Phorenice halted in the hall of waiting. How well I remembered the place, with the pictures of kings on its red walls, and the burning fountain of earth-breath which blazed from a jet of bronze in the middle of the flooring and gave it light. The old King that was gone had come this far of his complaisance when he bade me farewell as I set out twenty years before for my viceroyalty in Yucatan. But the air of the hall was different to what it had been in those old days. Then it was pure and sweet. Now it was heavy with some scent, and I found it languid and oppressive.

"My minister," said the Empress, "I acquit you

[p. 75]

of intentional insult; but I think the colonial air has made you a very simple man. Such an obeisance as you showed to that mountain not a minute since has not been made since I was sent to reign over this kingdom."

"Your Majesty," I said, "I am a member of the Priests' Clan and was brought up in their tenets. I have been taught, before entering a house, to thank the Gods, and more especially our Lord the Sun, for the good air that He and They have provided. It has been my fate more than once to be chased by streams of fire and stinking air among the mountains during one of their sudden boils, and so I can say the prescribed prayer upon this matter straight from my heart."

"Circumstances have changed since you left Atlantis," said Phorenice, "and when thanks are given now, they are not thrown at those old Gods."

I saw her meaning, and almost started at the impiety of it. If this was to be the new rule of things, I would have no hand in it. Fate might deal with me as it chose. To serve truly a reigning monarch, that I was prepared for; but to palter with sacrilege, and accept a swineherd's daughter as a God, who should receive prayers and obeisances, revolted my manhood. So I invited a crisis.

"Phorenice," I said, "I have been a priest from my childhood up, revering the Gods, and growing intimate with their mysteries. Till I find for myself that those old things are false, I must stand by that allegiance, and if there is a cost for this faithfulness, I must pay it."

[p. 76]

She looked at me with a slow smile. "You are a strong man, Deucalion," she said.

I bowed.

"I have heard others as stubborn," she said, "but they were converted." She shook out the ruddy bunches of her hair, and stood so that the light of the burning earth-breath might fall on the loveliness of her face and form. "I have found it as easy to convert the stubborn as to burn them. Indeed, there has been little talk of burning. They have all rushed to conversion, whether I would or no. But it seems that my poor looks and tongue are wanting in charm to-day."

"Phorenice is Empress," I said, stolidly, "and I am her servant. To-morrow, if she gives me leave, I will clear away this rabble which clamors outside the walls. I must immediately commence to prove my uses."

"I am told you are a pretty fighter," said she. "Well, I hold some small skill in arms myself, and have a conceit that I am something of a judge. Tomorrow we will take a taste of battle together. But to-day I must carry through the honorable reception I have planned for you, Deucalion. The feast will be set ready soon, and you will wish to make ready for the feast. There are chambers here selected for your use, and stored with what is needful. Ylga will show you their places."

We waited, the fan-girl and I, till Phorenice had passed out of the glow of the light-jet, and had left the hall of waiting through a doorway among the shadows of its farther angle, and then (the girl taking

[p. 77]

a lamp and leading) we also threaded our way through the narrow mazes of the pyramid.

Everywhere the air was full of perfumes, and everywhere the passages turned and twisted and doubled through the solid stone of the pyramid, so that strangers might have spent hours--yes, or days--in search before they came to the chamber they desired. There was a fine cunningness about those forgotten builders who set up this royal pyramid. They had no mind that kings should fall by the hand of vulgar assassins who might come in suddenly from outside. And it is said also that the king of the time, to make doubly sure, killed all that had built the pyramid, or seen even the lay of its inner stones.

But the fan-girl led the way with the lamp swinging in her hand, as one accustomed to the mazes. Here she doubled, there she turned, and here she stopped in the middle of a blank wall to push a stone, which swung to let us pass. And once she pressed at the corner of a flagstone on the floor, which reared up to the thrust of her foot, and showed us a stair steep and narrow. That we descended, coming to the foot of an inclined way which led us upward again; and so by degrees we came unto the chamber which had been given for my use.

"There is raiment in all these chests which stand by the walls," said the girl, "and jewels and gauds in that bronze coffer. They are Phorenice's first presents, she bid me say, and but a small earnest of what is to come. My lord Deucalion can drop his simplicity now, and fig himself out in finery to suit the fashion."

[p. 78]

"Girl," I said, sharply, "be more decorous with your tongue, and spare me such small advice."

"If my lord Deucalion thinks this a rudeness, he can give a word to Phorenice, and I shall be whipped. If he asks it, I can be stripped and scourged before him. The Empress will do much for Deucalion just now."

"Girl," I said, "you are nearer to that whipping than you think for."

"I have got a name," she retorted, looking at me sullenly from under her black brows. "They call me Ylga. You might have heard that as we rode here on the mammoth, had you not been so wrapped up in Phorenice."

I gazed at her curiously. "You have never seen me before," I said, "and the first words you utter are those that might well bring trouble to yourself. There is some object in all this."

She went and pushed to the massive stone that swung in the doorway of the chamber. Then she put her little jewelled fingers on my garment and drew me carefully away from the air-shaft into the farther corner. "I am the daughter of Zaemon," she said, "whom you knew."

"You bring me some message from him?"

"How could I? He lives in the priests' dwellings on the mountain you did obeisance to. I have not put eyes on him these two years. But when I saw you first step out from that red pavilion they had pitched at the harbor side, I--I felt a pity for you, Deucalion. I remembered you were my father's, Zaemon's friend, and I knew what Phorenice had

[p. 79]

in store. She has been plotting it all these two months."

"I cannot hear words against the Empress."

"And yet--"

"What?"

She stamped her sandal upon the stone of the floor. "You must be a very blind man, Deucalion, or a very daring one. But I shall not interfere further; at least, not now. I shall watch, and if at any time you seem to want a friend I will try and serve you."

"I thank you for your friendship."

"You seem to take it lightly enough. Why, sir, even now I do not believe you know my power, any more than you guess my motive. You may be first man in this kingdom, but let me tell you I rank as second lady. And remember, women stand high in Atlantis now. Believe me, my friendship is a commodity that has been sought with frequence and industry."

"And, as I say, I am grateful for it. You seem to think little enough of my gratitude, Ylga; but, credit me, I never have bestowed it on a woman before, and so you should treasure it for its rarity."

"Well," she said, "my lord, there is an education before you." She left me then, showing me how to call slaves when I wished for their help, and for a full minute I stood wondering at the words I had spoken to her. Who was this daughter of Zaemon that she should induce me to change the habit of a lifetime?

The slaves came at my bidding, and showed themselves anxious to deck me with a thousand foolishnesses

[p. 80]

in the matter of robes and gauds, and (what seemed to be the modern fashion of their class) holding out the virtues of a score of perfumes and unguents. Their manner irritated me. Clean I was already, and shaved; my hair was trim, and my robe was unsoiled; and, considering these pressing attentions of theirs something of an impertinence, I set them to beat one another as a punishment, promising that if they did not do it with thoroughness, I would hand them on to the brander to be marked with stripes which would endure. It is strange, but a common menial can often surpass even a rebellious general in power of ruffling one.

I had seen many strange sights that day, and undergone many new sensations; but of all the things which came to my notice, Phorenice's manner of summoning the guests to her feast surprised me most. Nay, it did more; it shocked me profoundly; and I cannot say whether amazement at her profanity, or wonder at her power, was for the moment strongest in my breast. I sat in my chamber awaiting the summons, when gradually, growing out of nothing, a sound fell upon my ear which increased in volume with infinitely small gradations, till at last it became a clanging din which hurt the ear with its fierceness; and then (I guessed what was coming) the whole massive fabric of the pyramid trembled and groaned and shook, as though it had been merely a child's wooden toy brushed about by a strong man's sandal.

It was the portent served out yearly by the chiefs of the Priests' Clan on the Sacred Mountain, when

[p. 81]

they bade all the world take count of their sins. It was the sacred reminder that from roaring, raging fire, and from the agony of monstrous earth-tremors, man had been born, and that by these same agencies he would eventually be swallowed up--he and the sins within his breast. And here the Empress was prostituting its solemnities into a mere call to gluttony, and sign for ribald laughter and sensuous display.

But how had she acquired the authority to do this thing? Who was she that she should tamper with those dimly understood powers, the forces that dwell within the liquid heart of our mother earth? Had there been treachery? Had some member of the Priests' Clan forgotten his sacred vows, and babbled to this woman matters concerning the holy mysteries? Or had Phorenice discovered a key to these mysteries with her own agile brain?

If that last was the case, I could continue to serve her with silent conscience. Though she might be none of my making, at least she was Empress, and it was my duty to give her obedience. But if she had suborned some weaker member of the Clan on the Sacred Mount, that would be a different matter. For be it remembered that it was one of the elements of our constitution to preserve our secrets and mysteries inviolate, and to pursue with undying hatred both the man who had dared to betray them and the unhappy recipient of his confidence.

It was with very undecided feelings, then, that I obeyed the summons of the earth-shaking, and bade the slaves lead me through the windings of the pyramid

[p. 82]

to the great banqueting-hall. The scene there was dazzling. The majestic chamber with its marvellous carvings was filled with a company decked out with all the gauds and colors that fancy could conceive. Little reeked they of the solemn portent which had summoned them to the meal, of the death and misery that stalked openly through the city wards without, of the rebels which lay in leaguer beyond the walls, of the neglected Gods and their clan of priests on the Sacred Mountain. They were all gluttonous for the passions of the moment: it was their fashion and conceit to look at nothing beyond.

Flaming jets of earth-breath lit the great hall to the brightness of mid-day; and when I stepped out upon the pavement, trumpets blared, so that all might know of my coming. But there was no roar of welcome. "Deucalion," they lisped with mincing voices, bowing themselves ridiculously to the ground so that all their ornaments and silks might jangle and swish. Indeed, when Phorenice herself appeared, and all sent up their cries and made lawful obeisance, there was the same artificiality in the welcome. They meant well enough, it is true; but this was the new fashion. Heartiness had come to be accounted a barbarism by this new culture.

A pair of posturing, smirking chamberlains took me in charge, and ushered me with their flimsy golden wands to the dais at the farther end. It appeared that I was to sit on Phorenice's divan, and eat my meat out of her dish.

"There is no stint to the honor the Empress puts upon me," I said, as I knelt down and took my seat.

[p. 83]

She gave me one of her queer, sidelong looks. "Deucalion may have more beside, if he asks for it prettily. He may have what all the other men in the known world have sighed for, and what none of them will ever get. But I have given enough of my own accord; he must ask me warmly for those further favors."

"I ask," I said, "first, that I may sweep the boundaries clear of this rabble which is clamoring against the city walls."

"Pah!" she said, and frowned. "Have you appetite only for the sterner pleasures of life? My good Deucalion, they must have been rustic folk in that colony of yours. Well, you shall give me news now of the toothsomeness of this feast."

Dishes and goblets were placed before us, and we began to eat, though I had little enough appetite for victual so broken and so highly spiced. But if this finicking cookery and these luscious wines did not appeal to me, the other diners in that gorgeous hall appreciated it all to the full. They sat about in groups on the pavement beneath the light-jets like a tangle of rainbows for color, and according to the new custom they went into raptures and ecstasies over their enjoyment. Women and men both, they lingered over each titillation of the palate as though it were a caress of the Gods.

Phorenice, with her quick, bright eyes, looked on, and occasionally flung one or another a few words between her talk with me, and now and again called some favored creature up to receive a scrap of viand from the royal dish. This the honored one would

[p. 84]

eat with extravagant gesture, or (as happened twice) would put it away in the folds of his clothes as a treasure too dear to be profaned by human lips.

To me this flattery appeared gross and disgustful, but Phorenice, through use, perhaps, seemed to take it as merely her due. There was, one had to suppose, a weakness in her somewhere, though truly to the outward seeing none was apparent. Her face was strong enough, and it was subtle also, and, moreover, it was wondrous comely. All the courtiers in the banqueting-hall raved about Phorenice's face and the other beauties of her body and limbs; and though not given to appreciation in these matters, I could not but see that here at least they had a groundwork for their admiration; for surely the Gods have never favored mortal woman more highly. Yet lovely though she might be, for myself I preferred to look upon Ylga, the girl, who, because of her rank, was privileged to sit on the divan behind us as immediate attendant. There was an honesty in Ylga's face which Phorenice's lacked.

They did not eat to nutrify their bodies, these feasters in the banqueting-hall of the royal pyramid, but they all ate to cloy themselves, and they strutted forth new usages with every platter and bowl that the slaves brought. To me some of their manners were closely touching on disrespect. At the half-way of the meal a gorgeous popinjay--he was a governor of an out-province driven into the capital by a rebellion in his own lands--this gorgeous fop, I say, walked up between the groups of feasters with flushed face and unsteady gait, and did obeisance before the divan.

[p. 85]

[paragraph continues] "Most astounding Empress," cried he, "fairest among the Goddesses, Queen regnant of my adoring heart, hail!"

Phorenice with a smile stretched him out her cup. I looked to see him pour respectful libation, but no such thing. He set the drink to his lips and drained it to the final drop. "May all your troubles," he cried, "pass from you as easily, and leave as pleasant a flavor."

The Empress turned to me with one of her quick looks. "You do not like this new habit?"

To which I replied bluntly enough that to pour out liquor at a person's feet had grown through custom to be a mark of respect, but that drinking it seemed to me mere self-indulgence, which might be practised anywhere.

"You still keep to the old austere teachings," she said. " Our newer code bids us enjoy life first, and order other things so as not to meddle with our more immediate pleasure."

And so the feast went on, the guests practising their gluttonies and their absurdities, and the guards standing to their arms round the circuit of the walls as motionless and as stern as the statues carven in the white stone beyond them. But a term was put to the orgie with something of suddenness. There was a stir at the farther doorway of the banqueting-hall, and a clash, as two of the guards joined their spears across the entrance. But the man they tried to stop--or perhaps it was to pin--passed them unharmed, and walked up over the pavement between the lights and the groups of feasters. All looked round at him;

[p. 86]

a few threw him ribald words; but none ventured to stop his progress. A few, women chiefly, I could see shuddered as he passed them by, as though a wintry chill had come over them; and in the end he walked up and stood in front of Phorenice's divan, and gazed fixedly on her, but without making obeisance.

He was a frail old man, with white hair tumbling on his shoulders, and ragged white beard. The mud of wayfaring hung in clots on his feet and legs. His wizened body was bare save for a single cloth wound about his shoulders and his loins, and he carried in his hand a wand with the Symbol of our Lord the Sure glowing at its tip. That wand went to show his caste, but in no other way could I recognize him.

I took him for one of those ascetics of the Priests' Clan, who had forsworn the steady nurtured life of the Sacred Mountain, and who lived out in the dangerous lands among the burning hills, where there is daily peril from falling rocks, from fire streams, from evil vapors, from sudden fissuring of the ground, and from other movements of those unstable territories, and from the greater lizards and other monstrous beasts which haunt them. These keep constant in the memory the might of the Holy Gods, and the insecurity of this frail earth on which we have our resting-place, and so the sojourners there become chastened in the spirit, and gain power over mysteries which even the most studious and learned of other men can never hope to attain.

A silence filled the room when the old man came to his halt, and Phorenice was the first to break it. "Those two guards," she said, in her clear, carrying

[p. 87]

voice, "who held the door, are not equal to their work. I cannot have imperfect servants: remove them."

The soldiers next in the rank lifted their spears and drove them home, and the two fellows who had admitted the old man fell to the ground. One shrieked once, the other gave no sound: they were clever thrusts both.

The old man found his voice, thin, and high, and broken. "Another crime added to your tally, Phorenice. Not half your army could have hindered my entrance had I wished to come, and let me tell you that I am here to bring you your last warning. The Gods have shown you much favor; They gave you merit by which you could rise above your fellows, till at last only the throne stood above you. It was seen good by those on the Sacred Mountain to let you have this last ambition, and sit on this throne that has so long and honorably been filled by the ancient kings of Atlantis."

The Empress sat back on the divan smiling. "I seemed to get these things as I chose, and in spite of your friends' teeth. I may owe to you, old man, a small parcel of thanks, though that I offered to repay; but for my lords the priests, their permission was of small enough value when it came. I would have you remember that I was as firm on the throne of Atlantis as this pyramid stands upon its base when your worn-out priests came up to give their tottering benediction."

The old man waved aside her interruption. "Hear me out," he said. "I am here with no trivial message.

[p. 88]

[paragraph continues] There is nothing paltry about the threat I can throw at you, Phorenice. With your fire-tubes, your handling of troops, and your other fiendish clevernesses, you may not be easy to overthrow by mere human means, though, forsooth, these poor rebels who yap against your city walls have contrived to hold their ground for long enough now. It may be that you are becoming enervated; I do not know. It may be that you are too wrapped up in your feastings, your dressings, your pomps, and your debaucheries, to find leisure to turn to the art of war. It may be that the man's spirit has gone out from your arm and brain, and you are a woman once more--weak, and pleasure-loving; again I do not know.

"But this must happen: You must undo the evil you have done; you must give bread, to the people who are starving, even if you take it from these gluttons in this hall; you must restore Atlantis to the state in which it was intrusted to you: or else you must be removed. It cannot be permitted that the country should sink back into the lawlessness and barbarism from which its ancient kings have digged it. You hear, Phorenice. Now give me true answer."

"Speak him fair. Oh! for the sake of your fortune, speak him fair," came Ylga's voice in a hurried whisper from behind us. But the Empress took no notice of it. She leaned forward on the cushions of the divan with a knit brow.

"Do you dare to threaten me, old man, knowing what I am?"

"I know your origin," he said, gravely, "as well

[p. 89]

as you know it yourself. As for my daring, that is a small matter. He need be but a timid man who dares to say words that the High Gods put on his lips."

"I shall rule this kingdom as I choose. I shall brook interference from no creature on this earth, or beneath it, or in the sky above. The Gods have chosen me to be Their regent in Atlantis, and They do not depose me through such creatures as you. Go away, old man, and play the fanatic in another court. It is well that I have an ancient kindliness for you, or you would not leave this place unharmed."

"Now, indeed, you are lost," I heard Ylga murmur from behind, and the old man in front of us did not move a step. Instead, he lifted up the Symbol of our Lord the Sun, and launched his curse. "Your blasphemy gives the reply I asked for. Hear me now make declaration of war on behalf of Those against whom you have thrown your insults. You shall be overthrown and sent to the nether Gods. At whatever cost the land shall be purged of you and yours, and all the evil that has been done to it while you have sullied the throne of its ancient kings. You will not amend, neither will you yield tamely. You vaunt that you sit as firm on your throne as this pyramid reposes on its base. See how little you know of what the future carries. I say to you that, while you are yet Empress, you shall see this royal pyramid which you have polluted with your debaucheries torn tier from tier, and stone from stone, and scattered as feathers spread before a wind."

[p. 90]

"You may wreck the pyramid," said Phorenice, contemptuously. "I myself have some knowledge of the earth forces, as I have shown this night. But though you crumble every stone above us now and around into grit and dust, I shall still be Empress. What force can you crazy priests bring against me that I cannot throw back and destroy?"

"We have a weapon that was forged in no mortal smithy," shrilled the old man, "whereof the key is now lodged in the Ark of the Mysteries. But that weapon can be used only as a last resource. The nature of it even is too awful to be told in words. Our other powers will be launched against you first, and for this poor country's sake I pray that they may cause you to wince. Yet rest assured, Phorenice, that we shall not step aside once we have put a hand to this matter. We shall carry it through, even though the cost be a universal burning and destruction. For know this, daughter of the swineherd, it is agreed among the most High Gods that you are too full of sin to continue unchecked."

"Speak him fairly," Ylga urged from behind. "He has a power at which you cannot even guess."

The Empress made to rise, but Ylga clung to her skirt. "For the sake of your fame," she urged, "for the sake of your life, do not defy him." But Phorenice struck her fiercely aside, and faced the old man in a tumult of passion. "You dare call me a blasphemer, who blaspheme yourself? You dare cast slurs upon my birth, who am come direct from the most high Heaven? Old man, your craziness protects you in part, but not in all. You shall be

[p. 91]

whipped. Do you hear me? I say, whipped. The lean flesh shall be scourged from your scraggy bones, and you shall totter away from this place as a red and bleeding example for those who would dare traduce their Empress. Here, some of you, I say, take that man, and let him be whipped where he stands."

Her cry went out clearly enough. But not a soul among those glittering feasters stirred in his place. Not a soldier among the guards stepped from his rank. The place was hung in a terrible silence. It seemed as though no one within the hall dared so much as to draw a breath. All felt that the very air was big with fate.

Phorenice, with her head crouched forward, looked from one group to another. Her face was working. "Have I no true servants," she asked, "among all you pretty lip-servers?"

Still no one moved. They stood, or sat, or crouched like people fascinated. For myself, with the first words he had uttered, I had recognized the old man by his voice. It was Zaemon, the weak governor who had given the Empress her first step towards power; that earnest searcher into the mysteries, who knew more of their powers, and more about the hidden forces, than any other dweller on the Sacred Mountain, even at that time when I left for my colony. And now, during his strange hermit life, how much more might he not have learned? I was torn by warring duties. I owed much to the Priests' Clan, by reason of my oath and membership; it seemed I owed no less to Phorenice. And, again, was Zaemon the truly accredited envoy of the high council of the

[p. 92]

priests of the Sacred Mountain? And was the Empress of a truth deposed by the High Gods above, or was she still Empress, and still the commander of my duty? I could not tell, and so I sat in my seat awaiting what the event would show.

Phorenice's fury was growing. "Do I stand alone here?" she cried. "Have I pampered you creatures out of all touch with gratitude? It seems that at least I want a new chief to my guards. Ho! who will be chief of the guards of the Empress?"

There was a shifting of eyes, a hesitation. Then a great burly form strode up from the farther end of the hall, and a perceptible shudder went up from all the others as they watched him.

"So, Tarca, you prefer to take the risks, and remain chief of the guard yourself?" she said, with an angry scoff. "Truly there did not seem to be many thrusting forward to strip you of the office. I shall have a fine sorting up of places in payment for this night's work. But for the present, Tarca, do your duty."

The man came up, obviously timorous. He was a solidly made fellow, but not altogether unmartial, and though but little of his cheek showed above his decorated beard, I could see that he paled as he came near to the priest. "My lord," he said, quietly, "I must ask you to come with me."

"Stand aside!" said the old man, thrusting out the Symbol in front of him. I could see his eyes gather on the soldier and his brows knit with a strain of will.

Tarca saw this too, and I thought he would have

[p. 93]

fallen, but with an effort he kept his manhood, and doggedly repeated his summons. "I must obey the command of my mistress, and I would have you remember, my lord, that I am but a servant. You must come with me to the whip."

"I warn you!" cried the old man. "Stand from out of my path, you!"

It must have been with the courage of desperation that the soldier dared to use force. But the hand he stretched out dropped limply back to his side the moment it touched the old man's bare shoulder, as though it had been struck by some shock. He seemed almost to have expected some such repulse; yet when he picked up that hand with the other, and looked at it, and saw its whiteness, he let out of him a yell like a wounded beast. "Oh, Gods!" he cried, "not that. Spare me!"

But Zaemon was glowering at him still. A twitching seized the man's face, and he put up his sound hand to it and plucked at his beard, which was curled and plaited after the new fashion of the day. A woman standing near screamed as the half of the beard came off in his fingers. Beneath was silver whiteness over half his face. Zaemon had smitten him with a sudden leprosy that was past cure.

Yet the punishment was not ended even then. Other twitchings took him on other parts of the body, and he tore off his armor and his foppish clothes, and always where the bare flesh showed, there had the horrid plague written its white mark; and in the end, being able to endure no more, the man fell to the pavement and lay there writhing.

[p. 94]

Zaemon said no further word. He lifted the Symbol before him, set his eyes on the farther door of the banqueting-hall, and walked for it directly, all those in his path shrinking away from him with open shudders. And through the valves of the door he passed out of our sight, still wordless, still unchecked.

I glanced up at Phorenice. The loveliness of her face was drawn and haggard. It was the first great reverse, this, she had met with in all her life, and the shock of it, and the vision of what might follow after, dazed her. Alas, if she could only have guessed at a tenth of the terrors which the future had in its womb, Atlantis might have been saved even then.

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 95]

  

CHAPTER VI

  

THE BITERS OF THE CITY WALLS

HERE then was the manner of my reception back in the capital of Atlantis, and some first glimpse at her new policies. I freely confess to my own inaction and limpness; but it was all deliberate. The old ties of duty seemed lost, or at least merged in one another. Beforetime, to serve the king was to serve the Clan of the Priests, from which he had been chosen, and whose head he constituted. But Phorenice was self-made, and appeared to be a rule unto herself; if Zaemon was to be trusted, he was the mouthpiece of the Priests, and their Clan had set her at defiance; and how was a mere honest man to choose on the instant between the two?

But cold argument told me that governments were set up for the good of the country at large, and I said to myself that there would be my choice: I must find out which rule promised best for Atlantis, and do my poor best to prop it into full power. And here at once there opened up another path in the maze: I had heard some considerable talk of rebels; of another faction of Atlanteans who, whatever their faults might be, were at any rate strong enough to beleaguer the capital; and before coming to any final decision, it would be as well to take their claims in balance

[p. 96]

with the rest. So, on the night of that very same day on which I had just replanted my foot on the old country's shores, I set out to glean for myself tidings on the matter.

No one inside the royal pyramid gainsaid me. The banquet had ended abruptly with the terrible scene that I have set down above on these tablets, for with Tarca writhing on the floor, and thrusting out the gruesome scars of his leprosy, even the most gluttonous had little enough appetite for further gorging. Phorenice glowered on the feasters for a while longer in silent fury, but saying no further word; and then her eyes turned on me, though softened somewhat.

"You may be an honest man, Deucalion," she said, at length, "but you are a monstrous cold one. I wonder when you will thaw?" And here she smiled. "I think it will be soon. But for now I bid you farewell. In the morning we will take this country by the shoulders, and set it in some new order."

She left the banqueting-hall then, Ylga following; and, taking precedence of my rank, I went out next, while all others stood and made salutation. But I halted by Tarca first, and put my hand on his unclean flesh. "You are an unfortunate man," I said, "but I can admire a brave soldier. If relief can be gained for your plague, I will use interest to procure it for you."

The man's thanks came in a mumble from his wrecked mouth, and some of those near shuddered in affected disgust. I turned on them with a black brow. "Your charity, my lords, seems of as small

[p. 97]

account as your courage. You affected a fine disbelief of Zaemon's sayings, and a simpering contempt for his priesthood, but when it comes to laying a hand on him, you show a discretion which, in the old days, we should have called by an ugly name. I had rather be Tarca, with all his uncleanness, than any of you now as you stand."

With which leave-taking I waited coldly till they gave me my due salutation, and. then walked out of the banqueting-hall without offering a soul another glance. I took my way to the grand gate of the pyramid, called for the officer of the guard, and demanded exit. The man was obsequious enough, but he opened with some demur.

"My lord's attendants have not yet come up?"

"I have none."

"My lord knows the state of the streets?"

"I did twenty years back. I shall be able to pick my way."

"My lord must remember that the city is beleaguered," the fellow persisted. "The people are hungry. They prowl in bands after nightfall, and--I make no question that my lord would conquer in a fight against whatever odds, but--"

"Quite right. I covet no street scuffle to-night. Lend me, I pray you, a sufficiency of men. You will know best what are needed. For me, I am accustomed to a city with quiet streets."

A score of sturdy fellows were detailed off for my escort, and with them in a double file on either hand, I marched out from the close perfumed air of the pyramid into the cool moonlight of the city. It was

[p. 98]

my purpose to make a tour of the walls and to find out somewhat of the disposition of these rebels.

But the Gods saw fit to give me another education first. The city, as I saw it during that night walk, was no longer the old capital that I had known, the just accretion of the ages, the due admixture of comfort and splendor. The splendor was there, vastly increased. Whole wards had been swept away to make space for new palaces and new pyramids of the wealthy, and I could not but have an admiration for the skill and the brain which had made possible such splendid monuments.

And, indeed, gazing at them there under the silver of the moonlight, I could almost understand the emotions of the Europeans and other barbarous savages which cause them to worship all such great buildings as Gods, since they deem them too wonderful and majestic to be set up by human hands unaided.

Still, if it was easy to admire, it was simple also to see plain advertisement of the cost at which these great works had been reared. From each grant of ground, where one of these stately piles earned silver under the moon, a hundred families had been evicted and left to harbor as they pleased in the open; and, as a consequence, now every niche had its quota of sleepers, and every shadow its squad of fierce wild creatures, ready to rush out and rob or slay all wayfarers of less force than their own.

Myself, I am no pamperer of the common people. I say that, if a man be left to hunger and shiver, he will work to gain him food and raiment; and if not, why then he can die, and the State is well rid of a

[p. 99]

worthless fellow. But here beside us, as we marched through many wards, were marks of blind oppression; starved dead bodies, with the bones starting through the lean skin, sprawled in the gutter; and indeed it was plain that, save for the favored few, the people of the great capital were under a most heavy oppression.

But at this, though I might regret it abominably, I could make no strong complaint. By the ancient law of the land all the people, great and small, were the servants of the king, to be put without question to what purposes he chose; and Phorenice stood in place of the king. So I tried to think no treason, but with a sigh passed on, keeping my eyes above the miseries and the squalors of the roadway, and sending out my thoughts to the stars which hung in the purple night above, and to the High Gods which dwelt among them, seeking, if it might be, for guidance for my future policies. And so in time the windings of the street brought us to the walls, and, coursing beside these and giving fitting answer to the sentries who beat their drums as we passed, we came in time to that great gate which was a charge to the captain of the garrison.

Here it was plain there was some special commotion. A noise of laughter went up into the still night air, and with it now and again the snarl and roar of a great beast, and now and again the shriek of a hurt man. But whatever might be afoot, it was not a scene to come upon suddenly. The entrance gates of our great capital were designed by their ancient builders to be no less strong than the walls themselves.

[p. 100]

[paragraph continues] Four pairs of valves were there, each a monstrous block of stone two man-heights square, and a man-height thick, and the wall was doubled to receive them, inclosing an open circus between its two parts. The four gates themselves were set one at the inner, one at the outer side of each of these walls, and a hidden machinery so connected them that of each set one could not open till the other was closed; and as for forcing them without war engines, one might as foolishly try to push down the royal pyramid with the bare hand.

My escort made outcry with the horn which hung from the wall inviting such a summons, and a warder came to an arrow-slit, and did inspection of our persons and business. His survey was according to the ancient form of words, which is long, and this was made still more tedious by the noise from within, which ever and again drowned all speech between us entirely.

But at last the formalities had been duly complied with, and he shot back the massive bars and bolts of stone, and threw ajar one monstrous stone valve of the door. Into the chamber within--a chamber made from the thickness of the wall between the two doors--I and my fellows crowded, and then the warder with his machines pulled to the valve which had been opened, and came to me again through the press of my escort, bowing low to the ground.

"I have no vail to give you," I said, abruptly. "Get on with your duty. Open me that other door."

"With respect, my lord, it would be better that I should first announce my lord's presence. There is

[p. 101]

a baiting going forward in the circus, and the tigers are as yet mere savages, and no respecters of persons."

"The what?"

"The tigers, if my lord will permit them the name. They are baiting a batch of prisoners with the two great beasts which the Empress (whose name be adored) has sent here to aid us keep the gate. But if my lord will, there are the ward-rooms leading off this passage, and the galleries which run out from them commanding the circus, and from there my lord can see the sport undisturbed."

Now, the mere lust for killing excites only disgust in me, but I suspected the orders of the Empress in this matter, and had a curiosity to see her scheme. So I stepped into the warder's lodge, and on into the galleries which commanded the circus with their arrow-slits. The old builders of the place had intended these for a second line of defence; for, supposing the outer doors all forced, an enemy could be speedily shot down in the circus, without being able to give a blow in return, and so would only march into a death-trap. But as a gazing-place on a spectacle they were no less useful.

The circus was bright lit by the moonshine, and the air which came in to me from it was acid with the reek of blood. There was no sport in what was going forward: as I said, it was mere killing, and the sight disgusted me. I am no prude about this matter. Give a prisoner his weapons, put him in a pit with beasts of reasonable strength, and let him fight to a finish if you choose, and I can look on there and

[p. 102]

applaud the strokes. The war prisoner, being a prisoner, has earned death by natural law, and prefers to get his last stroke in hot blood than to be knocked down by the headsman's axe. And it is any brave man's luxury either to help or watch a lusty fight. But this baiting in the circus between the gates was no fair battle like that.

To begin with, the beasts were no fair antagonists for single men. In fact, twenty men armed might well have fled from them. When the warder said tigers, I supposed he meant the great cats of the woods. But here, in the circus, I saw a pair of the most terrific of all the fur-bearing land beasts, the great tigers of the caves--huge monsters, of such ponderous strength that in hunger they will oftentimes drag down a mammoth, if they can find him away from his herd.

How they had been brought captive I could not tell. Hunter of beasts though I had been for all my days, I take no shame in saying that I always approached the slaying of a cave-tiger with stratagem and infinite caution. To trap it alive and bring it to a city on a chain was beyond my most daring schemes, and I have been accredited with more new things than one. But here it was in fact, and I saw in these captive beasts a new certificate for Phorenice's genius.

The purpose of these two cave-tigers was plain: while they were in the circus, and loose, no living being could cross from one gate to the other. They were a new and sturdy addition to the defences of the capital. A collar of bronze was round the throat

[p. 103]

of each, and on the collar was a massive chain which led to the wall, where it could be played out or hauled in by means of a windlass in one of the hidden galleries. So that at ordinary moments the two huge beasts could be tethered, one close to either end of the circus, as the litter of bones and other messes showed, leaving free passageway between the two sets of doors.

But when I stood there by the arrow-slit, looking down into the moonlight of the circus, these chains were slackened (though men stood by the windlass of each), and the great striped brutes were prowling about the circus with the links clanking and chinking in their wake. Lying stark on the pavement were the bodies of some eight men, dead and uneaten; and though the cave-tigers stopped their prowlings now and again to nuzzle these, and beat them about with playful paw-blows, they made no pretence at commencing a meal. It was clear that this cruel sport had grown common to them, and they knew there were other victims yet to be added to the tally.

Presently, sure enough, as I watched, a valve of the farther gate sprung back an arm's-length, and a prisoner, furiously resisting, was thrust out into the circus. He fell on his face, and after one look around him lay resolutely still, with eyes on the ground passively awaiting his fate. The ponderous stone of the gate clapped to in its place; the cave-tigers turned in their prowlings; and a clatter of wagers ran to and fro among the watchers behind the arrow-slits.

It seemed there were niceties of cruelty in this

[p. 104]

wretched game. There was a sharp clank as the windlasses were manned, and the tethering chains were drawn in by perhaps a score of links. One of the cave-tigers crouched, lashed its tail, and launched forth on a terrific spring. The chain tautened, the massive links sang to the strain, and the great beast gave a roar which shook the walls. It had missed the prone man by a hand's breadth, and the watchers behind the arrow-slits shrieked forth their delight. The other tiger sprang also and missed, and again there were shouts of pleasure, which mingled with the bellowing voices of the beasts. The man lay motionless in his form. One more cowardly, or one more brave, might have run from death, or faced it; but this poor prisoner chose the middle course--he permitted death to come to him, and had enough of doggedness to wait for it without stir.

The great cave-tigers were used, it appeared, to this disgusting sport. There were no more wild springs, no more stubbings at the end of the massive chains. They lay down on the pavement, and presently began to purr, rolling on to their sides and rubbing themselves luxuriously. The prisoner still lay motionless in his form.

By slow degrees the monstrous brutes each drew to the end of its chain and began to reach at the man with outstretched forepaw. The male could not touch him; the female could just reach him with the far tip of a claw; and I saw a red scratch start up in the bare skin of his side at every stroke. But still the prisoner would not stir. It seemed to me that they must slack out more links of one of the tiger's

Click to enlarge
"THE GREAT CAVE-TIGER"

[p. 105]

chains, or let the vile play linger into mere tediousness.

But I had more to learn yet. The male tiger, either taught by his own devilishness, or by those brutes that were his keepers, had still another ruse in store. He rose to his feet and turned round, backing against the chain. A yell of applause from the hidden men behind the arrow-slits told that they knew what was in store; and then the monstrous beast, stretched to the utmost of its vast length, kicked sharply with one hind paw.

I heard the crunch of the prisoner's ribs as the pads struck him, and at the same moment the poor wretch's body was spurned away by the blow, as one might throw a fruit with the hand. But it did not travel far. It was clear that the she-tiger knew this manoeuvre of her mate's. She caught the man on his bound, nuzzling over him a minute, and then tossing him high into the air, and leaping up to the full of her splendid height after him.

Those other onlookers thought it magnificent; their gleeful shouts said as much. But for me, my gorge rose at the sight. Once the tigers had reached him, the man had been killed, it is true, without any unnecessary lingering. Even a light blow from those terrific paws would slay the strongest man living. But to see the two cave-tigers toying with the poor body was an insult to the pride of our race.

However, I was not there to preach the superiority of man to the beasts, and the indecency and degradation of permitting man to be unduly insulted. I had come to learn for myself the new balance of things

[p. 106]

in the kingdom of Atlantis, and so I stood at my place behind the arrow-slit with a still face. And presently another scene in this ghastly play was enacted.

The cave-tigers tired of their sport, and first one and then the other fell once more to prowling over the littered pavements, with the heavy chains scraping and chinking in their wake. They made no beginning to feast on the bodies provided for them. That would be for afterwards. In the present, the fascination of slaughter was big in them, and they had thought that it would be indulged further. It seemed that they knew their entertainers.

Again the windlass clanked, and the tethering chains drew the great beasts clear of the doorway; and again a valve of the farther door swung ajar, and another prisoner was thrust struggling into the circus. A sickness seized me when I saw that this was a woman, but still, in view of the object I had in hand, I made no interruption.

It was not that I had never seen women sent to death before. A general, who has done his fighting, must in his day have killed women equally with men; yes, and seen them earn their death-blow by lusty battling. Yet there seemed something so wanton in this cruel, helpless sacrifice of a woman prisoner, that I had a struggle with myself to avoid interference. Still it is ever the case that the individual must be sacrificed to a policy, and so, as I say, I watched on, outwardly cold and impassive.

I watched too (I confess it freely) with a quickening heart. Here was no sullen, submissive victim

[p. 107]

like the last. She may have been more cowardly (as some women are), she may have been braver (as many women have shown themselves); but, at any rate, it was clear that she was going to make a struggle for her life, and to do vicious damage, it might be, before she yielded it up. The watchers behind the arrow-slits recognized this. Their wagers, and the hum of their appreciation, swept loudly round the ring of the circus.

They stripped their prisoners, before they thrust them out to this death, of all the clothes they might carry, for clothes have a value; and so the woman stood there bared-limbed in the moonlight.

She clapped her back to the great stone door by which she had entered, and faced fate with glowing eye. Gods! there have been times in early years when I could have plucked out sword and jumped down, and fought for her there for the sheer delight of such a battle. But now policy restrained me. The individual might want a helping hand, but it was becoming more and more clear that Atlantis wanted a minister also; and before these great needs, the lesser ones perforce must perish. Still, be it noted that, if I did not jump down, no other man there that night had sufficient manhood remaining to venture the opportunity.

My heart glowed as I watched her. She picked a bone from the litter on the pavement and beat off its head by blows against the wall. Then with her teeth she fashioned the point to still further sharpness. I could see her teeth glisten white in the moon rays as she bit with them.

[p. 108]

The huge cave-tigers, which stood as high as her head as they walked, came nearer to her in their prowlings, yet obviously neglected her. This was part of their accustomed scheme of torment, and the woman knew it well. There was something intolerable in their noiseless, ceaseless paddings over the pavement. I could see the prisoner's breasts heave as she watched them. A terror such as that would have made many a victim sick and helpless.

But this one was bolder than I had thought. She did not wait for a spring: she made the first attack herself. When the she-tiger made its stroll towards her, and was in the act of turning, she flung herself into a sudden leap, striking viciously at its eye with her sharpened bone. A roar from the onlookers acknowledged the stroke. The cave-tiger's eye remained undarkened, but the puny weapon had dealt it a smart flesh wound, and with a great bellow of surprise and pain it scampered away to gain space for a rush and a spring.

But the woman did not await its charge. With a shrill scream she sped forward, running at the full of her speed across the moonlight directly towards that shadowed part of the encircling wall within whose thickness I had my gazing-place; and then, throwing every tendon of her body into the spring, made the greatest leap that surely any human being ever accomplished, even when spurred on by the utmost of terror and desperation. In an after day I measured it, and though of a certainty she must have added much to the tally by the sheer force of her run, which drove her clinging up the rough surface of the

[p. 109]

wall, it is a sure thing that in that splendid leap her feet must have dangled a man-height and a half above the pavement.

I say it was prodigious, but then the spur was more than the ordinary, and the woman herself was far out of the common both in thews and intelligence; and the end of the leap left her with five fingers lodged in the sill of the arrow-slit from which I watched. Even then she must have slipped back if she had been left to herself, for the sill sloped, and the stone was finely smooth; but I shot out my hand and gripped hers by the wrist, and instantly she clambered up with both knees on the sill, and her fingers twined round to grip my wrist in her turn.

And now you will suppose she gushed out prayers and promises, thinking only of safety and enlargement. There was nothing of this. With savage panting wordlessness she took fresh grip on the sharpened bone with her spare hand, and lunged with it desperately through the arrow-slit. With the hand that clutched mine she drew me towards her, so as to give the blows the surer chance, and so unprepared was I for such an attack, and with such fierce suddenness did she deliver it, that the first blow was near giving me my quietus. But I grappled with the poor frantic creature as gently as might be--the stone of the wall separating us always--and stripped her of her weapon, and held her firmly captive till she might calm herself.

"That was an ungrateful blow," I said. "But for my hand you'd have slipped and be the sport of a tiger's paw this minute."

[p. 110]

"Oh, I must kill some one," she panted, "before I am killed myself."

"There will be time enough to think upon that some other day; but for now you are far enough off meeting further harm."

"You are lying to me. You will throw me to the beasts so soon as I loose my grip. I know your kind: you will not be robbed of your sport."

"I will go so far as to prove myself to you," said I, and called out for the warder who had tended the doors below. "Bid those tigers be tethered on a shorter chain," I ordered, "and then go yourself outside into the circus, and help this lady delicately to the ground."

The word was passed and these things were done, and I too came out into the circus and joined the woman, who stood waiting under the moonlight. But the others who had seen these doings were by no means suited at the change of plan. One of the great stone valves of the farther door opened hurriedly, and a man strode out, armed and flushed. "By all the Gods!" he shouted. "Who comes between me and my pastime?"

I stepped quietly to the advance. "I fear, sir," I said, "that you must launch your anger against me. By accident I gave that woman sanctuary, and I had not heart to toss her back to your beasts."

His fingers began to snap against his hilt.

"You have come to the wrong market here with your qualms. I am captain here, and my word carries, subject only to Phorenice's nod. Do you hear that? Do you know too that I can have you

[p. 111]

tossed to those striped gate-keepers of mine for meddling in here without an invitation?" He looked at me sharp enough, but saw plainly that I was a stranger. "But perhaps you carry a name, my man, which warrants your impertinence?"

"Deucalion is my poor name," I said, "but I cannot expect you will know it. I am but newly landed here, sir, and when I left Atlantis some score of years back, a very different man to you held guard over these gates." He had his forehead on my feet by this time. "I had it from the Empress this night that she will to-morrow make a new sorting of this kingdom's dignities. Perhaps there is some recommendation you would wish me to lay before her in return for your courtesies?"

"My lord," said the man, "if you wish it, I can have a turn with those cave-tigers myself now, and you can look on from behind the walls and see them tear me."

"Why tell me what is no news?"

"I wish to remind my lord of his power; I wish to beg of his clemency."

"You showed your power to these poor prisoners; but, from what remains here to be seen, few of them have tasted much of your clemency."

"The orders were," said the captain of the gate, as though he thought a word might be said here for his defence--"the orders were, my lord, that the tigers should be kept fierce and accustomed to killing."

"Then, if you have obeyed orders, let me be the last to chide you. But it is my pleasure that this

[p. 112]

woman be respited, and I wish now to question her."

The man got to his feet again with obvious relief, though still bowing low.

"Then if my lord will honor me by sitting in my room that overlooks the outer gate, the favor will never be forgotten."

"Show the way," I said, and took the woman by the fingers, leading her gently. At the two ends of the circus the tigers prowled about on short chains, growling and muttering.

We passed through the door into the thickness of the outer wall, and the captain of the gate led us into his private chamber, a snug enough box overlooking the plain beyond the city. He lit a torch from his lamp and thrust it into a bracket on the wall, and bowing deeply and walking backwards, left us alone, closing the door in place behind him. He was an industrious fellow, this captain, to judge from the spoil with which his chamber was packed. There could have come very few traders in through that gate below without his levying a private tribute; and so, judging that most of his goods had been unlawfully come by, I had little qualm at making a selection. It was not decent that the woman, being an Atlantean, should go bereft of the dignity of clothes, as though she was a mere savage from Europe; and so I sought about among the captain's spoil for garments that would be befitting.

But, as I busied myself in this search for raiment, rummaging among heaps and bales, with a hand and eye little skilled in such business, I heard a sound

[p. 113]

behind which caused me to turn my head, and there was the woman with a dagger she had picked from the floor, in the act of drawing it from the sheath.

She caught my eye and drew the weapon clear, but seeing that I made no advance towards her, or move to protect myself, waited where she was, and presently was took with a shuddering.

"Your designs seem somewhat of a riddle," I said. "At first you wished to kill me from motives which you explained, and which I quite understood. It lay in my power next to confer some small benefit upon you, in consequence of which you are here, and not--shall we say?--yonder in the circus. Why you should desire now to kill the only man here who can set you completely free, and beyond these walls, is a thing it would gratify me much to learn. I say nothing of the trifle of ingratitude. Gratitude and ingratitude are of little weight here. There is something far greater in your mind."

She pressed a hand hard against her breasts. "You are Deucalion," she gasped; "I heard you say it."

"I am Deucalion. So far, I have known no reason to feel shame for my name."

"And I come of those," she cried, with a rising voice, "who bite against this city, because they have found their fate too intolerable with the land as it is ordered now. We heard of your coming from Yucatan. It was we who sent the fleet to take you at the entrance to the gulf."

"Your fleet gave us a pretty fight."

"Oh, I know, I know. We had our watchers on a

[p. 114]

the high land who brought us the tidings. We had an omen even before that. Where we lay with our army before the walls here, we saw great birds carrying off the slain to the mountains. But where the fleet failed, I saw a chance where I, a woman, might--"

"Where you might succeed?" I sat me down on a pile of the captain's stuffs. It seemed as if that here at last I should find a solution for many things.

"You carry a name?" I asked.

"They call me Nais."

"Ah!" I said, and signed to her to take the clothes that I had sought out. She was curiously like, so both my eyes and hearing said, to Ylga, the fan-girl of Phorenice, but as she had told me of no parentage I asked for none then. Still her talk alone let me know that she was bred of none of the common people, and I made up my mind towards definite understanding. "Nais," I said, "you wish to kill me. At the same time I make no doubt you wish to live on yourself, if only to get credit from your people for what you have done. So here I will make a contract with you. Prove to me that my death is for Atlantis' good, and I swear by our Lord the Sun to go out with you beyond the walls, where you can stab me and then get you gone. Or else--"

"I will not be your slave."

"I do not ask you for service. Or else, I wished to say, I shall live so long as the High Gods wish, and do my poor best for this country. And for you--I shall set you free to do your best also. So now, I pray you, speak."

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 115]

  

CHAPTER VII

  

THE BITERS OF THE WALLS (FURTHER ACCOUNT)

"YOU will set me free," she said, regarding me from under her brows, "without any further exactions or treaty?"

"I will set you free exactly on those terms," I answered, "unless indeed we here decide that it is better for Atlantis that I should die, in which case the freedom will be of your own taking."

"My lord plays a bold game."

"Tut, tut," I said.

"But I shall not hesitate to take the full of my bond, unless my theories are most clearly disproved to me."

"Tut," I said, "you women, how you play out the time needlessly. Show me sufficient cause, and you shall kill me where and how you please. Come, begin the accusation."

"You are a tyrant."

"At least I have not paraded my tyrannies in Atlantis these twenty years. Why, Nais, I did but land yesterday."

"You will not deny you came back from Yucatan for a purpose?"

"I came back because I was sent for. The Empress gives no reasons for her recalls. She states

[p. 116]

her will; and we who serve her obey without question."

"Pah! I know that old dogma."

"If you discredit my poor honesty at the outset like this, I fear we shall not get far with our unravelling."

"My lord must be indeed simple," said this strange woman, scornfully, "if he is ignorant of what all Atlantis knows."

"Then simple you must write me down. Over yonder in Yucatan we were too well wrapped up in our own parochial needs and policies to have leisure to ponder much over the slim news which drifted out to us from Atlantis--and, in truth, little enough came. By example, Phorenice (whose office be adored) is a great personage here at home; but over there in the colony we barely knew so much as her name. Here, since I have been ashore, I have seen many new wonders; I have been carried by a riding mammoth; I have sat at a banquet; but in what new policies there are afoot, I have yet to be schooled."

"Then, if truly you do not know it, let me repeat to you the common tale. Phorenice has tired of her unmated life--"

"Stay there. I will hear no word against the Empress."

"Pah! my lord, your scruples are most decorous. But I did no more than repeat what the Empress had made public by proclamation. She is minded to take to herself a husband, and nothing short of the best is good enough for Phorenice. One after another has been put up in turn as favorite--and

[p. 117]

been found wanting. Oh, I tell you, we here in Atlantis have watched her courtship with jumping hearts. First it was this one here, then it was that one there; now it was this general just returned from a victory, and a day later he had been packed back to his camp, to give place to some dashing governor who had squeezed increased revenues from his province. But every ship that came from the west said that there was a stronger man than any of these in Yucatan, and at last the Empress changed the wording of her vow. 'I'll have Deucalion for my husband,' said she, 'and then we will see who can stand against my wishes.'"

"The Empress (whose name be adored) can do as she pleases in such matters," I said, guardedly; "but that is beside the argument. I am here to know how it would be better for Atlantis that I should die?"

"You know you are the strongest man in the kingdom."

"It pleases you to say so."

"And Phorenice is the strongest woman?"

"That is beyond doubt."

"Why, then, if the Empress takes you in marriage, we shall be under a double tyranny. And her rule alone is more cruelly heavy than we can bear already."

"I pass no criticism on Phorenice's rule. I have not seen it. But I crave your mercy, Nais, on the new-comer into this kingdom. I am strong, say you, and therefore I am a tyrant, say you. Now to me this sequence is faulty."

"Who should a strong man use strength for, if not

[p. 118]

for himself? And if for himself, why that spells tyranny. You will get all your heart's desires, my lord, and you will forget that many a thousand of the common people will have to pay for them."

"And this is all your accusation?"

"It seems to be black enough. I am one that has a compassion for my fellow-men, my lord, and because of that compassion you see me what I am today. There was a time, not long passed, when I slept as soft and ate as dainty as any in Atlantis."

I smiled. "Your speech told me that much from the first."

"Then I would I had cast the speech off, too, if that is also a livery of the tyrants' class. But I tell you I saw all the oppression myself from the oppressor's side. I was high in Phorenice's favor then."

"That, too, is easy of credence. Ylga is the fan-girl to the Empress now, and second lady in the kingdom, and those who have seen Ylga could make an easy guess at the parentage of Nais."

"We were the daughters of one birth; but I do not count with either Zaemon or Ylga now. Ylga is the creature of Phorenice, and Phorenice would have all the people of Atlantis slaves and in chains, so that she might crush them the easier. And as for Zaemon, he is no friend of Phorenice's; he fights with brain and soul to drag back the old authority to those on the Sacred Mountain; and that, if it come down on us again, would only be the exchange of one form of slavery for another."

"It seems to me you bite at all authority."

[p. 119]

"In fact," she said, simply, "I do. I have seen too much of it."

"And so you think a rule of no-rule would be best for the country?"

You have put it plainly in words for me. That is my creed to-day. That is the creed of all those yonder, who sit in the camp and besiege this city. And we number on our side, now, all in Atlantis save those in the city and a handful on the priests' Mountain."

I shook my head. "A creed of desperation, if you like, Nais, but, believe me, a silly creed. Since man was born out of the quakings and the fevers of this earth, and picked his way among the cooler places, he has been dependent always on his fellowmen. And where two are congregated together, one must be chief, and order how matters are to be governed--at least, I speak of men who have a wish to be higher than the beasts. Have you ever set foot in Europe?"

"No."

"I have. Years back I sailed there, gathering slaves. What did I see? A country without rule or order. Tyrants there were, to be sure, but they were the beasts. The men and the women were the rudest savages, knowing nothing of the arts, dressing in skins and uncleanness, harboring in caves and the tree-tops. The beasts roamed about where they would, and hunted them unchecked."

"Still, they fought you for their liberty?"

"Never once. They knew how disastrous was their masterless freedom. Even to their dull, savage

[p. 120]

brains it was a sure thing that no slavery could be worse; and to that state you and your friends and your theories will reduce Atlantis, if you get the upper hand. But, then, to argue in a circle, you will never get it. For to conquer, you must set up leaders, and once you have set them up, you will never pull them down again."

"Aye," she said, with a sigh, "there is truth in that last."

The torch had filled the captain's room with a resinous smoke, but the flame was growing pale. Dawn was coming in grayly through a slender arrow-slit, and with it ever and again the glow from some mountain out of sight, which was shooting forth spasmodic bursts of fire. With it also were mutterings of distant falling rocks, and sullen tremblings, which had endured all the night through, and I judged that earth was in one of her quaking moods, and would probably during the forthcoming day offer us some chastening discomforts.

On this account, perhaps, my senses were stilled to certain evidences which would otherwise have given me a suspicion; and also, there is no denying that my general wakefulness was sapped by another matter. This woman, Nais, interested me vastly out of the common; the mere presence of her seemed to warm the. organs of my interior; and while she was there, all my thoughts and senses were present in the room of the captain of the gate in which we sat.

But of a sudden the floor of the chamber rocked and fell away beneath me, and in a tumult of dust and litter and bales of the captain's plunder I fell

[p. 121]

down (still seated on the flag-stone) into a pit which had been digged beneath it. With the violence of the descent, and the flutter of all these articles about my head, I was in no condition for immediate action; and while I was still half-stunned by the shock, and long before I could get my eyes into service again, I had been seized and bound and half-strangled with a noose of hide. Voices were raised that I should be despatched at once out of the way; but one in authority cried out that killing me at leisure, and as a prisoner, promised more genteel sport; and so I was thrust down on the floor, while a whole army of men trod in over me to the attack.

What had happened was clear to me now, though I was powerless to do anything in hinderance. The rebels, with more craft than any one had credited to them, had driven a galley from their camp under the ground, intending so to make an entrance into the heart of the city. In their clumsy ignorance, and having no one of sufficient talent in mensuration, they had bungled sadly both in direction and length, and so had ended their burrow under this chamber of the captain of the gate. The great flag-stone in its fall had, it appeared, crushed four of them to death, but these were little noticed or lamented. Life was to them a bauble of the slenderest price, and a horde of others pressed through the opening, lusting for the fight, and reeking nothing of their risks and perils.

Half-choked by the foul air of the galley, and trodden on by this great procession of feet, it was little enough I could do to help my immediate self much less the more distant city. But when the chief

[p. 122]

mass of the attackers had passed through, and there came only here and there one eager to take his share at storming the gate, a couple of fellows plucked me up out of the mud on the floor, and began dragging me down through the stinking darkness of the galley towards the pit that gave it entrance.

Twenty times we were jostled by others hastening to the attack, either from hunger for fight, or from appetite for what they could steal. But we came to the open at last; and half-suffocated though I was, I contrived to do obeisance, and say aloud the prescribed prayer to the most High Gods in gratitude for the fresh air which They had provided.

Our Lord the Sun was on the verge of rising for His day, and all things were plainly shown. Before me were the monstrous walls of the capital, with the heads of its pyramids and higher buildings showing above them. And on the walls the sentries walked calmly their appointed paces, or took shelter against arrows in the casemates provided for them.

The din of fighting within the gate rose high into the air, and the heavy roaring of the cave-tigers told that they too were taking their share of the melee.

But the massive stonework of the walls hid all the actual engagement from our view, and which party was getting the upper hand we could not even guess.

But the sounds told how tight a fight was being hammered out in those narrow boundaries, and my veins tingled to be once more back at the old trade, and to be doing my share.

But there was no chivalry about the fellows who held me by my bonds. They thrust me into a small

[p. 123]

temple near by, which once had been a fane in much favor with travellers, who wished to show gratitude for the safe journey to the capital, but which now was robbed and ruined; and they swung to the stone entrance gate and barred it, leaving me to commune with myself. Presently, they told me, I should be put to death by torments. Well, this seemed to be the new custom of Atlantis, and I should have to endure it as best I could. The High Gods, it appeared, had no further use for my services in Atlantis, and I was not in the mood then to bite very much at their decision. What I had seen of the country since my return had not enamoured me very much with its new conditions.

The little temple in which I was gaoled had been robbed and despoiled of all its furnishments. But the light-slits, where at certain hours of the day the rays of our Lord the Sun had fallen upon the image of the God, before this had been taken away, gave me vantage places from which I could see over the camp of these rebel besiegers, and a dreary prospect it was. The people seemed to have shucked off the culture of centuries in as many months, and to have gone back for the most part to sheer brutishness. The majority harbored on the bare ground. Few owned shelter, and these were merely bowers of mud and branches.

They fought and quarrelled among themselves for food, eating their meat raw, and their grain (when they had it) unground. Many who passed my vision I saw were even gnawing the soft inside of tree bark.

[p. 124]

The dead lay where they fell. The sick and the wounded found no hand to tend them. Great man-eating birds hovered above the camp or skulked about, heavy with gorging, among the hovels, and no one had public spirit enough to give them battle. The stink of the place rose up to heaven as a foul incense inviting a pestilence. There was no order, no trace of strong command anywhere. With three hundred well-disciplined troops it seemed to me that I could have sent those poor desperate hordes flying in panic to the forest.

However, there was no very lengthy space of time granted me for thinking out the policy of this matter to any great depth. The attack on the gate had been delivered with suddenness; the repulse was not slow. Of what desperate fighting took place in the galleries, and in the circus between the two sets of gates, the detail will never be told in full.

At the first alarm the great cave-tigers were set loose, and these raged impartially against keeper and foe. Of those that went in through the tunnel, not one in ten returned, and there were few of these but what carried a bloody wound. Some, with the ruling passion still strong in them, bore back plunder; one trailed along with him the head of the captain of the gate; and among them they dragged out two of the warders who were wounded, and whom revenge had urged them to take as prisoners.

Over these two last a hubbub now arose, that seemed likely to boil over into blows. Every voice shouted out for them what he thought the most repulsive fate. Some were for burning, some for skinning,

[p. 125]

some for impaling, some for other things: my flesh crept as I heard their ravenous yells. Those that had been to the trouble of making them captive were still breathless from the fight, and were readily thrust aside; and it seemed to me that the poor wretches would be hustled into death before any definite fate was agreed upon, which all would pass as sufficiently terrific. Never had I seen such a disorderly tumult, never such a leaderless mob. But, as always has happened, and always will, the stronger men by dint of louder voices and more vigorous shoulders got their plans agreed to at last, and the others perforce had to give way.

A band of them set off running, and presently returned at snail's-pace, dragging with them (with many squeals from ungreased wheels) one of those huge war engines with which besiegers are wont to throw great stones and other missiles into the cities they sit down against. They ran it up just beyond bowshot of the walls, and clamped it firmly down with stakes and ropes to the earth. Then setting their lean arms to the windlasses, they drew back the great tree which formed the spring till its tethering place reached the ground, and in the cradle at its head they placed one of the prisoners, bound helplessly, so that he could not throw himself over the side.

Then the rude, savage, skin-clad mob stood back, and one who had appointed himself engineer knocked back the catch that held the great spring in place.

With a whir and a twang the elastic wood flung upward, and the bound man was shot away from its

[p. 126]

tip with the speed of a lightning flash. He sang through the air, spinning over and over with inconceivable rapidity, and the great crowd of rebels held their breath in silence as they watched. He passed high above the city wall, a tiny mannikin in the distance now, and then the trajectory of his flight began to lower. The spike of a new-built pyramid lay in the path of his terrific flight, and he struck it with a thud whose sound floated out to us afterwards, and then he toppled down out of our sight, leaving a red stain on the whiteness of the stone as he fell.

With a roar the crowd acknowledged the success of their device, and bellowed out insults to Phorenice, and insults to the Gods: a poor frantic crowd they showed themselves. And then with ravening shouts they fell upon the other captive warder, binding him also into a compact, helpless missile, and meanwhile getting the engine into gear again for another shot.

But for my part I saw nothing of this disgusting scene. I heard the bolt grate stealthily against the door of the little temple in which I was imprisoned, and was minded to give these brutish rebels somewhat of a surprise. I had rid myself of my bonds handily enough; I had rubbed my limbs to that perfect suppleness which is always desirable before a fight; and I had planned to rush out as soon as the door was swung, and kill those that came first with fist blows on the brow and chin.

They had not suspected my name, it was clear, for my stature and garb were nothing out of the ordinary; but if my bodily strength and fighting power had been sufficient to raise me to a viceroyalty like

Click to enlarge
"THE BOUND MAN WAS SHOT AWAY"

[p. 127]

that of Yucatan, and let me endure alive in that government throughout twenty hard-battling years, why, it was likely that this rabble of savages would see something that was new and admirable in the practice of arms before the crude weight of their numbers could drag me down. Nay, I did not even despair of winning free altogether. I must find me a weapon from those that came up to battle, with which I could write worthy signatures, and I must attempt no standing fight. Gods! but what a glow the prospect did send through me as I stood there waiting.

A vainer man, writing history, might have said that always, before everything else, he held in mind the greater interests before the less. But for me--I prefer to be honest, and own myself human. In my glee at that forthcoming fight--which promised to be the greatest and most furious I had known in all a long life of battling I will confess that Atlantis and her differing policies were clean forgot. I should go out an unknown man from that little cell of a temple, I should do my work, and then, whether I took freedom with me, or whether I came down at last myself on a pile of slain, these people would guess, without being told the name, that here was Deucalion. Gods! what a fight we would have made!

But the door did not open wide to give me space for my first rush. It creaked gratingly outward on its pivots, and a slim hand and a white arm slipped inside, beckoning me to quietude. Here was some woman. The door creaked wider, and she came inside.

"Nais," I said.

[p. 128]

"Silence, or they will hear you, and remember. At present those who brought you here are killed, and unless by chance some one blunders into this robbed shrine, you will not be found."

"Then if that is so, let me go out and walk among these people as one of themselves."

She shook her head.

"But, Nais, I am not known here. I am merely a man in very plain and mud-stained robe. I should be in no ways remarkable."

A smile twitched her face. "My lord," she said, "wears no beard; and his is the only clean chin in the camp."

I joined in her laugh. "A pest on my want of foppishness then. But I am forgetting somewhat. It comes to my mind that we still have unfinished that small discussion of ours concerning the length of my poor life. Have you decided to cut it off from risk of further mischief, or do you propose to give me further span?"

She turned to me with a look of sharp distress. "My lord," she said, "I would have you forget that silly talk of mine. This last two hours I thought you were dead in real truth."

"And you were not relieved?"

"I felt that the only man was gone out of the world--I mean, my lord, the only man who can save Atlantis."

"Your words give me a confidence. Then you would have me go back and become husband to Phorenice?"

"If there is no other way."

[p. 129]

"I warn you I shall do that, if she still so desires it, and if it seems to me that that course will be best. This is no hour for private likings or dislikings."

"I know it," she said, "I feel it. I have no heart now save only for Atlantis. I have schooled myself once more to that."

And at present I am in this lone little box of a temple. A minute ago, before you came, I had promised myself a pretty enough fight to signalize my changing of abode."

"There must be nothing of that. I will not have these poor people slaughtered unnecessarily. Nor do I wish to see my lord exposed to a hopeless risk. This poor place, such as it is, has been given to me as an abode, and if my lord can remain decorously till nightfall in a maiden's chamber, he may at least be sure of quietude. I am a person," she added, simply, "that in this camp has some respect. When darkness comes, I will take my lord down to the sea and a boat, and so he may come with ease to the harbor and the water-gate."

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 130]

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

THE PREACHER FROM THE MOUNTAINS

IT was long enough since I had found leisure for a parcel of sleep, and so during the larger part of that day I am free to confess that I slumbered soundly, Nais watching me. Night fell, and still we remained within the privacy of the temple. It was our plan that I should stay there till the camp slept, and so I should have more chance of reaching the sea-beach without disturbance.

The night came down wet, with a drizzle of rain, and through the slits in the temple walls we could see the many fires in the camp well cared for, and men and women in skins and rags toasting before them, with steam rising as the heat fought with their wetness. Folk seated in discomfort like this are proverbially alert and cruel in the temper, and Nais frowned as she looked on the inclemency of the weather.

"A fine night," she said, "and I would have sent my lord back to the city without a soul here being the wiser; but in this chill, people sleep sourly. We must wait till the hour drugs them sounder."

And so we waited, sitting there together on that pavement so long unkissed by worshippers, and it

[p. 131]

was little enough we said aloud. But there can be good companionship without sentences of talk.

But as the hours drew on the night began to grow less quiet. From the distance some one began to blow on a horn or a shell, sending forth a harsh raucous note incessantly. The sound came nearer, as we could tell from its growing loudness, and the voices of those by the fires made themselves heard, railing at the blower for his disturbance. And presently it became stationary, and standing up we could see through the slits in the walls the people of the camp rousing up from their uneasy rest, and clustering together round one who stood and talked to them from the pedestal of a war engine.

What he was declaiming upon we could not hear, and our curiosity on the matter was not keen. Given that all who did not sleep went to weary themselves with this fellow, as Nais whispered, it would be simple for me to make an exit in the opposite direction.

But here we were reckoning without the inevitable busybody. A dozen pairs of feet splashing through the wet came up to the side of the little temple, and cried loudly that Nais should join the audience. She had eloquence of tongue, it appeared, and they feared lest this speaker who had taken his stand on the war engine should make schisms among their ranks unless some skilled person stood up also to refute his arguments.

Here, then, it seemed to me that I must be elbowed into my skirmish by the most unexpected of chances, but Nais was firmly minded that there should be no

[p. 132]

fight, if courage on her part could turn it. "Come out with me," she whispered, "and keep distant from the light of the fires."

"But how explain my being here?"

"There is no reason to explain anything," she said, bitterly. "They will take you for my lover. There is nothing remarkable in that: it is the mode here. But oh! why did not the Gods make you wear a beard, and curl it, even as other men? Then you could have been gone and safe these two hours."

"A smooth chin pleases me better."

"So it does me," I heard her murmur as she leaned her weight on the stone which hung in the doorway, and pushed it ajar; "your chin."

The ragged men outside--there were women with them also--did not wait to watch me very closely. A coarse jest or two flew (which I could have found good heart to have repaid with a sword-thrust) and they stepped off into the darkness, just turning from time to time to make sure we followed. On all sides others were pressing in the same direction--black shadows against. the night; the rain spat noisily on the camp-fires as we passed them; and from behind us came up others. There were no sleepers in the camp now; all were pressing on to hear this preacher who stood on the pedestal of the war engine; and if we had tried to swerve from the straight course, we should have been marked at once.

So we held on through the darkness, and presently came within earshot.

Still it was little enough of the preacher's words we could make out at first. "Who are your chiefs?"

[p. 133]

came the question at the end of a fervid harangue, and immediately all further rational talk was drowned in uproar. "We have no chiefs," the people shouted; "we are done with chiefs; we are all equal here. Take away your silly magic. You may kill us with magic if you choose, but rule us you shall not. Nor shall the other priests rule. Nor Phorenice. Nor anybody. We are done with rulers."

The press had brought us closer and closer to the man who stood on the war engine. We saw him to be old, with white hair that tumbled on his shoulders, and a long white beard, untrimmed and uncurled. Save for a wisp of rag about the loins, his body was unclothed, and glistened in the wet.

But in his hand he held that which marked his caste. With it he pointed his sentences, and at times he whirled it about, bathing his wet, naked body in a halo of light. It was a wand whose tip burned with an unconsuming fire, which glowed and twinkled and blazed like some star lent down by the Gods from their own place in the high heaven. It was the Symbol of our Lord the Sun, a credential no one could forge, and one on which no civilized man would cast a doubt.

Indeed, the ragged frantic crew did not question for one moment that he was a member of the Clan of Priests, the Clan which from time out of numbering has given rulers for the land, and even in their loudest clamors they freely acknowledged his powers. "You may kill us with your magic, if you choose," they screamed at him. But stubbornly they refused to come back to their old allegiance. "We have suffered

[p. 134]

too many things these later years," they cried. "We are done with rulers now for always."

But for myself I saw the old man with a different emotion. Here was Zaemon that was father to Nais, Zaemon that had seen me yesterday seated on the divan at Phorenice's elbow, and who to-day could denounce me as Deucalion if so he chose. These rebels had expended a navy in their wish to kill me four days earlier, and if they knew of my nearness, even though Nais were my advocate, her cold reasoning would have little chance of an audience now. The High Gods who keep the tether of our lives hide Their secrets well, but I did not think it impious to be sure that mine was very near the cutting then.

The beautiful woman saw this too. She even went so far as to twine her fingers in mine and press them as a farewell, and I pressed hers in return, for I was sorry enough not to see her more. Still, I could not help letting my thoughts travel with a grim gloating over the fine mound of dead I should build before these ragged, unskilled rebels pulled me down. And it was inevitable this should be so. For of all the emotions that can ferment in the human heart, the joy of strife is keenest, and none but an old fighter, face to face with what must necessarily be his final battle, can tell how deep this lust is embroidered into the very foundations of his being.

But for the time Zaemon did not see me, being too much wrapped in his outcry, and so I was free to listen to the burning words which he spread around him, and to determine their effect on the hearers.

The theme he preached was no new one. He told

[p. 135]

that ever since the beginning of history, the Gods had set apart one Clan of the people to rule over the rest and be their priests, and until the coming of Phorenice these had done their duties with exactitude and justice. They had fought invaders, carried war against the beasts, and studied earth-movements so that they were able to foretell earthquakes and eruptions, and could spread warnings that the people might be able to escape their devastations. They are no self-seekers; their aim was always to further the interest of Atlantis, and so do honor to the kingdom on which the High Gods had set their special favor. Under the Priestly Clan Atlantis had reached the pinnacle of human prosperity and happiness.

"But," cried the old man, waving the Symbol till his wet body glistened in a halo of light, "the people grew fat and careless with their easy life. They began to have a conceit that their good fortune was earned by their own puny brains and thews, and was no gift from the Gods above; and presently the cult of these Gods became neglected, and Their temples were barren of gifts and worshippers. Followed a punishment. The Gods in Their inscrutable way decreed that a wife of one of the priests (that was a governor of no inconsiderable province) should see a woman child by the way-side, and take it for adoption. That child the Gods in their infinite wisdom fashioned into a scourge for Atlantis, and you who have felt the weight of Phorenice's hand, know with what completeness the High Gods can fashion their instruments.

"Yet, even as They set up, so can they throw

[p. 136]

down, and those that shall debase Phorenice are even now appointed. The old rule is to be re-established; but not till you who have sinned are sufficiently chastened to cry to it for relief." He waved the mysterious glowing Symbol before him. "See," he cried, in his high, old, quavering voice, "you know the unspeakable Power of which that is the sign, and for which I am the mouthpiece. It is for you to make decision now. Are the Gods to throw down this woman who has scorned Them and so cruelly trodden on you? Or are you to be still further purged of your pride before you are ripe for deliverance?"

The old priest broke off with a gesture, and his ragged white beard sank on to his chest. Promptly a young man, skin clad and carrying his weapon, elbowed up through the press of listeners, and jumped on to the platform beside him. "Hear me, brethren!" he bellowed, in his strong young voice. "We are done with tyrants. Death may come, and we all of us here have shown how little we fear it. But own rulers again we will not, and that is our final say. My lord," he said, turning to the old man with a brave face, "I know it is in your power to kill me by magic if you choose, but I have said my say, and can stand the cost if needs be."

"I can kill you, but I will not," said Zaemon. "You have said your silliness. Now go you to the ground again."

"We have free speech here. I will not go till I choose."

"Aye, but you will," said the old man, and turned

[p. 137]

on him with a sudden tightening of the brows. There was no blow passed; even the Symbol, which glowed like a star against the night, was not so much as lifted in warning; but the young man tried to retort, and, finding himself smitten with a sudden dumbness, turned with a spasm of fear, and jumped back whence he had come. The crowd of them thrilled expectantly, and when no further portent was given, they began to shout that a miracle should be shown them, and then perchance they would be persuaded back to the old allegiance.

The old man stooped and glowered at them in fury. "You dogs!" he cried, "you empty-witted dogs! do you ask that I should degrade the powers of the Higher Mysteries by dancing them out before you as though they were a mummers' show? Do you tickle yourselves that you are to be tempted back to your allegiance? It is for you to woo the Gods who are so offended. Come in humility, and I take it upon myself to declare that you will receive fitting pardon and relief. Remain stubborn, and the scourge, Phorenice, may torment you into annihilation before she in turn is made to answer for the evil she has put upon the land. There is the choice for you to pick at."

The turmoil of voices rose again into the wetness of the night, and weapons were upraised menacingly. It was clear that the party for independence had by far the greater weight, both in numbers and lustiness; and those who might, from sheer weariness of strife, have been willing for surrender, withheld their word through terror of the consequence. It was a fine

[p. 138]

comment on the freedom of speech, about which these unruly fools had made their boast, and, with a sly malice, I could not help whispering a word on this to Nais as she stood at my elbow. But Nais clutched at my hand, and implored me for caution. "Oh, be silent, my lord," she whispered back, "or they will tear you in pieces. They are on fire for mischief now."

"Yet a few hours back you were for killing me yourself," I could not help reminding her.

She turned on me with a hot look. "A woman can change her mind, my lord. But it becomes you little to remind her of her fickleness."

A man in the press beside me wrenched round with an effort, and stared at me searchingly through the darkness. "Oh!" he said, "a shaved chin. Who are you, friend, that you should cut a beard instead of curling it? I can see no wound on your face."

I answered him civilly enough that, with "freedom" for a watchword, the fashion of my chin was a matter of mere private concern. But as that did not satisfy him, and as he seemed to be one of those quarrelsome fellows that are the bane of every community, I took him suddenly by the throat and the shoulder, and bent his neck with the old, quick turn, till I heard it crack, and had unhanded him before any of his neighbors had seen what had befallen. The fierce press of the crowd held him from slipping to the ground, and so he stood on there where he was, with his head nodded forward, as though he had fallen asleep through heaviness, or had fainted

[p. 139]

through the crushing of his fellows. I had no desire to begin that last fight of mine in a place like this, where there was no room to swing a weapon nor chance to clear a battle ring.

But all this time the lean preacher from the mountains was sending forth his angry anathemas, and still holding the strained attention of the people. And next he set forth before them the cult of the Gods in the ancient form as is prescribed, and they (with old habit coming back to them) made response in the words and in the places where the old ritual enjoins. It was a weird enough sight, that time- honored service of adoration, forced upon these wild people after so long a period of irreligion.

They warmed to the old words as the high shrill voice of the priest cried them forth, and as they listened, and as they realized how intimate was the care of the Gods for the travails and sorrows of their daily lives, so much warmer grew their responses.

". . . . Who stilled the burning of the mountains, and made cool places on the earth for us to live!--PRAISE TO THE MOST HIGH GODS.

"Who took away the poisonous vapors, and gave us sweet air that we might breathe!--PRAISE TO THE MOST HIGH GODS.

"Who gave us mastery over the lesser beasts and us sweet air that we might breathe!--PRAISE TO THE MOST HIGH GODS. . . ."

It thrilled one to hear their earnestness; it sorrowed one to know that they would yet be obdurate and not return to their old allegiance. For this is the way with these common people; they will work up

[p. 140]

an enthusiasm one minute, and an hour later it will have fled away and left them cold and empty.

But Zaemon made no further calls upon their loyalty. He finished the prescribed form of sentences, and stepped down from off the platform of the war engine with the Symbol of our Lord the Sun thrust out resolutely before him. To all ordinary seeming the crowd had been Tacked so that no further compression was possible, but before the advance of the Symbol the people crushed back, leaving a wide lane for his passage.

And here came the turning point of my life. At first, like, I take it, every one else in that crowd, I imagined that the old man, having finished his mission, was making a way to return to the place from which he had come. But he held steadily to one direction, and as that was towards myself, it naturally came to my mind that, having dealt with greater things, he would now settle with the less; or, in plainer words, that having put his policy before the swarming people, he would now smite down the man he had seen but yesterday seated as Phorenice's minister. Well, I should lose that final fight I had promised myself, and that mound of slain for my funeral bed. It was clear that Zaemon was the mouth-piece of the Priests' Clan, duly appointed; and I also was a priest. If the word had been given on the Sacred Mountain to those who sat before the Ark of the Mysteries that Atlantis would prosper more with Deucalion sent to the Gods, I was ready to bow to the sentence with submissiveness. That I had regret for this mode of cutting off, I will not deny. No man

[p. 141]

who has practised the game of arms could abandon the promise of such a gorgeous final battle without a qualm of longing.

But I had been trained enough to show none of these emotions on my face, and when the old man came up to me, I stood my ground and gave him the salutation prescribed between our ranks, which he returned to me with circumstance and accuracy. The crowd fell back, being driven away by the ineffable force of the Symbol, leaving us alone in the middle of a ring. Even Nais, though she was a priest's daughter, was ignorant of the Mysteries, and could not withstand its force. And so we two men stood there alone together, with the glow of the Symbol bathing us and lighting up the sea of ravenous faces that watched.

The people were quick to put their natural explanation on the scene. "A spy!" they began to roar out. "A spy! Zaemon salutes him as a priest!"

Zaemon faced round on them with a queer look on his grim old face. "Aye," he said, "this is a priest. If I give you his name, you might have further interest. This is the Lord Deucalion."

The word was picked up and yelled among them with a thousand emotions. But at least they were loyal to their policy; they had decided that Deucalion was their enemy; they had already expended a navy for his destruction; and now that he was ringed in by their masses, they lusted to tear him into rags with their fingers. But rave and rave though they might against me, the glare from the Symbol drove them shuddering back as though it had been a lava-stream;

[p. 142]

and Zaemon was not the man to hand me over to their fury until he had delivered formal sentence as the emissary of our Clan on the Sacred Mount. So the end was not to be yet.

The old man faced me and spoke in the sacred tongue, which the common people do not know. "My brother," he said, "which have you come to serve--Deucalion or Atlantis?"

"Words are a poor thing to answer a question like that. You will know all of my record. According to the Law of the Priests, each ship from Yucatan will have carried home its sworn report to lay at the feet of their council, and before I went to that viceroyalty, what I did was written plain here on the face of Atlantis."

"We know your doings in the past, brother, and they have found approval. You have governed well, and you have lived austerely. You set up Atlantis for a mistress, and served her well; but then, you have had no Phorenice to tempt you into change and fickleness."

"You can send me where I shall see her no more, if you think me frail."

"Yes, and lose your usefulness. No, brother, you are the last hope which this poor land has remaining. All other human means that have been tried against Phorenice have failed. You have returned from over seas for the final duel. You are the strongest man we have, and you are our final champion. If you fail, then only those terrible Powers which are locked within the Ark of the Mysteries remain to us, and though it is not lawful to speak even in this

[p. 143]

hidden tongue of their scope, you at least have full assurance of their potency."

I shrugged my shoulders. " It seems that you would save time and pains if you threw me to these wolves of rebels, and let them end me here and now."

The old man frowned on me angrily. "I am bidding you do your duty. What reason have you for wishing to evade it?"

"I have in my memory the words you spoke in the pyramid, when you came in among the banqueters. 'Phorenice,' was your cry, 'while you are yet Empress, you shall see this royal pyramid, which you have polluted with your debaucheries, torn tier from tier, and stone from stone, and scattered as feathers before a wind.' It seems that you foresee my defeat."

The old man shuddered. "I cannot tell what she may force us to do. I spoke then only what it was revealed to me must happen. Perhaps when matters have reached that pass she will repent and submit. But in the meanwhile, before we use the more desperate weapons of the Gods, it is fitting that we should expend all human power remaining to us. And so you must go, my brother, and play your part to the utmost."

"It is an order. So I obey."

"You shall be at Phorenice's side again by the next dawn. She has sent for you from Yucatan as a husband, and as one who (so she thinks, poor human conqueror) has the weight of arm necessary to prolong her tyrannies. You are a priest, brother, and you are a man of convincing tongue. It will

[p. 144]

be your part to make her stubborn mind see the invincible power that can be loosed against her, to point out to her the utter hopelessness of prevailing against it."

"If it is ordered, I will do these things. But there is little enough chance of success. I have seen Phorenice, and can gauge her will. There will be no turning her once she has made a decision. Others have tried; you have tried yourself; all have failed."

"Words that were wasted on a maiden may go home to a wife. You have been brought here to be her husband. Well, take your place."

The order came to me with a pang. I had given little enough heed to women through all of a busy life, though when I landed, the taking of Phorenice to wife would not have been very repugnant to me if policy had demanded it. But the matters of the last two days had put things in a different shape. I had seen two other women who had strangely attracted me, and one of these had stirred within me a tumult such as I had never felt before among my economies.

To lead Phorenice in marriage would mean a severance from this other woman eternally, and I ached as I thought of it. But though these thoughts floated through my system and gave me harsh wrenches of pain, I did not thrust my puny likings before the command of the council of the priests. I bowed before Zaemon, and put his hand to my forehead. "It is an order," I said. "If our Lord the Sun gives me life, I will obey."

"Then let us begone from this place," said Zaemon,

[p. 145]

and took me by the arm and waved a way for us with the Symbol. No further word did I have with Nais, fearing to embroil her with these rebels who clustered round, but I caught one hot glance from her eyes, and that had to suffice for farewell. The dense ranks of the crowd opened, and we walked away between them scathless. Fiercely though they lusted for my life, brimming with hate though they made their cries, no man dared to rush in and raise a hand against me. Neither did they follow. When we reached the outskirts of the crowd, and the ranks thinned, they had a mind, many of them, to surge along in our wake; but Zaemon whirled the Symbol back before their faces with a blaze of lurid light, and they fell to their knees grovelling, and pressed on us no more.

The rain still fell, and in the light of the camp fires as we passed them the wet gleamed on the old man's wasted body. And far before us through the darkness loomed the vast bulk of the Sacred Mountain, with the ring of eternal fires encincturing its crest. I sighed as I thought of the old peaceful days I had spent in its temples and groves.

But there was to be no more of that studious leisure now. There was work to be done, work for Atlantis which did not brook delay. And so when we had progressed far out into the waste, and there was none near to view (save only the most High Gods), we found the place where the passage was, whose entrance is known only to the Seven among the priests; and there we parted, Zaemon to his hermitage in the dangerous lands, and I by this secret way back into the capital.

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 146]

  

CHAPTER IX

  

PHORENICE, GODDESS

NOW the passage, though its entrance had been cunningly hidden by man's artifice, was one of those veins in which the fiery blood of our mother, the Earth, had aforetime coursed. Long years had passed since it carried lava streams, but the air in it was still warm and sulphurous, and there was no inducement to linger in transit. I lit me a lamp which I found in an appointed niche, and walked briskly along my ways, coughing, and wishing heartily I had some of those simples which ease a throat that has a tendency to catarrh. But, alas! all that packet of drugs which were my sole spoil from the viceroyalty of Yucatan were lost in the sea-fight with Dason's navy, and since landing in Atlantis there had been little enough time to think of the refinements of medicine.

The network of earth-veins branched prodigiously, and if any but one of us Seven Priests had found a way into its recesses by chance, he would have perished hopelessly in the windings, or have fallen into one of those pits which lead to the boil below. But I carried the chart of the true course clearly in my head, remembering it from that old initiation of twenty years back, when, as an appointed viceroy,

[p. 147]

[paragraph continues] I was raised to the highest degree but one known to our Clan, and was given its secrets and working implements.

The way was long, the floor was monstrous uneven, and the air, as I have said, bad; and I knew that day would be far advanced before the signs told me that I had passed beneath the walls, and was well within the precincts of the city. And here the vow of the Seven hampered my progress; for it is ordained that under no circumstances, whatever the stress, shall egress be made from this passage before mortal eye. One branch after another did I try, but always found loiterers near the exits. I had hoped to make my emergence by that path which came up inside the royal pyramid. But there was no chance of coming up unobserved here; the place was humming like a hive. And so, too, with each of the five next outlets that I visited. The city was agog with some strange excitement.

But I came at last to a temple of one of the lesser Gods, and stood behind the image for a while making observation. The place was empty; nay, from the dust which robed all the floors and the seats of the worshippers, it had been empty long enough; so I moved all that was needful, stepped out, and closed all entry behind me. A broom lay unnoticed on one of the pews, and with this I soon disguised all route of footmark, and took my way to the temple door. It was shut, and priest though I was, the secret of its opening was beyond me.

Here was a pretty pass. No one but the attendant priests of the temple could move the mechanism

[p. 148]

which closed and opened the massive stone which filled the doorway; and if all had gone out to attend. this spectacle, whatever it might be, that was stirring the city, why there I should be no nearer enlargement than before.

There was no sound of life within the temple precincts; there were evidences of decay and disuse spread broadcast on every hand; but according to the ancient law there should be eternally one at least on watch in the priests' dwellings; so down the passages which led to them I made my way. It would have surprised me little to have found even these deserted. That the old order was changed I knew, but I was only then beginning to realize the ruthlessness with which it had been swept away, and how much it had given place to the new.

However, there can be some faithful men remaining even in an age of general apostasy; and on making my way to the door of the dwelling (which lay in the roof of the temple) I gave the call, and presently it was opened to me. The man who stood before me, peering dully through the gloom, had at least remained constant to his vows, and I made the salutation before him with a feeling of respect.

His name was Ro, and I remembered him well. We had passed through the sacred college together, and always he had been known as the dullard. He had capacity for learning little of the cult of the Gods, less of the arts of ruling, less still of the handling of arms; and he had been appointed to some lowly office in this obscure temple, and had risen to being its second priest and one of its two custodians merely

[p. 149]

through the desertion of all his colleagues. But it was not pleasant to think that a fool should remain true where cleverer men abandoned the old beliefs.

Ro did before me the greater obeisance. He wore his beard curled in the prevailing fashion, but it was badly done. His clothing was ill-fitting and un-brushed. He always had been a slovenly fellow. "The temple door is shut," he said, "and I only have the secret of its opening. My lord comes here, therefore, by the secret way, and as one of the Seven. I am my lord's servant."

"Then I ask this small service of you. Tell me, what stirs the city?"

"That impious Phorenice has declared herself Goddess, and declares that she will light the sacrifice with her own divine fire. She will do it, too. She does everything. But I wish the flames may burn her when she calls them down. This new Empress is the bane of our Clan, Deucalion, these latter days. The people neglect us; they bring no offerings; and now, since these rebels have been hammering at the walls, I might have gone hungry if I had not some small store of my own. Oh, I tell you, the cult of the true Gods is wellnigh oozed quite out of the land."

"My brother, it comes to my mind that the priests of our Clan have been limp in their service to let these things come to pass."

"I suppose we have done our best. At least, we did as we were taught. But if the people will not come to hear your exhortations, and neglect to adore the God, what hold have you over their religion?

[p. 150]

[paragraph continues] But I tell you, Deucalion, that the High Gods try our own faith hard. Come into the dwelling here. Look there on my bed."

I saw the shape of a man, untidily swathed in reddened bandages.

"This is all that is left of the poor priest that was my immediate superior in this cure. It was his turn yesterday to celebrate the weekly sacrifice to our Lord the Sun within the circle of His great stones. Faugh! Deucalion, you should have seen how he was mangled when they brought him back to me here."

"Did the people rise on him? Has it come to that?"

"The people stayed passive," said Ro, bitterly, "what few of them had interest to attend; but our Lord the Sun saw fit to try His minister somewhat harshly. The wood was laid; the sacrifice was disposed upon it according to the prescribed rites; the procession had been formed round the altar, and the drums and the trumpets were speaking forth, to let all men know that presently the smoke of their prayer would be wafted up towards Those that sit in the great places in the heavens. But then, above the noise of the ceremonial, there came the rushing sound of wings, and from out of the sky there flew one of those great featherless man-eating birds, of a bigness such as seldom before has been seen."

"An arrow-shot in the eye or a long-shafted spear receives them best."

"Oh, all men know what they were taught as children, Deucalion; but these priests were unarmed,

[p. 151]

according to the rubric, which ordains that they shall intrust themselves completely to the guardianship of the High Gods during the hours of sacrifice. The great bird swooped down, settling on the wood pyre, and attacked the sacrifice with beak and talon. My poor superior here, still strong in his faith, called loudly on our Lord the Sun to lend power to his arm, and sprang up on the altar with naught but his teeth and his bare hands for weapons. It may be that he expected a miracle--he has not spoken since, poor soul, in explanation--but all he met with were blows from leathery wings, and rakings from talons which went near to disembowelling him. The bird brushed him away as easily as we could sweep aside a fly, and there he lay bleeding on the pavement beside the altar, while the sacrifice was torn and eaten in the presence of all the people. And then when the bird was glutted, it flew away again to the mountains."

"And the people gave no help?"

"They cried out that the thing was a portent, that our Lord the Sun was a God no longer if He had not power or thought to guard His own sacrifice; and some cried that there was no God remaining now, and others would have it that there was a new God come to weigh on the country, which had chosen to take the form of a common man-eating bird. But a few began to shout that Phorenice stood for all the Gods now in Atlantis, and that cry was taken up till the stones of the great circle rang with it. Some may have made proclamation because they were convinced; many because the cry was new, and pleased them; but I am sure there were not a few who joined

[p. 152]

in because it was dangerous to leave such an outburst unwelcomed. The Empress can be hard enough to those who neglect to give her adulation."

"The Empress is Empress," I said, formally, "and her name carries respect. It is not for us to question her doings."

"I am a priest," said Ro, "and I speak as I have been taught, and defend the Faith as I have been commanded. Whether there is a Faith any longer, I am beginning to doubt. But, anyway, it yields a poor enough livelihood nowadays. There have been no offerings at this temple this five months past, and if I had not a few jars of corn put by, I might have starved for anything the pious of this city cared. And I do not think that the affair of that sacrifice is likely to put new enthusiasm into our cold votaries."

"When did it happen?"

"Twenty hours ago. To-day Phorenice conducts the sacrifice herself. That has caused the stir you spoke about. The city is in the throes of getting ready one of her pageants."

"Then I must ask you to open the temple doors and give me passage. I must go and see this thing for myself."

"It is not for me to offer advice to one of the Seven," said Ro, doubtfully.

"It is not."

"But they say that the Empress is not overpleased at your absence," he mumbled. "I should not like harm to come in your way, Deucalion," he said, aloud.

[p. 153]

"The future is in the hands of the most High Gods, Ro, and I at least believe that They will deal out our fates to each of us as They in their infinite wisdom see best, though you seem to have lost your faith. And now I must be your debtor for a passage out through the doors. Plagues! man, it is no use your holding out your hand to me. I do not own a coin in all the world."

He mumbled something about "force of habit," as he led the way down towards the door, and I responded tartly enough about the unpleasantness of his begging customs. "If it were not for your sort and your customs, the Priests' Clan would not be facing this crisis to-day."

"One must live," he grumbled, as he pressed his levers, and the massive stone in the doorway swung ajar.

"If you had been a more capable man, I might have seen the necessity," said I, and passed into the open and left him. I could never bring myself to like Ro.

A motley crowd filled the street which ran past the front of this obscure temple, and all were hurrying one way. With what I had been told, it did not take much art to guess that the great stone circle of our Lord the Sun was their mark, and it grieved me to think of how many venerable centuries that great fane had upreared before the weather and the earth tremors, without such profanation as it would witness to-day. And also the thought occurred to me, "Was our Great Lord above drawing this woman on to her destruction? Would He take some vast and final act

[p. 154]

of vengeance when she consummated her final sacrilege?"

But the crowd pressed on, thrilled and excited, and thinking little (as is a crowd's wont) on the deeper matters which lay beneath the bare spectacle. From one quarter of the city walls the din of an attack from the besiegers made itself clearly heard from over the houses, and the temples and the palaces intervening, but no one heeded it. They had grown callous, these townsfolk, to the battering of rams, and the flight of fire-darts, and the other emotions of a bombardment. Their nerves, their hunger, their desperation were strung to such a pitch that little short of an actual storm could stir them into new excitement over the siege.

All were weaponed. The naked carried arms in the hope of meeting some one whom they could overcome and rob; those that had a possession walked ready to do a battle for its ownership. There was no security, no trust; the lesson of civilization had dropped away from these common people as mud is washed from the feet by rain, and in their new habits and their thoughts they had gone back to the grade from which savages like those of Europe have never yet emerged. It was a grim commentary on the success of Phorenice's rule.

The crowd merged me into their ranks without question, and with them I pressed forward down the winding streets, once so clean and trim, now so foul and mud-strewn. Men and women had died of hunger in these streets these latter years, and rotted where they lay, and we trod their bones underfoot

[p. 155]

as we walked. Yet rising out of this squalor and this misery were great pyramids and palaces, the like of which for splendor and magnificence had never been seen before. It was a jarring admixture.

In time we came to the open space in the centre of the city, which even Phorenice had not dared to encroach upon with her ambitious building schemes, and stood on the secular ground which surrounds the most ancient, the most grand, and the barest of all this world's temples

Since the beginning of time, when man first emerged among the beasts, our Lord the Sun has always been his chiefest God, and legend says that He raised this circle of stones Himself to be a place where votaries should offer Him worship. It is the fashion among us moderns not to take these old tales in a too literal sense; but for myself, this one satisfies me. By our wits we can lift blocks weighing six hundred men, and set them a the capstones of our pyramids. But to uprear the stones of that great circle would be beyond all our art, and much more would it be impossible to-day to transport them from their distant quarries across the rugged mountains.

There were nine-and-forty of the stones, alternating with spaces, and set in an accurate circle, and across the tops of them other stones were set, equally huge. The stones were undressed and rugged; but the huge massiveness of them impressed the eye more than all the temples and daintily tooled pyramids of our wondrous city. And in the centre of the circle was that still greater stone which formed the altar, and round which was carved, in the rude chiselling

[p. 156]

of the ancients, the snake and the outstretched hand.

The crowd which bore me on came to a stand-still before the circle of stones. To trespass beyond this is death for the common people; and for myself, although I had the right of entrance, I chose to stay where I was for the present, unnoticed among the mob, and wait upon events.

For long enough we stood there, our Lord the Sun burning high and fiercely from the clear blue sky above our heads. The din of the rebels' attack upon the walls came to us clearly, even above the gabble of the multitude; but no one gave attention to it. Excitement about what was to befall in the circle mastered every other emotion.

I learned afterwards that so pressing was the rebels' attack, and so destructive the battering of their new war engines, that Phorenice had gone off to the wall s first to lend awhile her brilliant skill for its repulse, and to put heart into the defenders. But as it was, the day had burned out to its middle and scorched us intolerably, because the noise of the drums and horns gave advertisement that the pageant had formed in procession; and of those who waited in the crowd, many had fainted with exhaustion and the heat, and not a few had died. But life was cheap in the city of Atlantis now, and no one heeded the fallen.

Nearer and nearer drew the drums and the braying of the other music, and presently the head of a glittering procession began to arrive and dispose itself in the space which had been set apart. Many a thousand poor starving wretches sighed when they

[p. 157]

saw the wanton splendor of it. But these lords and these courtiers of this new Atlantis had no concern beyond their own bellies and their own backs, except for their one alien regard--their simpering affection for Phorenice.

I think, though, their loyalty for the Empress was real enough; and it was not to be wondered at, since everything they had came from her lavish hands. Indeed, the woman had a charm that cannot be denied; for when she appeared, riding in the golden castle (where I also had ridden) on the back of her monstrous shaggy mammoth, the starved, sullen faces of the crowd brightened as though a meal and sudden prosperity had been bestowed upon them; and without a word of command, without a trace of compulsion, they burst into spontaneous shouts of welcome.

She acknowledged it with a smile of thanks. Her cheeks were a little flushed, her movements quick, her manner high-strung, as all well might be, seeing the horrible sacrilege she had in mind. But she was undeniably lovely; yes, more adorably beautiful than ever with her present thrill of excitement; and when the stair was brought, and she walked down from the mammoth's back to the ground, those near fell to their knees and gave her worship, out of sheer fascination for her beauty and charm.

Ylga, the fan-girl, alone of all that vast multitude round the Sun temple, contained herself within her formal paces and duties. She looked pained and troubled. It was plain to see, even from the distance where I stood, that she carried a heavy heart under the jewels of her robe. It was fitting, too, that this

[p. 158]

should be so. Though she had been long enough divorced from his care and fostered by the Empress, Ylga was a daughter of Zaemon, and he was the chiefest of our Lord the Sun's ministers here on earth. She could not forget her upbringing now at this supreme moment when the highest of the old Gods was to be formally defied. And perhaps also (having a kindness for Phorenice) she was not a little dreadful of the consequences.

But the Empress had no eye for one sad look among all the sea of glowing faces. Boldly and proudly she strode out into the circle, as though she had been the duly appointed priest for the sacrifice. And after her came a knot of men, dressed as priests, and bearing the victim. Some of these were creatures of her own, and it was easy to forgive mere ignorant laymen, won over by the glamour of Phorenice's presence. But some, to their shame, were men born in the Priests' Clan, and brought up in the groves and colleges of the Sacred Mountain, and for their apostasy there could be no palliation.

The wood had already been stacked on the altar-stone in the due form required by the ancient symbolism, and the Empress stood aside while those who followed did what was needful. As they opened out, I saw that the victim was one of the small, cloven-hoofed horses that roam the plains--a most acceptable sacrifice. They bound its feet with metal gyves, and put it on the pyre, where, for a while, it lay neighing. Then they stepped aside, and left it living. Here was an innovation.

The false priests went back to the farther side of

[p. 159]

the circle, and Phorenice stood alone before the altar. She lifted up her voice, sweet, tuneful, and carrying, and though the din of the siege still came from over the city, no ear there lost a word of what was spoken.

She raised her glance aloft, and all other eyes followed it. The heaven was clear as the deep sea, a gorgeous blue. But as the words came from her, so a small mist was born in the sky, wheeling and circling like a ball, although the day was windless, and rapidly growing darker and more compact. So dense had it become that presently it threw a shadow on part of the sacred circle that soothed it into twilight, though all without, where the people stood, was still garish day. And in the ball of mist were little quick stabs and splashes of noiseless flame.

She spoke not in the priests' sacred tongue--though such was her wicked cleverness that she may very well have learned it--but in the common speech of the people, so that all who heard might understand; and she told of her wondrous birth (as she chose to name it), and of the direct aid of the most High Gods, which had enabled her to work so many marvels. And in the end she lifted both of her fair white arms towards the blackness above, and with her lovely face set with the strain of will, uttered her final cry:

"O my high Father, the Sun, I pray You now to acknowledge me as Your very daughter. Give this people a sign that I am indeed a child of the Gods and no frail mortal. Here is sacrifice unlit, where mortal priests with their puny fires had weekly, since the foundation of this land, sent savory smoke towards

[p. 160]

the sky. I pray You send down the heavenly fire to burn this beast here offered, in token that though You still rule on high, You have given me Atlantis to be my kingdom, and the people of the Earth to be my worshippers."

She broke off and strained towards the sky. Her face was contorted. Her limbs shook. "O mighty Father," she cried, "who hast made me a God and an equal, hear me! hear me!"

Out of the black cloud overhead there came a blinding flash of light, which spat downward on to the altar. The cloven-hoofed horse gave one shrill neigh, and one convulsion, and fell back dead. Flames crackled out from the wood-pile, and the air became rich with the smell of burning flesh. And lo! in another moment the cloud above had melted into nothingness, and the flames burned pale, and the smoke went up in a thin blue spiral towards the deeper blueness of the sky.

Phorenice the Empress stood there before the great stone, and before the snake and the outstretched hand of life which were inscribed upon it, flushed, exultant, and once more radiantly lovely; and the knot of priests within the circle, and the great mob of people without, fell to the ground adoring.

"Phorenice, Goddess!" they cried. "Phorenice, Goddess of all Atlantis!"

But for myself, I did not kneel. I would have no part in this apostasy, so I stood there awaiting fate.

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 161]

  

CHAPTER X

  

A WOOING

A MURMUR quickly sprang up round me, which grew into shouts. "Kneel," one whispered, "kneel, sir, or you will be seen." And another cried: "Kneel, you without beard, and do obeisance to the only Goddess, or by the old Gods I will make myself her priest and butcher you!" And so the shouts arose into a roar.

But presently the word "Deucalion" began to be bandied about, and there came a moderation in the zeal of these enthusiasts. Deucalion, the man who had left Atlantis twenty years before to rule Yucatan, they might know little enough about, but Deucalion who rode not many days back beside the Empress in the golden castle beneath the canopy of snakes, was a person they remembered; and when they weighed up his possible ability for vengeance, the shouts died away from them limply.

So when the silence had grown again, and Phorenice turned and saw me standing alone among all the prostrate worshippers, I stepped out from the crowd and passed between two of the great stones, and went across the circle to where she stood beside

[p. 162]

the altar. I did not prostrate myself. At the prescribed distance I made the salutation which she herself had ordered when she made me her chief minister, and then hailed her with formal decorum as Empress.

"Deucalion, man of ice," she retorted.

"I still adhere to the old Gods!"

"I was not referring to that," said she, and looked at me with a sidelong smile.

But here Ylga came up to us with a face that was white and a hand that shook, and made supplication for my life. "If he will not leave the old Gods yet," she pleaded, "surely you will pardon him? He is a strong man, and does not become a convert easily. You may change him later. But think, Phorenice, he is Deucalion; and if you slay him here for this one thing, there is no other man within all the marches of Atlantis who could so worthily serve--"

The Empress took the words from her. "You slut," she cried out, "I have you near me to appoint my wardrobe and carry my fan, and do you dare to put a meddling finger in my policies? Back with you, outside this circle, or I'll have you whipped. Aye, and I'll do more. I'll serve you as Zaemon served my captain, Tarca. Shall I point a finger at you, and smite your pretty skin with a sudden leprosy?"

The girl bowed her shoulders and went away cowed, and Phorenice turned to me. "My lord," she said, "I am like a young bird in the nest that has suddenly found its wings. Wings have so many uses that I am curious to try them all."

Click to enlarge
"'BACK WITH YOU, OUTSIDE THIS CIRCLE'"

[p. 163]

"May each new flight they take be for the good of Atlantis."

"Oh," she said, with an eye-flash, "I know what you have most at heart. But we will go back to the pyramid, and talk this out at more leisure. I pray you now, my lord, conduct me back to my riding beast."

It appeared then that I was to be condoned for not offering her worship, and so putting public question on her deification. It appeared also that Ylga's interference was looked upon as untimely, and, though I could not understand the exact reasons for either of these things, I accepted them as they were, seeing that they forwarded the scheme that Zaemon had bidden me carry out.

So when the Empress lent me her fingers--warm, delicate fingers they were, though so skilful to grasp the weapons of war--I took them gravely, and led her out of the great circle, which she had polluted with her trickeries. I had expected to see our Lord the Sun take vengeance on the profanation while it was still in act; but none had come: and I knew that He would choose His own good time for retribution, and appoint what instrument He thought best, without my raising a puny arm to guard His mighty honor.

So I led this lovely, sinful woman back to the huge red mammoth which stood there tamely in waiting, and the smell of the sacrifice came after us as we walked. She mounted the stair to the golden castle on the shaggy beast's back, and bade me mount also and take seat beside her. But the place of the fan-girl

[p. 164]

behind was empty, and what we said as we rode back through the streets there was none to overhear.

She was eager to know what had befallen me after the attack on the gate, and I told the tale, laying stress on the worthiness of Nais, and uttering an opinion that with care the girl might be won back to allegiance again. Only the commands that Zaemon laid upon me, when he and I spoke together in the sacred tongue, did I withhold, as it is not lawful to repeat these matters save only in the High Council of the Priests itself as they sit before the Ark of the Mysteries.

You seem to have an unusual kindliness for this rebel Nais," said Phorenice.

"She showed herself to me as more clever and thoughtful than the common herd."

"Aye," she answered, with a sigh that I think was real enough in its way, "an Empress loses much that meaner woman gets as her common due."

"In what particular?"

"She misses the honest wooing of her equals."

"If you set up for a Goddess--" I said.

"Pah! I wish to be no Goddess to you, Deucalion. That was for the common people; it gives me more power with them; it helps my schemes. All you Seven higher priests know that trick of calling down the fire, and it pleased me to filch it. Can you not be generous, and admit that a woman may be as clever in finding out these natural laws as your musty elder priests?"

"Remains that you are Empress."

"Nor Empress either. Just think that there is a woman seated beside you on this cushion, Deucalion,

[p. 165]

and look upon her, and say what words come first to your lips. Have done with ceremonies, and have done with statecraft. Do you wish to wait on as you are till all your manhood withers? It is well not to hurry unduly in these matters: I am with you there. Yet who but a fool watches a fruit grow ripe, and then leaves it till it is past its prime?"

I looked on her glorious beauty, but as I live it left me cold. But I remembered the command that had been laid upon me, and forced a smile. "I may have been fastidious," I said, "but I do not regret waiting this long."

"Nor I. But I have played my life as a maid time enough. I am a woman, ripe and full-blooded, and the day has come when I should be more than what I have been."

I let my hand clench on hers. "Take me to husband then, and I will be a good man to you. But, as I am bidden speak to Phorenice the woman now, and not to the Empress, I offer fair warning that I will be no puppet."

She looked at me sidelong. "I have been master so long that I think it will come as enjoyment to be mastered sometimes. No, Deucalion, I promise that--you shall be no puppet. Indeed, it would take a lusty lung to do the piping if you were to dance against your will."

"Then as man and wife we will live together in the royal pyramid, and we will rule this country with all the wit that it has pleased the High Gods to bestow on us. These miserable differences shall be swept aside; the rebels shall go back to their

[p. 166]

homes, and hunt, and fight the beasts in the provinces, and the Priests' Clan shall be pacified. Phorenice, you and I will throw ourselves brain and soul into the government, and we will make Atlantis rise as a nation that shall once more surpass all the world for peace and prosperity."

Petulantly she drew her hand away from mine. "Oh, your conditions, and your Atlantis! You carry a crudeness in these colonial manners of yours, Deucalion, that palls on one after the first blunt flavor has worn away. Am I to do all the wooing? Is there no little thrill of love under all your ice?"

"In truth, I do not know what love may be. I have had little enough speech with women all these busy years."

"We were a pair, then, when you landed, though I have heard sighs and protestations from every man that carries a beard in all Atlantis. Some of them tickled my fancy for the day, but none of them have moved me deeper. No, I also have not learned what this love may be from my own personal feelings. But, sir, I think that you will teach me soon, if you go on with your coldness."

"From what I have seen, love is for the poor and the weak, and for those of flighty emotions."

"Then I would that another woman were Empress, and that I were some ill-dressed creature of the gutter that a strong man could pick up by force and carry away to his home for sheer passion. Ah! How I could revel in it! How I could respond if he caught my whim!" She laughed. "But I should

[p. 167]

lead him a sad life of it if my liking were not so strong as his."

"We are as we are made, and we cannot change our inwards which move us."

She looked at me with a sullen glance. "If I do not change yours, my Deucalion, there will be more trouble brewed for this poor Atlantis that you set such store upon. There will be ill doings in this coming household of ours if my love grows for you, and yours remains still unborn."

I believe she would have had me fondle her there in the golden castle on the mammoth's shaggy back, before the city streets packed with curious people. She had little enough appetite for privacy at any time. But for the life of me I could not do it. The Gods know I was earnest enough about my task, and They know also how it repelled me. But I was a true priest that day, and I had put away all personal liking to carry out the commands which the council had laid upon me. If I had known how to set about it, I would have fallen in with her mood. But where any of those shallow, bedizened triflers about the court would have been glibly in his element, I stuck for lack of a dozen words.

There was no help for it but to leave all, save what I actually felt, unsaid. Diplomacy I was trained in, and on most matters I had a glib enough tongue. But to palter with women was a lightness I had always neglected, and if I had invented would-be pretty speeches out of my clumsy inexperience, Phorenice would have seen through the fraud on the instant. She had been nurtured during these

[p. 168]

years of her rule on a pap of these silly protestations, and could weigh their value with an expert's exactness.

Nor was it a case where honest confession would have served my purpose better. If I had put my position to her in plain words, it would have made relations worse. And so perforce I had to hold my tongue, and submit to be considered a clown.

"I had always heard," said she, "that you colonists in Yucatan were far ahead of those in Egypt in all the arts and graces. But you, sir, do small credit to your viceroyalty. Why, I have had gentry front the Nile come here, and you might almost think they had never left their native shores."

"They must have made great strides these last twenty years, then. When last I was sent to Egypt to report, the blacks were clearly masters of the land, and our people lived there only on sufferance. Their pyramids were puny, and their cities nothing more than forts."

"Oh," she said, mockingly, "they are mere exiles still, but they remember their manners. My poor face seemed to please them; at least they all went into raptures over it. And for ten pleasant words one of them cut off his own right hand. We made the bargain, my Egyptian gallant and I, and the hand lies dried on some shelf in my apartment to-day as a pleasant memento."

But here, by a lucky chance for me, an incident occurred which saved me from further baiting. The rebels outside the walls were conducting their day's attack with vigor and some intelligence. More than

[p. 169]

once during our procession the lighter missiles from their war engines had sang up through the air and split against a building, and thrown splinters which wounded those which thronged the streets. Still there had been nothing to ruffle the nerves of any one at all used to the haps of warfare, or in any way to hinder our courtship. But presently, it seems, they stopped hurling stones from their war engines, and took to loading them with carcasses of wood lined with the throwing fire.

Now against stone buildings these did little harm, save only that they scorched horribly any poor wretch that was within splash of them when they burst; but when they fell upon the rude wooden booths and rush shelters of the poorer folk, they set them ablaze instantly. There was no putting out these fires.

These things also would have given to either Phorenice or myself little enough of concern, as they are the trivial and common incidents of every siege; but the mammoth on which we rode had not been so properly schooled. When the first blue whiff of smoke came to us down the windings of the street, the huge red beast hoisted its trunk, and began to sway its head uneasily. When the smoke drifts grew more dense, and here and there a tongue of flame showed pale beneath the sunshine, it stopped abruptly and began to trumpet.

The guards who led it tugged manfully at the chains which hung from the jagged metal collar round its neck, so that the spikes ran deep into its flesh, and reminded it keenly of its bondage. But the beast's terror at the fire, which was native to its

[p. 170]

constitution, mastered all its new-bought habits of obedience. From time unknown men have hunted the mammoth in the savage ground, and the mammoth has hunted men; and the men have always used fire as a shield, and mammoths have learned to dread fire as the most dangerous of all enemies.

Phorenice's brow began to darken as the great beast grew more restive, and she shook her red curls viciously. "Some one shall lose a head for this blundering," said she. "I ordered to have this beast trained to stand indifferent to drums, shouting, arrows, stones, and fire, and the trainers assured me that all was done, and brought examples."

I slipped my girdle. "Here," I said, "quick. Let me lower you to the ground."

She turned on me with a gleam. "Are you fearful for my neck then, Deucalion?"

"I have no mind to be bereaved before I have tasted my wedded life."

"Pish! There is little enough of danger. I will stay and ride it out. I am not one of your nervous women, sir. But go you, if you please."

"There is little enough chance for that now."

Blood flowed from the mammoth's neck where the spikes of the collar tore it, and with each drop, so did the tameness seem to ooze out from it also. With wild squeals and trumpetings it turned and charged viciously down the way it had come, scattering like straws the spearmen who tried to stop it, and mowing a great swathe through the crowd with its monstrous progress. Many must have been trodden under foot, many killed by its murderous trunk, but only their

[p. 171]

cries came to us. The golden castle, with its canopy of royal snakes, was swayed and tossed so that we two occupants had much ado not to be shot off like stones from a catapult. But I took a brace with my feet against the front and one arm around a pillar, and clapped the spare arm round Phorenice, so as to offer myself to her as a cushion.

She lay there contentedly enough, with her lovely face just beneath my chin, and the faint scent of her hair coming in to me with every breath I took; and the mammoth charged madly on through the narrow streets. We had outstripped the taint of smoke, and the original cause of fear, but the beast seemed to have forgotten everything in, its mad panic. It held furiously on with enormous strides, carrying its trunk aloft, and deafening us with its screams and trumpetings. We left behind us quickly all those who had trod in that glittering pageant, and we were carried helplessly on through the wards of the city.

The beast was utterly beyond all control. So great was its pace that there was no alternative but to try and cling on to the castle. Up there we were beyond its reach. To have leaped off, even if we had avoided having brains dashed out or limbs smashed by the fall, would have been to put ourselves at once at a frightful disadvantage. The mammoth would have scented us immediately, and turned (as is the custom of these beasts), and we should have been trampled into pulp in a dozen seconds.

The thought came to me that here was the High Gods' answer to Phorenice's sacrilege. The mammoth was appointed to carry out Their vengeance

[p. 172]

by dashing her to pieces, and I, their priest, was to be human witness that justice had been done. But no direct revelation had been given me on this matter, and so I took no initiative, but hung on to the swaying castle, and held the Empress against bruises in my arms.

There was no guiding the brute: in its insanity of madness it doubled many times upon its course, the windings of the streets confusing it. But by degrees we left the large palaces and pyramids behind, and got among the quarters of artisans, where weavers and smiths gaped at us from their doors as we thundered past. And then we came upon the merchants' quarters where men live over their storehouses that do traffic with the people over seas, and then down an open space there glittered before us a mirror of water.

"Now here," thought I, "this mad beast will come to sudden stop, and as like as not will swerve round sharply and charge back again towards the heart of the city." And I braced myself to withstand the shock, and took fresh grip upon the woman who lay against my breast. But with louder screams and wilder trumpetings the mammoth held straight on, and presently came to the harbor's edge, and sent the spray sparkling in sheets among the sunshine as it went with its clumsy gait into the water.

But at this point the pace was very quickly slackened. The great sewers, which science devised for the health of the city in the old King's time, vomit their drainings into this part of the harbor, and the solid matter which they carry is quickly deposited as an impalpable sludge. Into this the

[p. 173]

huge beast began to sink deeper and deeper before it could halt in its rush, and when with frightened bellowings it had come to a stop, it was bogged irretrievably. Madly it struggled, wildly it screamed and trumpeted. The harbor water and the slime were churned into one stinking compost, and the golden castle in which we clung lurched so wildly that we were torn from it and shot far away into the water.

Still there, of course, we were safe, and I was pleased enough to be rid of the bumpings.

Phorenice laughed as she swain. "You handle yourself like a sore man, Deucalion. I owe you something for lending me the cushion of your body. By my face! There's more of the gallant about you when it comes to the test than one would guess to hear you talk. How did you like the ride, sir? I warrant it came to you as a new experience."

"I'd liefer have walked."

"Pish, man! you'll never be a courtier. You should have sworn that with me in your arms you could have wished the bumping had gone on forever. Ho, the boat there! Hold your arrows. Deucalion, hail me those fools in that boat. Tell them that, if they hurt so much as a hair of my mammoth, I'll kill them all by torture. He'll exhaust himself directly, and when his flurry's done we'll leave him where he is, to consider his evil ways for a day or so, and then haul him out with windlasses, and tame him afresh. Pho! I could not feel myself to be Phorenice if I had no fine, red, shaggy mammoth to take me out for my rides."

[p. 174]

The boat was a ten-slave galley, which was churning up from the farther side of the harbor as hard as well-plied whips could make oars drive her; but at the sound of my shouts the soldiers on her foredeck stopped their arrow-shots, and the steersman swerved her off on a new course to pick us up. Till then we had been swimming leisurely across an angle of the harbor, so as to avoid landing where the sewers outpoured; but we stopped now, treading the water, and were helped over the side by most respectful hands.

The galley belonged to the captain of the port, a mincing figure of a mariner, whose highest appetite in life was to lick the feet of the great; and he began to fawn and prostrate himself at once, and to wish that his eyes had been blinded before he saw the Empress in such deadly peril.

"The peril may pass," said she. "It's nothing mortal that will ever kill me. But I've spoiled my pretty clothes, and shed a jewel or two, and that's annoying enough, as you say, good man."

The silly fellow repeated a wish that he might be blinded before the Empress was ever put to such discomfort again.

But it seemed she could be cloyed with flattery. "If you are tired of your eyes," said she, "let me tell you that you have gone the way to have them plucked out from their sockets. Kill my mammoth, would you, because he has shown himself a trifle frolicsome? You and your sort want more education, my man. I shall have to teach you that port-captains and such small creatures are very easy to

[p. 175]

come by, and very small value when got, but that my mammoth is mine--mine, do you understand?--the property of Goddess Phorenice, and as such is sacred."

The port-captain abased himself before her. "I am an ignorant fellow," said he, "and heaven was robbed of its brightest ornament when Phorenice came down to Atlantis. But if reparation is permitted me, I have two prisoners in the cabin of the boat here who shall be sacrificed to the mammoth forthwith. Doubtless it would please him to make sport with them, and spill out the last lees of his rage upon their bodies."

"Prisoners you've got, have you? How taken?"

"Under cover of last night they were trying to pass in between the two forts which guard the harbor mouth. But their boat fouled the chain, and by the light of the torches the sentries spied them. They were caught with ropes and put in a dungeon. There is an order not to abuse prisoners before they have brought before a judgment."

"It was my order. Did these prisoners offer to buy their lives with news?"

"The man has not spoken. Indeed, I think he got his death-wound in being taken. The woman fought like a cat also, so they said in the fort, but she was caught without hurt. She says she has got nothing that would be of use to tell. She says she has tired of living like a savage outside the city, and moreover that, inside, there is a man for whose nearness she craves most mightily."

"Tut!" said Phorenice. "Is this a romance we

[p. 176]

have swum to? You see what affectionate creatures we women are, Deucalion." The galley was brought up against the royal quay and made fast to its golden rings. I handed the Empress ashore, but she turned again and faced the boat, her garments still yielding up a slender drip of water. "Produce your woman prisoner, master captain, and let us see whether she is a runaway wife, or a lovesick girl mad after her sweetheart. Then I will deliver judgment on her, and as like as not will surprise you all with my clemency. I am in a mood for tender romance to-day."

The port-captain went into the little hutch of a cabin with a white face. It was plain that Phorenice's pleasantries scared him. "The man appears to be dead, your Majesty. I see that his wounds--"

"Bring out the woman, you fool. I asked for her. Keep your carrion where it is."

I saw the fellow stoop for his knife to cut a lashing, and presently who should he bring out to the daylight but the girl I had saved from the cave-tigers in the circus, and who has so strangely drawn me to her during the hours that we had spent afterwards in companionship. It was clear, too, that the Empress recognized her also. Indeed, she made no secret about the matter, addressing her by name and mockingly making inquiries about the menage of the rebels, and the success of the prisoner's amours.

"This good port-captain tells me that you made a most valiant attempt to return, Nais, and for an excuse you told that it was your love for some man in

[p. 177]

the city here which drew you. Come now, we are willing to overlook much of your faults if you will give us a reasonable chance. Point me out your man, and if he is a proper fellow, I will see that he weds you honestly. Yes, and I will do more for you, Nais, since this day brings me to a husband. Seeing that all your estate is confiscate as a penalty for your late rebellion, I will charge myself with your dowry and give it back to you. So come, name me the man."

The girl looked at her with a sullen brow. "I spoke a lie," she said; "there is no man."

I tried myself to give her advocacy. "The lady doubtless spoke what came to her lips. When a woman is in the grip of a rude soldiery, any excuse which can save her for the moment must serve. For myself, I should think it like enough that she would confess to having come back to her old allegiance, if she were asked."

"Sir," said the Empress, "keep your peace. Any interest you may show in this matter will go far to offend me. You have spoken of Nais in your narrative before; and although your tongue was shrewd and you did not say much, I am a woman and I could read between the lines. Now regard, my rebel, I have no wish to be unduly hard upon you, though once you were my fan-girl, and so your running away to these ill-kempt malcontents, who beat their heads against my city walls, is all the more naughty. But you must meet me half-way. You must give an excuse for a leniency. Point me out the man you would wed, and he shall be your husband to-morrow."

[p. 178]

"There is no man."

"Then name me one at random. Why, my pretty Nais, not ten months ago there were a score who would have leaped at the chance of having you for a wife. Drop your coyness, girl, and name me one of those. I warrant you that I will be your ambassadress and will put the matter to him with such delicacy that he will not make you blush by refusal."

The prisoner moistened her lips. "I am a maiden, and I have a maiden's modesty. I will die as you choose, but I will not do this indecency."

"Well, I am a maiden too, and though because I am Empress also, questions of State have to stand before questions of my private modesty, I can have a sympathy for yours--although in truth I did not obtrude unduly when you were my fan-girl, Nais. No, come to think of it, you liked a tender glance and a pretty phrase as well as any when you were f an-girl. You have grown wild and shy among these savage rebels, but I will not punish you for that.

"Let me call your favorites to memory now. There was Tarca, of course; but Tarca had a difference with that ill-dressed father of yours, and wears a leprosy on half his face instead of that beard he used to trim so finely. And then there is Tatho; but Tatho is away over-seas. Eron, too, you liked once; but he lost an arm in fighting t'other day, and I would not marry you to less than a whole man. Ah, by my face! I have it, the dainty exquisite, Rota! He is the husband! How well I remember the way he used to dress in a change of garb each day to catch your

[p. 179]

proud fancy, girl. Well, you shall have Rota. He shall lead you to wife before this hour to-morrow."

Again the prisoner moistened her lips. "I will not have Rota, and spare me the others. I know why you mock me, Phorenice."

"Then there are three of us here who share one knowledge." She turned her eyes upon me. Gods! who ever saw the like of Phorenice's eyes, and who ever saw them lit with such a fire as burned within them then? "My lord, you are marrying me for policy; I am marrying you for policy, and for another reason which has grown stronger of late, and which you may guess at. Do you wish still to carry out the match?"

I looked once at Nais, and then I looked steadily back at Phorenice. The command given by the mouth of Zaemon from the high council of the Sacred Mountain had to outweigh all else, and I answered that such was my desire.

"Then," said she, glowering at me with her eyes, "you shall build me up the pretty body of Nais beneath a throne of granite as a wedding gift. And you shall do it too with your own proper hands, my Deucalion, while I watch your devotion."

And to Nais she turned with a cruel smile. "You lied to me, my girl, and you spoke truth to the soldiers in the harbor forts. There is a man here in the city you came after, and he is the one man you may not have. Because you know me well, and my methods very thoroughly, your love for him must be very deep or you would not have come. And so, being here, you shall be put beyond mischief's reach.

[p. 180]

[paragraph continues] I am not one of those who see luxury in fostering rivals.

"You came for attention at the hands of Deucalion. By my face! you shall have it. I will watch myself while he builds you up living."

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 181]

  

CHAPTER XI

  

AN AFFAIR WITH THE BARBAROUS FISHERS

SO this mighty Empress chose to be jealous of a mere woman prisoner!

Now my mind has been trained to work with a soldierly quickness in these moments of stress, and I decided on my proper course on the instant the words had left her lips. I was sacrificing myself for Atlantis by order of the high council of the priests, and, if needful, Nais must be sacrificed also, although in the same flash a scheme came to me for saving her.

So I bowed gravely before the Empress, and said I, "In this, and in all other things where a mere human hand is potent, I will carry out your wishes, Phorenice." And she on her part patted my arm, and fresh waves of feeling welled up from the depths of her wondrous eyes. Surely the Gods won for her half her schemes and half her battles when they gave Phorenice her shape, and her voice, and the matters which lay within the outlines of her face.

By this time the merchants and the other dwellers adjacent to this part of the harbor, where the royal quay stands, had come down, offering changes of raiment and houses to retire into. Phorenice was all graciousness, and though it was little enough I

[p. 182]

cared for mere wetness of my coat, still that part of the harbor into which we had been thrown by the mammoth was not over savory, and I was glad enough to follow her example. For myself, I said no further word to Nais, and refrained even from giving her a glance of farewell. But a small sop like this was no meal for Phorenice, and she gave the port-captain strict orders for the guarding of his prisoner before she left him.

At the house into which I was ushered they gave me a bath, and I eased my host of the plainest garment in his store, and he was pleased enough at getting off so cheaply. But I had an hour to spend outside on the pavement listening to the distant din of bombardment before Phorenice came out to me again, and I could not help feeling some grim amusement at the face of the merchant who followed. The fellow was clearly ruined. He had a store of jewels and gauds of the most costly kind, which were only in fraction his own, seeing that he had bought them (as the custom is) in partnership with other merchants. These had pleased Phorenice's eye, and so she had taken all and disposed them on her person.

"Are they not pretty?" said she, showing them to me. "See how they flash under the sun. I am quite glad now, Deucalion, that the mammoth gave us that furious ride and that spill, since it has brought me such a bonny present. You may tell the fellow here that some day, when he has earned some more, I will come and be his guest again. Ah! they have brought us litters, I see. Well, send one away and do you share mine with me, sir. We must

[p. 183]

play at being lovers to-day, even if love is a matter which will come to us both with more certainty tomorrow. No, do not order more bearers. My own slaves will carry us handily enough. I am glad you are not one of your gross, overfed men, Deucalion. I am small and slim myself, and I do not want to be husbanded by a man who will overshadow me."

"Back to the royal pyramid?" I asked.

"No, nor to the walls. I neither wish to fight nor to sit as Empress to-day, sir. As I have told you before, it is my whim to be Phorenice, the maiden, for a few hours, and if some one I wot of would woo me now, as other maidens are wooed, I should esteem it a luxury. Bid the slaves carry us round the harbor's rim, and give word to these starers that, if they follow, I will call down fire upon them as I did upon the sacrifice."

Now I have seen something of the unruliness of the streets myself, and I had gathered a hint also from the officer at the gate of the royal pyramid that night of Phorenice's welcoming banquet. But as whatever there was in the matter must be common knowledge to the Empress, I did not bring it to her memory then. So I dismissed the guard which had come up, and drove away with a few sharp words the throng of gaping sight-seers who always, silly creatures, must needs come to stare at their betters; and then I sat in the litter in the place where I was invited, and the bearers put their heads to the pole.

They swung away with us along the wide pavement which runs between the houses of the merchants and the mariner folk and the dimpling waters of

[p. 184]

the harbor; and I thought somewhat sadly of the few ships that floated on that splendid basin now, and of the few evidences of business that showed themselves on the quays. Time was when the ships were berthed so close that many had to wait in the estuary outside the walls, and memorials had been sent to the King that the port should be doubled in size to hold the glut of trade. And that, too, in the old days of oar and sail, when machines drawing power from our Lord the Sun were but rarely used to help a vessel speedily along her course.

The Egypt voyage and a return was a matter of a year then, as against a brace of months now; and of three ships that set out, one at least could be reckoned upon succumbing to the dangers of the wide waters and the terrible beasts that haunt them. But in those old days trade roared with lusty life, and was ever growing wider and more heavy. Your merchant then was a portly man and gave generously to the Gods. But now all the world seemed to be in arms, and, moreover, trade was vulgar. Your merchant, if he was a man of substance, forgot his merchandise, swore that chaffering was more indelicate than blasphemy, and curled his beard after the new fashion, and became a courtier. Where his father had spent anxious days with cargo tally and shipmaster, the son wasted hours in directing sewing men as they adorned a coat, and nights in vaporing at banquets.

Of the smaller merchants who had no substance laid by, taxes and the constant bickerings of war had wellnigh ground them into starvation. Besides,

[p. 185]

with the country in constant uproar, there were few markets left for most merchandise, nor was there aught made now which could be carried abroad. If your weaver is pressed as a fire-tube man he does not make cloth, and if your farmer is playing at rebellion, he does not buy slaves to till his fields. Indeed, they told me that a month before my return, as fine a cargo of slaves had been brought into harbor as ever came out of Europe, and there was nothing for it but to set them ashore across the estuary, and leave them free to starve or live in the wild ground there as they chose. There was no man in all Atlantis who would hold so much as one more slave at a gift.

But though I was grieved at this falling away, all schemes for remedy would be for afterwards. It would only make ill worse to speak of it as we rode together in the litter. I was growing to know Phorenice's moods enough for that. Still, I think that she too had studied mine, and did her best to interest me between her bursts of trifling. We went out to where the westernmost harbor wall joins the land, and there the panting bearers set us down. She led me into a little house of stone which stood by itself, built out on a promontory where there is a constant run of tide; and when we had been given admittance, after much unbarring, she showed me her new gold collectors.

In the dry knowledge taught in the colleges and groves of the Sacred Mountain it had been a common fact to us that the metal gold was present in a dissolved state in all sea-water, but of plans for dragging

[p. 186]

it forth into yellow hardness none had ever been discussed. But here this field-reared upstart of an Empress had stumbled upon the trick as though it had been written in a book.

She patted my arm laughingly as I stared curiously round the place. "I tell all others in Atlantis that only the Gods have this secret," said she, "and that They gave it to me as one of Themselves. But I am no Goddess to you, am I, Deucalion? And, by my face! I have no other explanation of how this plan was invented. We'll suppose I must have dreamed it. Look! the sea-water sluices in through that culvert, and passes over these rough metal plates set in the floor, and then flows out again yonder in its natural course. You see the yellow metal caught in the ridges of the plates? That is gold. And my fellows here melt it with fire into bars, and take it to my smiths in the city. The tides vary constantly, as you priests know well, as the quiet moon draws them; and it does not take much figuring to know how much of the sea passes through these culverts in a month, and how much gold to a grain should be caught in the plates. My fellows here at first thought to cheat me, but I towed two of them in the water once behind a galley till the cannibal fish ate them, and since then the others have given me credit for--for what do you think?"

"More divinity."

"I suppose it is that. But I am letting you see how it is done. Just have the head to work out a little sum, and see what an effect can be gained. You will be a God yet yourself, Deucalion, with these

[p. 187]

silly Atlanteans, if only you will use your wit and cleverness."

Was she laughing at me? Was she in earnest? I could not tell. Sometimes she pointed out that her success and triumphs were merely the reward of thought and brilliancy, and next moment she gave me some impossible explanation and left me to deduce that she must be more than mortal or the thing could never have been found. In good truth, this little woman with her supple mind and her supple body mystified me more and more the longer I stayed by her side; and more and more despairing did I grow that Atlantis could ever be restored by my agency to peace and the ancient Gods, even after I had carried out the commands of the high council and taken her to wife.

Only one plan seemed humanly possible, and that was to curb her further mischievousness by death, and then leave the wretched country naturally to recover. It was just a dagger-stroke, and the thing was done. Yet the very idea of this revolted me, and when the desperate thought came to my mind (which it did ever and anon), I hugged to myself the answer that if it were fitting to do this thing, the High Gods in Their infinite wisdom would surely have put definite commands upon me for its carrying out.

Yet such was the fascination of Phorenice that, when presently we left her gold collectors and stumbled into such peril that a little withholding of my hand would have gained her a passage to the nether Gods, I found myself fighting when she called upon

[p. 188]

me as seldom I have fought before. And though, of course, some blame for this must be laid upon that lust of battle which thrills even the coldest of us when blows begin to whistle and war-cries start to ring, there is no doubt also that the pleasure of protecting Phorenice, and the distaste for seeing her pulled down by those rude, uncouth fishers, put special nerve and vehemence into my blows.

The cause of the matter was the unrest and the prevalency to street violence which I have spoken of above, and the desperate poverty of the common people, which led them to take any risk if it showed them a chance of winning the wherewithal to purchase a meal. We had once more mounted the litter, and once more the bearers, with their heads beneath the pole, bore us on at their accustomed swinging trot. Phorenice was telling me about her new supplies of gold. She had made fresh sumptuary laws, it appeared.

"In the old days," said she, "when yellow gold was tediously dredged up grain by grain from river gravels in the dangerous lands, a quillful would cost a rich man's savings, and so none but those whose high station fitted them to be so adorned could wear golden ornaments. But when the sea-water gave me gold here by the double handful a day, I found that the price of these river hoards decreased; and one day--could you credit it?--a common fellow, who was one of my smiths, came to me wearing a collar of yellow gold on his own common neck. Well, I had that neck divided as payment for his presumption; and as I promised to repeat the division promptly on

[p. 189]

all other offenders, that special species of forwardness seems to be checked for the time. There are many exasperations, Deucalion, in governing these common people."

She had other things to say upon the matter, but at this point I saw two clumsy boats of fishers paddling to us from over the ripples, and at the same time among the narrow lanes which led between the houses on the other side of us savage-faced men were beginning to run after the litter in threatening clusters.

"With permission," I said, "I will step out of the conveyance and scatter this rabble."

"Oh, the people always cluster round me. Poor ugly souls, they seem to take a strange delight in coming to stare at my pretty looks. But scatter them. I have said I did not wish to be followed. I am taking holiday now, Deucalion, am I not, while you learn to woo me?"

I stepped to the ground. The rough fishers in the boats were beginning to shout to those who dodged among the houses to see to it that we did not escape, and the numbers who hemmed us in on the shore side were increasing every moment. The prospect was unpleasant enough. We had come out beyond the merchants' quarter, and were level with those small huts of mud and grass which the fishing population deem sufficient for shelter, and which has always been a spot where turbulence might be expected. Indeed, even in those days of peace and good government in the old King's time, this part of the city had rarely been without its weekly riot.

[p. 190]

The life of the fishermen is the most hard that any human toilers have to endure. Violence from the winds and waves, and pelting from fire-stones out of the sky are their daily portion; the great beasts that dwell in the seas hunt them with savage persistence, and it is a rare day when at least some one of the fishers' guild fails to come home to answer the tally. Moreover, the manner which prevails of catching fish is not without its risks.

To each man there is a large sea-fowl taken as a nestling and trained to the work. A ring of bronze is round its neck to prevent its swallowing the spoil for which it dives, and for each fish it takes and flies back with to the boat, the head and tail and inwards are given to it for a reward, the ring being removed while it makes the meal.

The birds are faithful, once they have got a training, and are seldom known to desert their owners; but, although the fishers treat them more kindly than they do their wives, or children of their own begetting, the life of the birds is precarious like that of their masters. The larger beasts and fish of the sea prey on them as they prey on the smaller fish; and so, whatever care may be lavished upon them, they are most liable to sudden cutting off.

And here is another thing that makes the life of the fisher most precarious: if his fishing-bird be slain, and the second, which he has in training, also come by ill fortune, he is left suddenly bereft of all utensils of livelihood, and (for aught his guild-fellows care) he may go starve. For these fishers hold that the Gods of the sea regulate their craft, and that if one

[p. 191]

is not pleasing to Them, They rob him of his birds; after which it would be impious to have any truck or dealing with such a fellow; and accordingly he is left to starve or rob as he chooses.

All of which circumstances tend to make the fishers rude, desperate men, who have been forced into the trade because all other callings have rejected them. They are fellows, moreover, who will spend the gains of a month on a night's debauch, for fear that the morrow will rob them of life and the chance of spending; and, moreover, it is their one point of honor to be curbed in no desire by an ordinary fear of consequences. As will appear.

I went quickly towards the largest knot of these people, who were skulking behind the houses, leaving the litter halted in the path behind me, and I bade them sharply enough to disperse. "For an employment," I added, "put your houses in order, and clean the fish offal from the lanes between them. Tomorrow I will come round here to inspect, and put this quarter into a better order. But for to-day the Empress, (whose name be adored) wishes for a privacy; so cease your staring."

"Then give us money," said a shrill voice from among the huts.

"I will send you a torch in an hour's time," I said, grimly, "and rig you a gallows, if you give me more annoyance. To your kennels, you!"

I think they would have obeyed the voice of authority if they had been left to themselves. There was a quick stir among them. Those that stood in the sunlight instinctively slipped into the shadow,

[p. 192]

and many dodged into the houses and cowered in dark corners out of sight. But the men in the two hide-covered fisher-boats that were paddling up called them back with boisterous cries.

I signed to the litter-bearers to move on quickly along their road. There was need of discipline here, and I was minded to deal it out myself with a firm hand. I judged that I could prevent them following the Empress, but if she still remained as a glittering bait for them to rob, and I had to protect her also, it might be that my work would not be done so effectively.

But it seems I was presumptuous in giving an order which dealt with the person of Phorenice. She bade the bearers stand where they were, and stepped out, and drew her weapons from beneath the cushions. She came towards me strapping a sword on to her hip, and carrying a well-dinted target of gold on her left forearm. "An unfair trick," cried she, laughing. "If you will keep a fight to yourself now, Deucalion, where will your greediness carry you when I am your shrinking, wistful little wife? Are these fools truly going to stand up against us?"

I was not coveting a fight, but it seemed as if there would be no avoidance of it now. The robe and the glittering gauds of which Phorenice had recently despoiled the merchant drew the eyes of these people with keen attraction. The fishers in the boats paddled into the surf which edged the beach, and leaped over-side and left the frail basket-work structures to be spewed up sound or smashed, as chance ordered. And from the houses, and from the filthy

[p. 193]

lanes between them, poured out hordes of others, women mixed with the men, gathering round us threateningly.

"Have a care," shouted one on the outskirts of the crowd. "She called down fire for the sacrifice once to-day, and she can burn up others here if she chooses."

"So much the more for those that are left," retorted another. "She cannot burn all."

"Nay, I will not burn any," said Phorenice, "but you shall look upon my sword play till you are tired."

I heard her say that with some malicious amusement, knowing (as one of the Seven) how she had called down the fires of the sky to burn that cloven-hoofed horse offered in sacrifice, and knowing too, full well, that she could bring down no fire here. But they gave us little enough time for wordy courtesies. Their Empress never went far unattended, and, for aught the wretches knew, an escort might be close behind. So what pilfering they did it behooved them to get done quickly.

They closed in; jostling one another to be first, and the reek of their filthy bodies made us cough. A grimy hand launched out to seize some of the jewels which flashed on Phorenice's breast, and I lopped it off at the elbow, so that it fell at her feet, and a second later we were engaged.

"Your back to mine, comrade," cried she, with a laugh, and then drew and laid about her with a fine dexterity. Bah! but it was mere slaughter, that first bout.

[p. 194]

The crowd hustled inward with such greediness to seize what they could that none had space to draw back elbow for a thrust, and we too kept a circle round us by sheer whirling of steel. It is necessary to do one's work cleanly in these bouts, as wounded left on the ground unnoticed before one are as dangerous as so many snakes. But as we circled round in our battling I noted that all of Phorenice's quarry lay peaceful and still. By the Gods! but she could play a fine sword, this dainty Empress. She touched life with every thrust.

Yes, it was plain to see, now an example was given, that the throne of Atlantis had been won, not by a lovely face and a subtle tongue alone; and (as a fighter myself) I did not like Phorenice the less for the knowledge. I could but see her out of the corner of my eye, and that only now and again, for the fishers, despite their ill-knowledge of fence and the clumsiness of their weapons, had heavy numbers and most savage ferocity; and as they made so confident of being able to pull us down, it required more than a little hard battling to keep them from doing it. Aye, by the Gods! it was at times a fight my heart warmed to; and if I had not contrived to pluck a shield from one fool who came too vaingloriously near me with one, I could not swear they would not have dragged me down by sheer ravening savageness.

And always above the burly uproar of the fight came very pleasantly to my ears Phorenice's cry of "Deucalion!" which she chose as her battle shout. I knew her, of course, to be a past mistress of the art

Click to enlarge
"'WE TWO KEPT A CIRCLE, AROUND US'"

[p. 195]

of compliment, and it was no new thing for me to hear the name roared out above a battle din; but it was given there under circumstances which were peculiar, and for the life of me I could not help being tickled by the flattery.

Condemn my weakness how you will, but I came very near then to liking the Empress of Atlantis in the way she wished. And as for that other woman who should have filled my mind, I will confess that the stress of the moment and the fury of the engagement had driven both her and her strait completely out beyond the marches of my memory. Of such frail stuff are we made, even those of us who esteem ourselves the strongest.

Now it is a temptation few men born to the sword can resist, to throw themselves heart and soul into a fight for a fight's sake, and it seems that women can be bitten with the same fierce infection. The attack slackened and halted. We stood in the middle of a ring of twisted dead, and the rest of the fishers and their women who hemmed us in shrank back out of reach of our weapons.

It was the moment for a truce, the moment when a few strong words would have sent them back cowering to their huts, and given us free passage to go where we chose. But no; this Phorenice must needs sing a hymn to her sword and mine, gloating over our feats and invulnerability; and then she must needs ask payment for the bearers of her litter whom they had killed, and then speak balefully of the burnings and the skinnings and the sawings asunder with which this fishers' quarter would be treated in

[p. 196]

the near future, till they learned the virtues of deportment and genteel manners.

"It makes your backs creep, does it?" said Phorenice. "I do not wonder. This severity must have its unpleasant side. But why do you not put it beyond my power to give the order? Either you must think yourselves Gods or me no Goddess, or you would not have gone on so far. Come, now, you nasty-smelling people, follow out your theory, and if you make a good fight of it, I swear by my face I will be lenient with those who do not fall."

But there was no pressing up to meet our swords. They still ringed us in, savage and sullen, beyond the ring of their own dead, and would neither run back to the houses nor give us the game of further fight. There was a certain stubborn bravery about them that one could not but admire, and for myself I determined that next time it became my duty to raise troops I would catch a handful of these men and teach them handiness with the utensils of war and train them to loyalty and faithfulness. But presently from behind their ranks a stone flew, and though it whizzed between the Empress and myself, and struck down a fisher, it showed that they had brought a new method into their attack, and it behooved us to take thought and meet it.

I looked round me up and down the beach. There was no sign of a rescue. "Phorenice," I said, in the court tongue, which these barbarous fishers would know little enough of, "I take it that a whiff of the sea-breeze would come very pleasant after all this warm play. As you can show such pretty sword-work,

[p. 197]

will you cut me a way down to the beach, and I will do my poor best to keep these creatures from snapping at our heels?"

"Oh!" cried she, "then I am to have a courtier for a husband, after all. Why have you kept back your flattering speeches till now? Is that your trick to make me love you?"

"I will think out the reason for it another time."

"Ah, these stern, commanding husbands," said she, "how they do press upon their little wives!" and with that leaped over the ring of dead before her, and cut and stabbed a way through those that stood between her and the waters which creamed and crashed upon the beach. Gods! what a charge she made. It made me tingle with admiration as I followed sideways behind her, guarding the rear. And I am a man that has spent so many years in battlings that it takes something far out of the common to move me to any enthusiasm in this matter.

There were two boats creaking and washing about in the edge of the surf, but in one, happily, the wicker-work which made its frame was crushed by the weight of the waves into a shapeless bundle of sticks, and would take half a day to replace. So that, let us but get the other craft afloat, and we should be free from further embroiling. But the fishers were quick to see the object of this new manoeuvre. "Guard the boat!" they shouted. "Smash her! Slit her skin with your knives! Tear her with your fingers! Swim her out to sea! Oh, at least take the paddles!"

But if these clumsy fishers could run, Phorenice

[p. 198]

was like a legged snake for speed. She was down beside the boat before any could reach it, laughing and shouting out that she could beat them at every point. Myself, I was slower bf foot; and, besides, there were some that offered me a fight on the road, and I was not wishful to balk them; and, moreover, the fewer we left clamoring behind, the fewer there would be to speed our going with their stones. Still, I came to the beach in good order, and laid hands on the flimsy boat and tipped her dry.

"Fighting is no trade for me," I cried, "while you are here, Phorenice. Guard me my back and walk out into the water."

I took the boat, thrusting it afloat and wading with it till two lines of the surf were past. The fishers swarmed round us, active as fish in their native element, and strove mightily to get hands on the boat and slit the hides which covered it with their eager fingers. But I had a spare hand and a short stabbing-knife for such close-quarter work, and here, there, and everywhere was Phorenice the Empress, with her thirsty, dripping sword. By the Gods! I laughed with sheer delight at seeing her art of fence.

But the swirl of a great fish into the shallows, and the squeal of a fisher as he was dragged down and borne away into the deep, made me mindful of foes that no skill can conquer and no bravery avoid. Without taking time to give the Empress a word of warning, I stooped and flung an arm round her, and threw her up out of the water into the boat, and then thrust on with all my might, driving the flimsy craft out to sea, while my legs crept under me for

[p. 199]

fear of the beasts which swam invisible beneath the muddied waters.

To the fishers, inured to these horrid perils by daily association, the seizing of one of their number meant little, and they pressed on, careless of their dull lives, eager only to snatch the jewels which still flaunted on Phorenice's breast. Of the vengeance that might come after they reeked nothing; let them but get the wherewithal for one night's good debauch, and they would forget that such a thing as the morning of a morrow could have existence.

Two fellows I caught and killed, that, diving down beneath, tried to slit the skin of the boat out of sight under the water; and Phorenice cared for all those that tried to put a hand on the gunwales. Yes, and she did more than that. A huge long-necked turtle that was stirred out of the mud by the turmoil came up to daylight, and swung its great horn-lipped mouth to this side and that, seeking for a prey. The fishers near it dodged and dived. I, thrusting at the stern of the boat, could only hope it would pass me by, and so offered an easy mark. It scurried towards me, champing its noisy lips, and beating the water into spray with its flippers.

But Phorenice was quick with a remedy and a rescue. She passed her sword through one of the fishers that pressed her, and then thrust the body towards the turtle. The great neck swooped towards it; the long slimy feelers which protruded from its head quivered and snuffled; and then the horny green jaws crunched on it, and drew it down out of sight.

The boat was in deep water now, and Phorenice

[p. 200]

called upon me to come in over the side, she the while balancing nicely so that the flimsy thing should not be overset. The fishers had given up their pursuit, finding that they earned nothing but lopped off arms and split faces by coming within swing of this terrible sword of their Empress, and so contented themselves with volleying jagged stones in the hopes of stunning us or splitting the boat. However, Phorenice crouched in the stern, holding the two shields--her own golden target and the rough hide buckler I had won--and so protected both of us while I paddled; and though many stones clattered against the shields, and hit the hide covering of the boat, so that it resounded like a drum, none of them did damage, and we drew quickly out of their range.

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 201]

  

CHAPTER XII

  

THE DRUG OF OUR LADY THE MOON

OUR Lord the Sun was riding towards the end of His day, and the smoke from a burning mountain fanned black and forbidding before His face. Phorenice wrung the water from her clothes and shivered. "Work hard with those paddles, Deucalion, and take me in through the water-gate and let me be restored to my comforts again. That merchant would rue if he saw how his pretty garments were spoiled, and I rue too, being a woman, and remembering that he at least has no others I can take in place of these." She looked at me sidelong, tossing back the short red hair from her eyes. "What think you of my wisdom in coming where we have come without an escort?"

"The Empress can do no wrong." I quoted the old formula with a smile.

"At least I have shown you that I can fight. I caught you looking your approval of me quite pleasantly once or twice. You were a difficult man to thaw, Deucalion, but you warm perceptibly as you keep on being near me. La, sir, we shall be a pair of rustic sweethearts yet if this goes on. I am glad I thought of the device of going near those smelly fishers."

[p. 202]

So she had taken me out in the litter unattended for the plain purpose of inviting a fight and showing me her skill at arms, and perhaps, too, of seeing in person how I also carried myself in a moment of stress. Well, if we were to live on together as husband and wife, it was good that each should know to a nicety the other's powers; and, also, I am too much of an old battler and too much enamoured with the glorious handling of arms to quarrel very deeply with any one who offers me a tough up-standing fight. Still, for the life of me, I could not help comparing Phorenice with another woman. With a similar chance open before us, Nais had robbed me of the struggle through a sheer pity for those squalid rebels who did not even call her chieftain; while here was this Empress frittering away twoscore of the hardiest of her subjects merely to gratify a whim.

Yet, loyal to my vow as a priest, and to the commands set upon me by the high council on the Sacred Mountain, I tried to put away these wayward thoughts and comparisons. As I rowed over the swingings of the waves towards the forts which guard the harbor's mouth, I sent prayers to the High Gods to give my tongue dexterity, and They through Their love for the country of Atlantis, and the harassed people whom it was my deep desire to serve, granted me that power of speech which Phorenice loved. Her eyes glowed upon me as I talked.

This beach of the fishers where we had had our passage at arms is safe from ship attack from without, by reason of a chain of jagged rocks which spring up from the deep and run from the harbor side to the

[p. 203]

end of the city wall. The fishers know the passes, and can oftentimes get through to the open water beyond without touching a stone; or if they do see a danger of hitting on the reef, leap out and carry their light boats in their hands till the water floats them again. But here I had neither the knowledge nor the dexterity, and, thought I, now the High Gods will show finally if They wish this woman who has defiled Them to reign on in Atlantis, and if also They wish me to serve as her husband.

I cried these things in my heart, and waited to receive the omen. There was no half-answer. A great wave rose in the lagoon behind us, a wave such as could have only been caused by an earth tremor, and on its sleek back we were hurled forward and thrown clear of the reefs with their seaweeds licking round us, without so much as seeing a stone of the barrier. I bowed my head as I rode on towards the harbor forts. It was plain that not yet would the High Gods take vengeance for the insults which this lovely woman had offered Them.

The sentries in the two forts beat drums at one another in their accustomed rotation, and in the growing dusk were going to pay little enough attention to the fishing boat which lay against the great chain clamoring to have it lowered. But luckily a pair of officers were taking the air of the evening in a stone-dropping turret of the roof of the nearer fort, and these recognized the tone of our shouts. They silenced the drums, torches were lowered to make sure of our faces, and then with a splash the great chain was dropped into the water to give us passage.

[p. 204]

A galley lay inside, nuzzling the harbor wall, and presently the ladder of ropes was let down from the top of the nearest fort, and a crew came down to man the oars. There were the customary changes of raiment too, given as presents by the officers of the fort, and these we put on in the cabin of the galley in place of the sodden clothes we wore. There are fevers to be gained by carrying wet clothes after sunset, and though from personal experience I have learned that these may be warded off with drugs, I noticed with some grim amusement that the Empress had sufficiently little of the Goddess about her to fear very much the ailments which are due to frail humanity.

The galley rowed swiftly across the calm waters of the harbor, and made fast to the rings of gold on the royal quay; and while we were waiting for litters to be brought, I watched a lantern lit in the boat which stood guard over Phorenice's mammoth. The huge red beast stood shoulder-deep in the harbor water, with trunk upturned. It was tamed now, and the light of the boat's lantern fell on the little ripples sent out by its tremblings. But I did not choose to intercede or ask mercy for it. If the mammoth sank deeper in the harbor mud and was swallowed, I could have borne the loss with equanimity.

To tell the truth, that ride on the great beast's back had impressed me unfavorably. In fact, it put into me a sense of helplessness that was wellnigh intolerable. Perhaps circumstances have made me unduly self-reliant: on that others must judge. But I will own to having a preference for walking on my own proper feet, as the Gods in fashioning our

[p. 205]

shapes most certainly intended. On my own feet I am able to guard my own head and neck, and have done on four continents, throughout a long and active life, and on many a thousand occasions. But on the back of that detestable mammoth, pah! I grew as nervous as a child or a dastard.

However, I had little enough leisure for personal megrims just then. While we waited, Phorenice asked the port-captain (who must needs come up officiously to make his salutations) after the disposal of Nais, and was told that she had been clapped into a dungeon beneath the royal pyramid, and the officer of the guard there had given his bond for her safe keeping.

"It is to be hoped he understands his work," said the Empress. "The pretty Nais knows the pyramid better than most, and it may be he will be sent to the tormentors for putting her in a cell which had a secret outlet. You would feel pleasure if the girl escaped, Deucalion?"

"Assuredly," said I, knowing how useless it would be to make a secret of the matter. "I have no enmity against Nais."

But I have," said she, viciously, "and I am still minded to lock your faith to me by that wedding gift you know of."

"The thing shall be done," I said. "Before all, the Empress of Atlantis."

"Poof! Deucalion, you are too stiff and formal. You ought to be mightily honored that I condescend to be jealous of your favors. Your hand, sir, please, to help me into the litter. And now come in beside

[p. 206]

me and keep me warm against the night air. Ho! you guards there with the torches! Keep farther back against the street walls. The perfume you are burning stifles me."

Again there was a feast that night in the royal banqueting-hall; again I sat beside Phorenice on the raised dais which stands beneath the symbols of the snake and the outstretched hand. What had been. taken for granted before about our forthcoming relationship was this time proclaimed openly; the Empress herself acknowledged me as her husband that was to be; and all that curled and jewelled throng of courtiers hailed me as greater than themselves, by reason of this woman's choice. There was method, too, in their salutation. Some rumor must have got about of my preference for the older and simpler habits, and there was no drinking wine to my health after the new and (as I considered) impertinent manner. Decorously each lord and lady there came forward, and each in turn spilled a goblet at my feet; and when I called any up, whether man or woman, to receive titbits from my platter, it was eaten simply and thankfully, and not kissed or pocketed with any extravagant gesture.

The flaring jets of earth-breath showed me, too, so I thought, a plainer habit of dress and a more sober mien among this thoughtless mob of banqueters. And, indeed, it must have been plain to notice, for Phorenice, leaning over till the ruddy curls on her shoulder brushed my face, chided me in a playful whisper as having usurped her high authority already.

[p. 207]

"Oh, sir," she pleaded, mockingly, "do not make your rule over us too ascetic. I have given no orders for this change, but to-night there are no perfumes in the air; the food is so plain that I have half a mind to burn the cook; and as for the clothes and gauds of these diners, by my face! they might have cone straight from the old King's reign before I stepped in here to show how tasteful could be colors on a robe or how pretty the glint of a jewel. It's done by no orders of mine, Deucalion. They have swung round to this change by sheer courtier instinct. Why, look at the beards of the men! There is not half the curl about many of them to-day that they showed with such exquisiteness yesterday. By my face! I believe they'd reap their chins to-morrow as smooth as yours, if you go on setting the fashions at this prodigious rate and I do not interfere."

"Why hinder them if they feel more cleanly shaven?"

"No, sir. There shall be only one clean chin where a beard can grow in all Atlantis, and that shall be carried by the man who is husband to the Empress. Why, my Deucalion, would you have no sumptuary laws? Would you have these good folk here and the common people outside imitate us in every cut of the hair and every fold of a garment which it pleases us to discover? Come, sir, if you and I chose to say that our sovereignty was marked only by our superior strength of arm and wit, they would hate us at once for our arrogance; whereas, if we keep apart to ourselves a few mere personal decorations, these become just objects to admire and pleasantly envy."

[p. 208]

"You show me that there is more in the office of a ruler than meets the eye."

"And yet they tell me, and indeed show me, that you have ruled with some success."

"I employed the older method. It requires a Phorenice to invent these nicer flights."

"Flatterer!" said she, and smote me playfully with the back of her little fingers on my arm. "You are becoming as great a courtier as any of them. You make me blush with your fine pleasantries, Deucalion, and there is no fan-girl here to-night to cool my cheek. I must choose me another fan-girl. But it shall not be Ylga. Ylga seems to have more of a kindness for you than I like, and if she is wise she will go live in her palace at the other side of the city, and there occupy herself with the ordering of her slaves and the making of embroideries. I shall not be hard on Ylga unless she forces me, but I will have no woman in this kingdom treat you with undue civility."

"And how am I to act," said I, falling in with her mood, "when I see and hear all the men of Atlantis making their protestations before you? By your own confession they all love you as ardently as they seem to have loved you hopelessly."

"Ah, now," she said, "you must not ask me to do impossibilities. I am powerful, if you will. But I have no force which will govern the hearts of these poor fellows on matters such as that. But if you choose, you make proclamation that I am given now body and inwards to you, and if they continue to offend your pride in this matter, you may take your

[p. 209]

culprits and give them over to the tormentors. Indeed, Deucalion, I think it would be a pretty attention to me if you did arrange some such ceremony. It seems to me at present," she added, with a frown, "that the jealousy is too much on one side."

"You must not expect that a man who has been divorced from love for all of a busy life can learn all its niceties in an instant. Myself, I was feeling proud of my progress. With any other school-mistress than you, Phorenice, I should not be near so forward. In fact (if one may judge by my past record), I should not have begun to learn at all."

"I suppose you think I should be satisfied with that? Well, I am not. I can be finely greedy over some matters."

The banquet this night did not extend to inordinate length. Phorenice had gone through much since last she slept, and though she had declared herself Goddess in the meantime, it seemed that her body remained mortal as heretofore. The black rings of weariness had grown under her wondrous eyes, and she lay back among the cushions of the divan with her limbs slackened and listless. When the dancers came and postured before us, she threw them a jewel and bade them begone before they had given a half of their performance; and the poet, a silly swelling fellow who came to sing the deeds of the day, she would not hear at all.

"To-morrow," she said, wearily, "but for now grant me peace. My lord Deucalion has given me much food for thought this day, and presently I go to my chamber to muse over the future policies of

[p. 210]

this State throughout the night. To-morrow come to me again, and if your poetry is good and short, I will pay you surprisingly. But see to it that you are not long-winded. If there are superfluous words, I will pay you for those with the stick."

She rose to her feet then, and when the banqueters had made their salutation to us, I led her away from the banqueting-hall and down the passages with their secret doors which led to her private chambers. She clung on my arm, and once when we halted while a great stone block swung slowly ajar to let us pass, she drooped her head against my shoulder. Her breath came warm against my cheek, and the loveliness of her face so close at hand surpasses the description of words. I think it was in her mind that I should kiss the red lips which were held so near to mine, but willing though I was to play the part appointed, I could not bring myself to that. So when the stone block had swung, she drew away with a sigh, and we went on without further speech.

"May the High Gods treat you tenderly," I said, when we came to the door of her bedchamber.

"I am my own God," said she, "in all things but one. By my face! you are a tardy wooer, Deucalion. Where do you go now?"

"To my own chamber."

"Oh, go then, go."

"Is there anything more I could do?"

"Nothing that your wit or your will would prompt you to. Yes, indeed, you are finely decorous, Deucalion, in your old-fashioned way, but you are a mighty poor wooer. Don't you know, my man, that

[p. 211]

a woman esteems some things the more highly if they are taken from her by rude force?"

"It seems I know little enough about women."

"You never said a truer word. Bah! And I believe your coldness brings you more benefit in a certain matter than any show of passion could earn. There, get you gone, if the atmosphere of a maiden's bedchamber hurts your rustic modesty; and your Gods keep you, Deucalion, if that's the phrase, and if you think They can do it. Get you gone, man, and leave me solitary."

I had taken the plan of the pyramid out of the archives before the banquet and learned it thoroughly, and so was able to thread my way through its angular mazes without pause or blunder. I, too, was heavily wearied with what I had gone through since my last snatch of sleep, but I dare set apart no time for rest just then. Nais must be sacrificed in part for the needs of Atlantis; but a plan had come to me by which it seemed that she need not be sacrificed wholly; and to carry this through there was need for quick thought and action.

Help came to me also from a quarter I did not expect. As I passed along the tortuous way between the ponderous stones of the pyramid, which led to the apartments that had been given me by Phorenice, a woman glided up out of the shadows of one of the side passages, and when I lifted my hand-lamp, there was Ylga.

She regarded me half-sullenly. "I have lost my place," she said, "and it seems I need never have spoken. She intended to have you all along, and it

[p. 212]

was not a thing like that which could put her off. And you--you just think me officious, if, indeed, you have ever given me another thought till now."

"I never forget a kindness."

"Oh, you will learn that trick soon now. And you are going to marry her--you! The city is ringing with it. I thought at least you we're honest, but when there is a high place to be got by merely taking a woman with it, you are like the rest. I thought, too, that you would be one of those men who would have a distrust for that ruddy hair. And, besides,. she is little."

"Ylga," I said, "you have taught me that these walls are full of crannies and ears. I will listen to no word against Phorenice. But I would have further converse with you soon. If you still have a kindness for me, go to the chamber that is mine and wait for me there. I will join you shortly."

She drooped her eyes. "What do you want of me, Deucalion?"

"I want to say something to you. You will learn who it concerns later."

"But is it--is it fitting for a maiden to come to a man's room at this hour?"

"I know little of your conventions here in this new Atlantis. I am Deucalion, girl, and if you still have qualms, remembering that, do not come."

She looked up at me with a sneer. "I was foolish," she said. "My lord's coldness has grown into a proverb, and I should have remembered it. Yes; I will come."

"Go now, then," said I, and waited till she had

[p. 213]

passed on ahead and was out of sight and hearing. With Ylga to help me, my tasks were somewhat lightened and their sequence changed. In the first instance, now, I had got to make my way with as little delay and show as possible into a certain sanctuary which lay within the temple of our Lady the Moon. And here my knowledge as one of the Seven stood me in high favor.

All the temples of the city of Atlantis are in immediate and secret connection with the royal pyramid, but the passages are little used, seeing that they are known only to the Seven and to the Three above them, supposing that there are three men living at one time sufficiently learned in the highest of the high mysteries to be installed in that sublime degree of the Three. And, even by these, the secret ways may only be used on occasions of the greatest stress, so that a generation well may pass without their being trodden by a human foot.

It was with some trouble and after no little experiment that I groped my way into this secret alley; but once there, the rest was easy. I had never trodden it before certainly, but the plan of it had been taught me at my initiation as one of the Seven, and the course of the windings came back to me now with easy accuracy. I walked quickly, not only because the air in those deep crannies is always full of lurking evils, but also because the hours were fleeting, and much must be done before our Lord the Sun again rose to make another day.

I came to the spy-place which commands the temple, and found the holy place empty, and, alas! dust-covered,

[p. 214]

and showing little trace that worshippers ever frequented it these latter years. A vast stone of the wall swung outward and gave me entrance, and presently (after the solemn prayer which is needful before attempting these matters), I took the metal stair from the place where it is kept, and climbed to the lap of the Goddess; and then, pulling the stair after me, climbed again upward till my length lay against her calm mysterious face.

A shivering seized me as I thought of what was intended, for even a warrior hardened to horrid sights and deeds may well have qualms when he is called upon to juggle with life and death and years and history, with the welfare of his country in one hand, and the future of a woman who is as life to him in the other. But again I told myself that the hours flew, and laid hold of the jewel which is studded into the forehead of the image with one hand, and then stretching out, thrust at a corner of the eyebrow with the other. With a faint creak the massive eyeball below, a stone that I could barely have covered with my back, swung inward. I stepped off the stair and climbed into the gap. Inside was the chamber which is hollowed from the head of the Goddess.

It was the first time I had seen this most secret place, but the aspect of it was familiar to me from my teaching, and I knew where to find the thing which would fill my need. Yet, occupied though I might be with the stress of what was to befall, I could not help having a wonder and an admiration for the cleverness with which it was hidden.

[p. 215]

High as I was in the learning and mysteries of the Priestly Clan, the structure of what I had come to fetch was hidden from me. Beforetime I had known only of their power and effect; and now that I came to handle them, I saw only some roughly rounded balls like nut kernels, grass-green in color, and in hardness like the wax of bees. There were three of these balls in the hidden place, and I took the one that was needful, concealing the others as I had found them. It may have been a drug, it may have been something more; what exactly it was I did not know; only of its power and effect I was sure, as that was set forth plainly in the teaching I had learned; and so I put it in a pouch of my garment, returning by the way I had come, and replacing all things in due order behind me.

One look I took at the image of the Goddess before I left the temple. The jet of earth-breath which burns eternally from the central altar lit her from head to toe, and threw sparkles from the great jewel in her forehead. Vast she was, and calm and peaceful beyond all human imaginings, a perfect symbolism of that rest and quietness which many sigh for so vainly on this rude earth, but which they will never attain unless by their piety they earn a place in the hereafter, where our Lady the Moon and the rest of the High Ones reign in Their eternal glorious majesty.

It was with tired, dragging limbs that I made my way back again to the royal pyramid, and at last came to my own private chamber. Ylga awaited me there, though at first I did not see her. The suspicions

[p. 216]

of these modern days had taken a deep hold of the girl, and she must needs crouch in hiding till she made sure it was I who came to the chamber, and, moreover, that I came alone.

"Oh, frown at me if you choose," said she, sullenly, "I am past caring now for your good opinion. I had heard so much of Deucalion, and I thought I read honesty in you when you first came ashore; but now I know that you are no better than the rest. Phorenice offers you a high place, and you marry her blithely to get it. And why, indeed, should you not marry her? People say she is pretty, and I know she can be warm. I have seen her warm and languishing to scores of men. She is clever, too, with her eyes, is our great Empress; I grant her that. And as for you, it tickles you to be courted."

"I think you are a very silly woman," I said.

"If you flatter yourself it matters a rap to me whom you marry, you are letting conceit run away with you."

"Listen," I said. "I did not ask you here to make foolish speeches which seem largely beyond my comprehension. I asked you to help me do a service to one of your own blood-kin."

She stared at me wonderingly. "I do not understand."

"It rests largely with you as to whether Nais dies to-morrow, or whether she is thrown into a sleep from which she may waken on some later and more happy day."

"Nais!" she gasped, "my twin, Nais? She is not here. She is out in the camp with those nasty rebels

[p. 217]

who bite against the city walls, if, indeed, still she lives."

"Nais, your sister, is near us in the royal pyramid this minute, and under guard, though where I do not know." And with that I told her all that had passed since the girl was brought up a prisoner in the galley of that foolish, fawning captain of the port. "The Empress has decreed that Nais shall be buried alive under a throne of granite which I am to build for her to-morrow, and buried she will assuredly be. Yet I have a kindness for Nais, which you may guess at if you choose, and I am minded to send her into a sleep such as only we higher priests know of, from which at some future day she may possibly awaken."

"So it is Nais, and not Phorenice, and not--not any other?"

"Yes; it is Nais. I marry the Empress because Zaemon, who is mouth-piece to the high council of the priests, has ordered it for the good of Atlantis. But my inwards remain still cold towards her."

"Almost I hate poor Nais already."

"Your vengeance would be easy. Do not tell me where she is gaoled, and I shall not dare to ask. Even to give Nais a further span of life I cannot risk making inquiries for her cell, when there is a chance that those who tell me might carry news to the Empress, and so cause more trouble for this poor Atlantis."

"And why should I not carry the news, and so bring myself into favor again? I tell you that being fan-girl to Phorenice and second woman in the kingdom

[p. 218]

is a thing that not many would cast lightly aside."

I looked her between eyes and smiled. "I have no fear there. You will not betray me, Ylga. Neither will you sell Nais."

"I seem to remember very small love for this same Nais just now," she said, bitterly. "But you are right about that other matter. I shall not buy myself back at your expense. Oh, I am a fool, I know, and you can give me no thanks that I care about, but there is no other way I can act."

"Then let us fritter no more time. Go you out now and find where Nais is gaoled, and bring me news how I can say ten words to her, and press a certain matter into her clasp."

She bowed her head and left the chamber, and for long enough I was alone. I sat down on the couch, and rested wearily against the wall. My bones ached, my eyes ached, and, most of all, my inwards ached. I had thought to myself that a man who makes his life sufficiently busy will find no leisure for these pains which assault frailer folk; but a philosophy like this, which carried one well in Yucatan, showed poorly enough when one tried it here at home. But that there was duty ahead, and the order of the high council to be carried into effect, the bleakness of the prospect would have daunted me, and I would have prayed the Gods then to spare me further life, and take me unto Themselves.

Ylga came back at last, and I got up and went quickly after her as she led down a maze of passages and alleyways. "There has been no care spared

[p. 219]

over her guarding," she whispered, as we halted once to move a stone. "The officer of the guard is an old lover of mine, and I raised his hopes to the burning point again by a dozen words. But when I wanted to see his prisoner, there he was as firm as brass. I told him she was my sister, but that did not move him. I offered him--oh, Deucalion, it makes me blush to think of the things I did offer to that man, but there was no stirring him. He has watched the tormentors so many times that there is no tempting him into touch of their instruments."

"If you have failed, why bring me out here?"

"Oh, I am not inveigling you into a lover's walk with myself, sir. You tickle yourself when you think your society is so pleasant as that."

"Come, girl, tell me then what it is. If my temper is short, credit it against my weariness."

"I have carried out my lord's commands in part. I know the cell where Nais lies, and I have had speech with her, though not through the door. And moreover, I have not seen her or touched her hand."

"Your riddles are beyond me, Ylga, but if there is a chance, let us get on and have this business done."

"We are at the place now," said she, with a hard little laugh, "and if you kneel on the floor, you will find an air-shaft, and Nais will answer you from the lower end. For myself, I will leave you. I have a delicacy in hearing what you want to say to my sister, Deucalion."

"I thank you," I said. "I will not forget what you have done for me this night."

[p. 220]

"You may keep your thanks," she said, bitterly, and walked away into the shadows.

I knelt on the floor of the gallery and found the air-passage with my hand, and then putting my lips to it whispered for Nais.

The answer came on the instant, muffled and quiet. "I knew my lord would come for a farewell."

"What the Empress said has to be. You understand, my dear? It is for Atlantis."

"Have I reproached my lord by word or glance?"

"I myself am bidden to place you in the hollow between the stones, and I must do it."

"Then my last sleep will be a sweet one. I could not ask to be touched by pleasanter hands."

"But it may hap that a day will come when she whom you know of will be suffered by the High Gods to live on this land of Atlantis no longer."

"If my lord will cherish my poor memory when he is free again, I shall be grateful. He might, if he chose, write them on the stones: Here was buried a maid who died gladly for the good of Atlantis, even though she knew that the man she so dearly loved was husband to her murderess."

"You must not die," I whispered. "My breast is near broken at the very thought of it. And for respite we must trust to the ancient knowledge, which in its day has been sent out from the Ark of the Mysteries." I took the green waxy ball in my fingers, and stretched them down the crooked air-shaft to the full of my span. "I have somewhat for you here. Reach up and try to catch it from me."

I heard the faint rustle of her arm as it swept

[p. 221]

against the masonry, and then the ball was taken over into her grasp. Gods! what a thrill went through me when the fingers of Nais touched mine! I could not see her because of the crookedness of the shaft, but that faint touch of her was exquisite.

"I have it," she whispered. "And what now, dear?"

"You will hide the thing in your garment, and when to-morrow the upper stone closes down upon you and the light is gone, then you will take it between your lips and let it dissolve as it will. Sleep will take you, my darling, then, and the High Gods will watch over you, even though centuries pass before you are roused."

"If Deucalion does not wake me, I shall pray never again to open an eye. And now go, my lord and my dear. They watch me here constantly, and I would not have you harmed by being brought to notice."

"Yes, I must go, my sweetheart. It will not do to have our scheme spoiled by a foolish loitering. May the most High Gods attend your rest, and if the sacrifice we make finds favor, may They grant us meeting here again on earth before we meet--as we must--when our time is done, and They take us up to Their own place."

"Amen," she whispered back, and then: "Kiss your fingers, dear, and thrust them down to me."

I did that, and for an instant felt her fondle them down the crook of the air-shaft out of sight, and then heard her withdraw her little hand and kiss it fondly. Then again she kissed her own fingers and stretched

[p. 222]

them up, and I took up the virtue of that parting kiss on my finger-tips and pressed it sacredly to my lips.

"Living, sleeping, or dead, always my darling," she whispered. And then, before I could answer, she whispered again: "Go; they are coming for me." And so I went, knowing that I could do no more to help her then, and knowing that all our schemes would be spilled if any eye spied upon me as I lay there beside the air-shaft. But my chest was like to have split with the dull, helpless anguish that was in it, as I made my way back to my chamber through the mazy alleys of the pyramid.

"Do not look upon mine eyes, dear, when the time comes," had been her last command, "or they will tell a tale which Phorenice, being a woman, would read. Remember, we make these small denials, not for our own likings, but for Atlantis, which is mother to us all."

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 223]

  

CHAPTER XIII

  

THE BURYING ALIVE OF NAIS

THERE is no denying that the wishes of Phorenice were carried into quick effect in the city of Atlantis. Her modern theory was that the country and all therein existed only for the good of the Empress, and when she had a desire, no cost could possibly be too great in its carrying out.

She had given forth her edict concerning the burying alive of Nais, and though the words were that I was to build the throne of stone, it was an understood thing that the manual labor was to be done for me by others. Heralds made the proclamation in every ward of the city, and masons, laborers, stonecutters, sculptors, engineers, and architects took hands from whatever was occupying them for the moment, and hastened to the rendezvous. The architects chose a chief who gave directions, and the lesser architects and the engineers saw these carried into effect. Any material within the walls of the city on which they set their seal was taken at once without payment or compensation; and as the blocks of stone they chose were the most monstrous that could be got, they were forced to demolish no few buildings to give them passage.

I have before spoken of the modern rage for erecting

[p. 224]

new palaces and pyramids, and, even though at the moment an army of rebels was battering with war engines at the city walls, the building guilds were steadily at work, and their skill (with Phorenice's marvellous invention to aid them) was constantly on the increase. True, they could not move such massive blocks of stone as those which the early Gods planted for the sacred circle of our Lord the Sun, but they had got rams and trucks and cranes which could handle amazing bulks.

The throne was to be erected in the open square before the royal pyramid. Seven tiers of stone were there for a groundwork, each a knee-height deep, and each cut in the front with three steps. In the uppermost layer was a cavity made to hold the body of Nais, and above this was poised the vast block which formed the seat of the throne itself.

Throughout the night, to the light of torches, relay after relay of the stone-cutters and the masons and the sweating laborers had toiled over bringing up the stone and dressing it into fit shape, and laying it in due position; and the engineers had built machines for lifting, and the architects had proved that each stone lay in its just and perfect place. Whips cracked, and men fainted with the labor, but so soon as one was incapable another pressed forward into his place. No delay was brooked when Phorenice had said her wish.

And finally, as the square began to fill with people come to gape at the pageant of to-day, the chippings and the scaffolding were cleared away, and with it the bodies of some half-score of workmen who had

[p. 225]

died from accidents or their exertions during the building, and there stood the throne, splendid in its carvings, and all ready for completion. The lower part stood more than two man-heights above the ground, and no stone of its courses weighed less than twenty men; the upper part was double the weight of any of these, and was carved so that the royal snake encircled the chair and the great hooded head overshadowed it. But at present the upper part was not on its bed, being held up high by lifting-rams, for what purpose all men knew.

It was to face this scene, then, that I came out from the royal pyramid at the summons of the chamberlains in the cool of next morning. Each great man who had come there before me had banner-bearers and trumpeters to proclaim his presence; the middle classes were in all their bravery of apparel; and even poor squalid creatures, with ribs of hunger showing through their dusty skins, had turbans and wisps of color wrapped about their heads to mark the gayety of the day.

The trumpets proclaimed my coming, and the people shouted welcome; and, with the gorgeous chamberlains walking backward in advance, I went across to a scarlet awning that had been prepared, and took my seat upon the cushions beneath it.

And then came Phorenice, my bride that was to be that day, fresh from sleep, and glorious in her splendid beauty. She was borne out from the pyramid in an open litter of gold and ivory by fantastic savages from Europe, her own refinement of feature being thrown up into all the higher relief by contrast

[p. 226]

with their brutish ugliness. One could hear the people draw a deep breath of delight as their eyes first fell upon her; and it is easy to believe there was not a man in that crowd which thronged the square who did not envy me her choice, nor was there a soul present (unless Ylga was there somewhere veiled) who could by any stretch imagine that I was not overjoyed in winning so lovely a wife.

For myself, I summoned up all the iron of my training to guard the expression of my face. We were here on ceremonial to-day--a ghastly enough affair throughout all its acts, if you choose, but still ceremonial; and I was minded to show Phorenice a grand manner that would leave her nothing to cavil at. After all that had been gone through and endured, I did not intend a great scheme to be shattered by letting my agony and pain show themselves in either a shaking hand or a twitching cheek. When it came to the point, I told myself, I would lay the living body of my love in the hollow beneath the stone as calmly and with as little outward emotion as though I had been a mere priest carrying out the burial of some dead stranger. And she, on her part, would not, I knew, betray our secret. With her, too, it was truly, "Before all, Atlantis."

I think it spared a pang to find that there was to be no mockery or flippancy in what went forward. All was solemn and impressive; and, though a certain grandeur and sombreness which bit deep into my breast was lost to the vulgar crowd, I fancy that the outward shape of the double sacrifice they witnessed that day would not be forgotten by any of

[p. 227]

them, although the inner meaning of it all was completely hidden from their minds. When it suited her fancy, none could be more strict on the ritual of a ceremony than this many-mooded Empress, and it appeared that on this occasion she had given command that all things were to be carried out with the rigid exactness and pomp of the older manner.

So she was borne up by her Europeans to the scarlet awning, and I handed her to the ground. She seated herself on the cushions and beckoned me to her side, entwining her fingers with mine, as has always been the custom with rulers of Atlantis and their consorts. And there before us as we sat a body of soldiery marched up, and, opening out, showed Nais in their midst. She had a collar of metal round her neck, with chains depending from it firmly held by a brace of guards, so that she could not run in upon the spears of the escort, and thus get a quick and easy death, which is often the custom of those condemned to the more lingering punishments.

But it was pleasant to see that she still wore her clothing. Raiment, whether of fabric or skin, has its value, and custom has always given the garments of the condemned to the soldiers guarding them. So, as Nais was not stripped, I could not but see that some one had given moneys to the guards as a recompense, and in this I thought I saw the hand of Ylga, and felt a gratitude towards her.

The soldiers brought her forward to the edge of the pavilion's shade, and she was bidden prostrate herself before the Empress; and this she wisely did,

[p. 228]

and so avoided rough handling and force. Her face was pale, but showed neither fear nor defiance, and her eyes were calm and natural. She was remembering what was due to Atlantis, and I was thrilled with love and pride as I watched her.

But outwardly I, too, was impassive as a man of stone; and though I knew that Phorenice's eye was on my face, there was never anything on it from first to last that I would not have had her see.

"Nais," said the Empress, "you have eaten from my platter when you were fan-girl, and drunk from my cup, and what was yours I gave you. You should have had more than gratitude, you should have had knowledge also that the arm of the Empress was long and her hand consummately heavy. But it seems that you have neither of these things. And, moreover, you have tried to take a certain matter that the Empress has set apart for herself. You were offered pardon on terms, and you rejected it. You were foolish. But it is a day now when I am inclined to clemency. Presently, seated on that carved throne of granite which he has built me yonder, I shall take my lord Deucalion to husband. Give me a plain word that you are sorry, girl, and name a man whom you would choose, and I will remember the brightness of the occasion; you shall be pardoned and wed before we rise from these cushions."

"I will not wed," she said, quietly.

"Think for the last time, Nais, of what is the other choice. You will be taken, warm and quick and beautiful as you stand there this minute, and laid in the hollow place that is made beneath the

[p. 229]

throne-stone. Deucalion, that is to be my husband, will lay you in that awful bed, as a symbol that so shall perish all Phorenice's enemies; and then he will release the rams and lower the upper stone into place, and the world shall see your face no more. Look at the bright sky, Nais, fill your chest with the sweet warm air, and then think of what this death will mean. Believe me, girl, I do not want to make you an example unless you force me."

"I will not wed," said the prisoner, quietly.

The Empress loosed her fingers from my arm and lay back against the cushions. "If the girl presumes on our old familiarity, or thinks that I jest, show her now, Deucalion, that I do not."

"The Empress is far from jesting," I said. "I will do this thing because it is the wish of the Empress that it should be done, and because it is the command of the Empress that a symbol of it shall remain forever as an example for others. Lead your prisoner to the place."

The soldiers wheeled, and the two guards with the chains of the collar which was on the neck of Nais prepared to put out force to drag her up the steps. But she walked with them willingly, and with a color unchanged, and I rose from my seat and made obeisance to the Empress and followed them.

Before all those ten thousand eyes we two made no display of emotion then, not only for Atlantis's sake, but also because both Nais and I had a nicety and a pride in our natures. We were not as Phorenice to flaunt endearments before others.

Yet, when I had bidden the guards unhasp the

[p. 230]

collar which held the prisoner's neck, and clapped my arms round her, showing all the roughness of one who has no mind that his captive shall escape or even unduly struggle, a thrill gushed through me so potent that I was like to have fainted, and it was only by supreme strain of will that I held unbrokenly on with the ceremonial. I, who had never embraced a woman with aught but the arm of roughness before, now held pressed to me one whom I loved with an infinite tenderness, and the revelation of how love can come out and link with love was almost my undoing. Yet, outwardly, Nais made no sign, but lay half-strangled in my arms, as any woman does that is being borne away by a spoiler.

I trod with her to the uppermost step, the vast throne-stone overhanging us, and then, so that all of those who were gazing from the sides of the pyramids and the roofs of the buildings round might see, though we were beyond Phorenice's view, I used a force that was brutal in dragging her across the level and putting her down into the hollow. And yet the girl resisted me with no one effort whatever.

So that the victim might not struggle out and be crushed, and so gain an easy death when the stone descended, there were brazen clamps to fit into grooves of the stones above the hollow where she lay, and these I fitted in place above her, and fastened one by one, doing this butcher's work with one hand, and still fiercely holding her down by the other. Gods! and the sweat of agony dripped from me on to the thirsty stone as I worked. I could not keep that in.

[p. 231]

I clamped and locked the last two bars in place, and took my brute's hand away from her throat.

The hateful finger-marks showed as bloodless furrows in the whiteness of her skin. For the life of me, yes, even for the fate of Atlantis, I could not help dropping my glance upon her face. But she was stronger than I. She gave me no last look. She kept her eyes steadfastly fixed on the cruel stone above, and so I left her, knowing that it was best not to tarry longer.

I came out from under the stone and gave the sign to the engineers who stood by the rams. The fires were taken away from their sides, and the metal in them began to contract, and slowly the vast bulk of the throne-stone began to creep down towards its bed.

But ah, so slowly! Gods! how my soul was torn as I watched and waited.

Yet I kept my face impassive, overlooking as any officer might a piece of work which others were carrying out under his direction, and on which his credit rested; and I stood gravely in my place till the rams had let the stone come down on its final resting-place, and had been carried away by the engineers; and then I went round with the master architect with his plumb-line and level, while he tested this last piece of the building and declared it perfect.

It was a useless form, this last, seeing that by calculation they knew exactly how the stone must rest; but the guilds have their forms and customs, and on these occasions of high ceremonial they are punctiliously carried out, because these middle-class people wish always to appear mysterious and impressive

[p. 232]

to the poor vulgar folk who are their inferiors. But perhaps I am hard there on them. A man who is needlessly taken round to plumb and duly level the tomb where his love lies buried living may perhaps be excused by the assessors on high a little spirit of bitterness.

I had gone up the steps to do my hateful work a man full of grief, though outwardly unmoved. As I came down again I had a feeling of incompleteness; it seemed as though half my inwards had been left behind with Nais in the hollow of the stone, and their place was taken by a void which ached wearily; but still I carried a passive face, and a memory that before all these private matters stood the command of the high council, which sat before the Ark of the Mysteries.

So I went and stood before Phorenice, and said the words which the ancient forms prescribed concerning the carrying out of her wish.

"Then now," she said, "I will give myself to you as wife. We are not as others, you and I, Deucalion. There is a law and a form set down for the marrying of these other people, but that would be useless for our purposes. We will have neither priest nor scribe to join us and set down the union. I am the law here in Atlantis, and you soon will be part of me. We will not be demeaned by profaner hands. We will make the ceremony for ourselves, and for witnesses there are sufficient in waiting. Afterwards the record shall be cut deep in the granite throne you have built for me, and the lettering filled in with gold, so that it shall endure and remain bright for always."

[p. 233]

"The Empress can do no wrong," I said, formally, and took the hand she offered me and helped her to rise. We walked out from the scarlet awning into the glare of the sunshine, she leaning on me, flushed, and so radiantly lovely that the people began to hail her with rapturous shouts of "A Goddess! our Goddess Phorenice!" But for me they had no welcoming word. I think the set grimness of my face both scared and repelled them.

We went up the steps which led to the throne, the people still shouting, and I sat her in the royal seat beneath the snake's outstretched head, and she drew me down to sit beside her.

She raised her jewelled hand, and a silence fell on that great throng, as though the breath had been suddenly cut short for all of them.

Then Phorenice made proclamation:

"Hear me, O my people, and hear me, O High Gods from whom I am come. I take this man Deucalion to be my husband, to share with me the prosperity of Atlantis, and join me in guarding our great possession. May all our enemies perish as she is now perishing above whom we sit." And then she put her arms around my neck and kissed me hotly on the mouth.

In turn I also spoke: "Hear me, O most High Gods, whose servant I am, and hear me also, O ye people. I take this Empress Phorenice to wife, to help with her the prosperity of Atlantis, and join with her in guarding the welfare of that great possession. May all the enemies of this country perish as they have perished in the past."

[p. 234]

And then I too, who had not been permitted by the fates to touch the lips of my love, bestowed the first kiss I had ever given a woman to Phorenice, that was now being made my wife.

But we were not completely linked yet.

"A woman is one, and man is one," she proclaimed, following for the first time the old form of words, "but in marriage they merge, so that wife and husband are no more separate, but one conjointly. In token of this we will now make the symbolic joining together, so that all may see and remember." She took her dagger, and pricking the brawn on my forearm till the bead of blood appeared, set her red lips to it and took it into herself.

"Ah," she said, with her eyes sparkling, "now you are part of me indeed, Deucalion, and I feel you have strengthened me already." She pulled down the neck of her robe. "Let me make you my return."

I pricked the rounded whiteness of her shoulder. Gods! when I remembered who was beneath us as we sat on that throne, I could have driven the blade through to her heart! And then I, too, put down my lips and took the drop of her blood that was yielded to me.

My tongue was dry, my throat was parched, and my face suffused, and I thought I should have choked.

But the Empress, who was ordinarily so acute, was misled then. "It thrills you?" she cried; "it burns within you like living fire? I have just felt it. By my face! Deucalion, if I had known the pleasure it

[p. 235]

gives to be made a wife, I do not think I should have waited this long for you. Ah, yes; but with another man I should have had no thrill. I might have gone through the ceremony with another, but it would have left me cold. Well, they say this feeling comes to a woman but once in her time, and I would not change it for the glory of all my conquests and the whirl of all my power." She leaned in close to me so that the red curls of her hair swept my cheek, and her breath came hot against my mouth. "Tasted you ever any sweet so delicious as this knowledge that we are made one now, Deucalion, past all possible dissolving?"

I could not lie to her any more just then. The Gods know how honestly I had striven to play the part commanded me for Atlantis's good, but there is a limit to human endurance, and mine was reached. I was not all anger towards her. I had some pity for this passion of hers, which had grown of itself certainly, but which I had done nothing to check; and the indecent frankness with which it was displayed was only part of the livery of potentates who flaunt what meaner folk would coyly hide. But always before my eyes was a picture of the girl on whom her jealousy had taken such a bitter vengeance, and to invent spurious lover's talk then was a thing my tongue refused to do.

"Words are poor things," I said, "and I am a man unused to women, and have but a small stock of any phrases except the driest. Remember, Phorenice, a week agone I did not know what love was, and now that I have learned the lesson, somewhat of the suddenest, the language remains still to come to me. My

[p. 236]

inwards speak; indeed they are full of speech; but I cannot translate into bald cold words what they say."

And here surely the High Gods took pity on my tied tongue and my misery, and made an opportunity for bringing the ceremony to an end. A man ran into the square shouting, and showing a wound that dripped, and presently all that vast crowd which stood on the pavements and the sides of the pyramids and the roofs of the temples took up the cry and began to feel for their weapons.

"The rebels are in!" "They have burrowed a path into the city!" "They have killed the cave-tigers and taken a gate!" "They are putting the whole place to the storm!" "They will presently leave no poor soul of us here alive!"

There then was a termination of our marriage cooings. With rebels merely biting at the walls, it was fine to put strong trust in the defences, and easy to affect contempt for the besiegers' powers, and to keep the business of pageants and state craft and marryings turning on easy wheels. But with rebel soldiers already inside the city (and hordes of others doubtless pressing on their heels), the affair took a different light. It was no moment for further delay, and Phorenice was the first to admit it. The glow that had been in her eyes changed to the glare of the fighter as the fellow who had run up squalled out his tidings.

I stood and stretched my chest. I seemed in need of air. "Here," I said, "is work that I can understand more clearly. I will go and sweep this rabble back to their burrows, Phorenice."

[p. 237]

"But not alone, sir. I come too. It is my city still. Nay, sir, we are too newly wed to be parted yet."

"Have your will," I said, and together we went down the steps of the throne to the pavement below. Under my breath I said a farewell to Nais.

Our armor-bearers met us with weapons, and we stepped into litters, and the slaves took us off hot foot. The wounded man who had first brought the news had fallen in a faint, and no more tidings was to be got from him; but the growing din of the fight gave us the general direction, and presently we began to meet knots of people who dwelt near the place of irruption running away in wild panic, loaded down with their household goods.

It was useless to stop these, as fight they could not; and if they had stayed they would merely have been slaughtered like flies, and would in all likelihood have impeded our own soldiery. And so we let them run screaming on their blind way, but forced the litters through them with but very little regard for their coward convenience.

Now the advantage of the rebels, when it came to be looked upon by a soldier's eye, was a thing of little enough importance. They had driven a tunnel from behind a covering mound, beneath the walls, and had opened it cleverly enough through the floor of a middle-class house. They had come through into this, collecting their numbers under its shelter, and doubtless hoping that the marriage of the Empress (of which spies had given them information) would sap the watchfulness of the city guards. But it seems

[p. 238]

they were discovered and attacked before they were thoroughly ready to emerge, and, as a fine body of troops were barracked near the spot, their extermination would have been merely a matter of time, even if we had not come up.

It did not take a trained eye long to decide on this, and Phorenice, with a laugh, lay back on the cushions of the litter, and returned her weapons to the armor-bearer who came panting up to receive them. "We grow nervous with our married life, my Deucalion," she said. "We are fearful lest this new-found happiness be taken from us too suddenly."

But I was not to be robbed of my breathing-space in this wise. "Let me crave a wedding gift of you," I said.

"It is yours before you name it."

"Then give me troops, and set me wide a city gate a mile away from here."

"You can gather five hundred as you go from here to the gate, taking two hundred of those that are here. If you want more, they must be fetched from other barracks along the walls. But where is your plan?"

"Why, my poor strategy teaches me this: these foolish rebels have set all their hopes on this mine, and all their excitement on its present success. If they are kept occupied here by a Phorenice, who will give them some dainty fighting without checking them unduly, they will press on to the attack and forget all else, and never so much as dream of a sortie. And meanwhile a Deucalion with his troop will march out of the city well away from here, without tuck of

[p. 239]

drum or blare of trumpet, and fall most unpleasantly upon their rear. After which a Phorenice will burn the house here at the mine's head, which is of wood, and straw-thatched, to discourage further egress, and either go to the walls to watch the fight from there, or sally out also and spur on the rout as her fancy dictates?"

"Your scheme is so pretty, I would I could rob you of it for my own credit's sake; and as it is I must kiss you for your cleverness. But you got my word first, you naughty fellow, and you shall have the men and do as you ask. Eh, sir, this is a sad beginning of our wedded life if you begin to rob your little wife of all the sweets of conquest from the outset."

She took back the weapons and target she had given to the armor-bearer, and stepped over the side of the litter to the ground. "But at least," she said, "if you are going to fight, you shall have troops that will do credit to my drill," and thereupon proceeded to tell off the companies of men-at-arms who were to accompany me. She left herself few enough to stem the influx of rebels who poured ceaselessly in through the tunnel; but, as I had seen, with Phorenice heavy odds added only to her enjoyment.

But for the Empress, I will own at the time to have given little enough of thought. My own proper griefs were raw within me, and I thirsted for that forgetfulness of all else which battle gives, so that for awhile I might have a rest from their gnawings.

It made my blood run freer to hear once more the tramp of practised troops behind me, and when all

[p. 240]

had been collected we marched out through a gate of the city, and presently were charging through and through the straggling rear of the enemy. By the Gods! for the moment even Nais was blotted from my wearied mind. Never had I loved more to let my fierceness run madly riot. Never have I gloated more abundantly over the terrible joy of battle.

Nais must forgive my weakness in seeking to forget her even for a breathing-space. Had that opportunity been denied me, I believe the agony of remembering would have snapped my brain-strings for always.

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 241]

  

CHAPTER XIV

  

AGAIN THE GODS MAKE CHANGE

NOW it would be tedious to tell how, with a handful of highly trained fighting men, I charged and recharged, and finally broke up that horde of rebels which outnumbered us by fifteen times. It must be remembered that they grew suddenly panic-stricken in finding that of all those who went in under the city walls by the mine on which they had set such great store none came back, and that the sounds of panic which had first broken out within the city soon gave way to cries of triumph and joy. And it must be carried in memory also that these wretched rebels were without training worthy of the name, were for the most part weaponed very vilely, and, seeing that their silly principles made each the equal of his neighbor, were practically without heads or leaders also.

So when the panic began it spread like a malignant murrain through all their ragged ranks, and there were none to rally the flying, none to direct those of more desperate bravery who stayed and fought.

My scheme of attack was simple. I hunted them without a halt. I and my fellows never stopped to play the defensive. We turned one flank, and charged through a centre, and then we were harrying

[p. 242]

the other flank, and once more hacking our passage through the solid mass. And so by constantly keeping them on the run, and in ignorance of whence would come the next attack, panic began to grow among them and ferment, till presently those in the outer lines commenced to scurry away towards the forests and the spoiled corn-lands of the country, and those in the inner packs were only wishful for a chance to follow them.

It was no feat of arms, this breaking up of the rebel leaguer, and no practised soldier would wish to claim it as such. It was simply taking advantage of the chances of the moment, and as such it was successful. Given an open battle on their own ground, these desperate rebels would have fought till none could stand, and by sheer ferocious numbers would have pulled down any trained troops that the city could have sent against them, whether they had advanced in phalanx or what formation you will. For it must be remembered they were far removed from cowards, being Atlantean all, just as were those within the city, and were, moreover, spurred to extraordinary savageness and desperation by the oppression under which they had groaned and the wrongs they had been forced to endure.

Still, as I say, the poor creatures were scattered, and the siege was raised from that moment; and it was plain to see that the rebellion might be made to end if no unreasonable harshness was used for its final suppression. Too great severity, though perhaps it may be justly their portion, only drives such malcontents to further desperations.

[p. 243]

Now following up these fugitives to make sure that there was no halt in their retreat, and to send the lesson of panic thoroughly home to them, had led us a long distance from the city walls; and as we had fought all through the burning heat of the day and my men were heavily wearied, I decided to halt where we were for the night among some half-ruined houses which would make a temporary fortification. Fortunately a drove of little cloven-hoofed horses which had been scared by some of the rebels in their flight happened to blunder into our lines, and as we killed five before they were clear again, there was a soldier's supper for us, and quickly the fires were lit and cooking it.

Sentries paced the outskirts and made their cries to one another, and the wounded sat by the fires and dressed their hurts; and with the officers I talked over the engagements of the day, and the methods of each charge, and the other details of the fighting. It is the special perquisite of soldiers to dally over these matters with gusto, though they are entirely without interest for laymen.

The hour drew on for sleep, and snores went up from every side. It was clear that all my officers were wearied out, and only continued the talk through deference to their commander. Yet I had a feverish dread of being left alone again with my thoughts, and pressed them on with conversation remorselessly. But in the end they were saved the rudeness of dropping off into unconsciousness during my talk. A sentry came up and saluted. "My lord," he reported, "there is a woman come up from the city

[p. 244]

whom we have caught trying to come into the bivouac."

"How is she named?"

"She will not say."

"Has she business?"

"She will say none. She demands only to see my lord."

"Bring her here to the fire," I ordered, and then on second thoughts remembering that the woman, whoever she might be, had news likely enough for my private ear (or otherwise she would not have come to so uncouth a rendezvous), I said to the sentry: "Stay," and got up from the ground beside the fire, and went with him to the outer line.

"Where is she?" I asked.

"My comrades are holding her. She might be a wench belonging to these rebels, with designs to put a knife into my lord's heart, and then we sentries would suffer. The Empress," he added, simply, "seems to set good store upon my lord at present, and we know the cleverness of her tormentors."

"Your thoughtfulness is frank," I said, and then he showed me the woman. She was muffled up in hood and cloak, but one who loved Nais as I loved could not mistake the form of Ylga, her twin and sister, because of mere swathings. So I told the sentries to release her without asking her for speech, and then led her out from the bivouac beyond earshot of their lines.

"It is something of the most pressing that has brought you out here, Ylga?"

"You know me, then? There must be something

[p. 245]

warmer than the ordinary between us two, Deucalion, if you could guess who walked beneath all these mufflings."

I let that pass. "But what's your errand, girl?"

"Aye," she said, bitterly, "there's my reward. All your concern's for the message, none for the carrier. Well, good my lord, you are husband to the dainty Phorenice no longer."

"This is news."

"And true enough, too. She will have no more of you, divorces you, spurns you, thrusts you from her, and, after the first splutter of wrath is done, then comes pains and penalties."

"The Empress can do no wrong. I will have you speak respectful words of the Empress."

"Oh, be done with that old fable! It sickens me. The woman was mad for love of you, and now she's mad with jealousy. She knows that you gave Nais some of your priest's magic, and that she sleeps till you choose to come and claim her, even though the day be a century from this. And if you wish to know the method of her enlightenment, it is simple. There is another air-shaft next the one down which you did your cooing and billing, and that leads to another cell in which lay another prisoner. The wretch heard all that passed, and thought to buy enlargement by telling it.

"But his news came a trifle stale. It seems that with the pressure of the morning's ceremonies they forgot to bring him a ration, and when at last his gaoler did remember him, it was rather late, seeing that by then Phorenice had tied herself publicly to

[p. 246]

a husband, and poor Nais had doubtless eaten her green drug. However, the fool must needs try and barter his tale for what it would fetch; and, as was natural, had such a silly head chopped off for his pains; and after that your Phorenice behaved as you may guess. And now you may thank me, sir, for coming to warn you not to go back to Atlantis."

"But I shall go back. And if the Empress chooses to cut my head also from its proper column, that is as the High Gods will."

"You are more sick of life than I thought. But I think, sir, our Phorenice judges your case very accurately. It was permitted me to hear the out-bursting of this lady's rage. 'Shall I hew off his head?' said she. 'Pah! Shall I give him over to my tormentors, and stand by while they do their worst? He would not wrinkle his brow at their fiercest efforts. No; he must have a heavier punishment than any of these, and one also which will endure. I shall lop off his right hand and his left foot, so that he may be a fighting man no longer, and then I shall drive him forth crippled into the dangerous lands, where he may learn fear. The beasts shall hunt him, the fires of the ground shall spoil his rest. He shall know hunger, and he shall breathe bad air. And all the while he shall remember that I have Nais near me, living and locked in her coffin of stone, to play with as I choose, and to give over to what insults may come to my fancy.' That is what she said, Deucalion. Now I ask you again will you go back to meet her vengeance?"

[p. 247]

"No," I said, "it is no part of my plan to be mutilated and left to live."

"So, being a woman of some sense, I judged. And, moreover, having some small kindness still left for you, I have taken it upon myself to make a plan for your further movement which may fall in with your whim. Does the name of Tob come back to your memory?"

"One who was captain of Tatho's navy?"

"That same Tob. A gruff, rude fellow, and smelling vile of tar, but seeming to have a sturdy honesty of his own. Tob sails away this night for parts unknown, presumably to found a kingdom with Tob for king. It seems he can find little enough to earn at his craft in Atlantis these latter days, and has scruples at seeing his wife and young ones hungry. He told me this at the harbor-side when I put my neck under the axe by saying I wanted carriage for you, sir; and so having me under his thumb, he was perhaps more loose-lipped than usual. You seem to have made a fine impression on Tob, Deucalion. He said--I repeat his hearty disrespect--you were just the recruit he wanted, but whether you joined him or not, he would go to the nether Gods to do you service."

"By the fellow's side I gained some experience in fighting the greater sea beasts."

"Nell, go and do it again. Believe me, sir, it is your only chance. It would grieve me much to hear the searing-iron hiss on your stumps. I bargained with Tob to get clear of the harbor forts before the chain was up for the night, and as he is a very daring

[p. 248]

fellow, with no fear of navigating under the darkness, he himself said he would come to a point of the shore which we agreed upon, and there await you. Come, Deucalion, let me lead you to the place."

"My girl," I said, "I see I owe you many thanks for what you have done on my poor behalf."

"Oh, your thanks!" she said, "you may keep them. I did not come out here in the dark and the dangers for mere thanks, though I knew well enough there would be little else offered." She plucked at my sleeve. "Now show me your walking pace, sir. They will begin to want your countenance in the camp directly, and we need hanker after no too narrow inquiries for what's along."

So thereon we set off, Ylga and I, leaving the lights of the bivouac behind us, and she showed the way, while I carried my weapons ready to ward off attacks whether from beasts or from men. Few words were passed between us, except those which had concern with the dangers natural to the way. Once only did we touch one another, and that was where a tree-trunk bridged a rivulet of scalding water which flowed from a boil-spring towards the sea.

"Are you sure of footing?" I asked, for the night was dark, and the heat of the water would peel the flesh from the bones if one slipped into it.

"No," she said, "I am not," and reached out and took my hand. I helped her over, and then loosed my grip, and she sighed, and slowly slipped her hand away. Then on again we went in silence, side by side, hour after hour, and league after league.

But at last we topped a rise, and below us through

[p. 249]

the trees I could see the gleam of the great estuary on which the city of Atlantis stands. The ground was soggy and wet beneath us, the trees were full of barbs and spines, the way was monstrous hard. Ylga's breath was beginning to come in labored pants. But when I offered to take her arm and help her, as some return against what she had done for me, she repulsed me rudely enough. "I am no poor weakling," said she, "if that is your only reason for wanting to touch me."

Presently, however, we came out through the trees, and the roughest part of our journey was done. We saw the ship riding to her anchors inshore a mile away, and a weird enough object she was under the faint starlight. We made our way to her along the level beaches.

Tob was keeping a keen watch. We were challenged the moment we came within stone or arrow shot, and bidden to halt and recite our business; but he was civil enough when he heard we were those whom he expected. He called a crew and slacked out his anchor-rope till his ship ground against the shingle, and then thrust out his two steering-oars to help us clamber aboard.

I turned to Ylga with words of thanks and farewell. "I will never forget what you have done for me this night; and should the High Gods see fit to bring me back to Atlantis and power, you shall taste my gratitude."

"I do not want to return. I am sick of this old life here."

"But you have your place in the city, and your

[p. 250]

servants and your wealth, and Phorenice will not disturb you from their possession."

"Oh, as for that, I could go back and be fan-girl to-morrow. But I do not want to go back."

"Let me tell you it is no time for a gently nurtured lady like yourself to go forward. I have been viceroy of Yucatan, Ylga, and know somewhat of making a foothold in these new countries. And that was nothing compared with what this will be. I tell you it entails hardships and privations and sufferings which you could not guess at. Few survive who go to colonize in the beginning, and those only of the hardiest, and they earn new scars and new batterings every day."

"I do not care; and, besides, I can share the work. I can cook, I can shoot a good arrow, and I can make garments--yes, though they were cut from the skins of beasts and had to be sewn with back-bone sinews. Because you despise fine clothes, and because you have seen me only decked out as fan-girl, you think I am useless. Bah, Deucalion! never let people prate to me about your perfections. You know less about a woman than a boy new from school."

"I have learned all I care to know about one woman, and because of the memory of her I could not presume to ask her sister to come with me now."

"Aye," she said, bitterly, "kick my pride. I knew well enough it was only second place to Nais I could get all the time I was wanting to come. Yet no one but a boor would have reminded me of it. Gods! and to think that half the men in Atlantis have courted me, and now I am arrived at this!"

Click to enlarge
"'SHE FLUNG HER ARMS ABOUT MY NECK'"

[p. 251]

"I must go alone. It would have made me happier to take your esteem with me. But as it is, I suppose I shall carry only your hate."

"That is the most humiliating thing of all; I cannot bring myself to hate you. I ought to, I know, after the brutal way you have scorned me. But I do not, and there is the truth. I seem to grow the fonder of you, and if I thought there was a way of keeping you alive and unmutilated here in Atlantis, I do not think I should point out that Tob is tired of waiting, and will probably be off without you." She flung her arms suddenly about my neck and kissed me hotly on the mouth. " There, that is for good-bye, dear. You see I am reckless. I care not what I do now, knowing that you cannot despise me more than you have done all along for my forwardness."

She ran back from me into the edge of the trees.

"But this is foolishness," I said. "I must take you through the dangers that lie between here and some gate of the city, and then come back to the ship."

"You need not fear for me. The unhappy are always safe. And, besides, I have a way. It is my solace to know that you will remember me now. You will never forget that kiss."

"Fare you well, Ylga," I cried. "May the High Gods keep you entirely in their holy care."

But no reply came back. She had gone off into the forest. And so I turned down to the beach, and plashed into the water, and climbed on board the ship up the steering-oars. Tob gave the word to haul to the anchor and get her away from the beach.

[p. 252]

"Greeting, my lord," said he, "but I'd have been pleased to see you earlier. We've small enough force and slow enough heels in this vessel, and it's my idea that the sooner we're away from here and beyond range of pursuit the safer it will be for my woman and brats who are in that hutch of an aftercastle. It's long enough since I sailed in such a small, old-fashioned ship as this. She's no machines, and she's not even a steering manikin. Look at the meanness of her furniture, and (in your ear) I've suspicions that there's rottenness in her bottom. But she's the best I'd the means to buy, and if she reaches the place at the farther end I've got my eye on, we shall have to make a home there, or be content to die, for she'll never have strength to carry us farther or back. She's been a ship in the Egypt trade, and you know what that is for getting worm and rot in the wood."

"You'd enough hands for your scheme before I came?"

"Oh yes. I've fifty stout lads and eight women packed in the ship somehow, and trouble enough I had to get them away from the city. That thief of a port-captain wellnigh skinned us clean before he could see it lawful that so many useful fighting men might go out of harbor. Times are not what they were, I tell you, and the sea trade's about done. All sailor men of any skill have taken a woman or two and gone out in companies to try their fortunes in other lands. Why, I'd trouble enough to get half a score to help me work this ship. All my balance are just landsmen raw and simple, and if I land half

[p. 253]

of them alive at the other end, we shall be doing well."

"Still, with luck and a few good winds it should not take long to get across to Europe."

Tob slapped his leg. "No savage Europe for me, my lord. Now see the advantage of being a mariner. I found once some islands to the north of Europe, separated from the main by a strait, which I called the Tin Islands, seeing that tin ore litters many of the beaches. I was driven there by storm, and said no word of the find when I got back, and here, you see, it comes in useful. There's no one in all Atlantis but me knows of those Tin Islands to-day, and we'll go and fight honestly for our ground, and build a town and a kingdom on it."

"With Tob for king?"

"Well, I have figured it out as such for many a day, but I know when I meet my better, and I'm content to serve under Deucalion. My lord would have done wiser to bring a wife with him, though, and I thought it was understood by the good lady that spoke to me down at the harbor, or I'd have mentioned it earlier. The savages in my Tin Islands go naked and stain themselves blue with woad, and are very filthy and brutish to look upon. They are sturdy, and should make good slaves, but one would have to get blunted in the taste before one could wish to be father to their children."

"I am still husband to Phorenice."

Tob grinned. "The Gods give you joy of her. But it is part of a mariner's creed--and you will grow to be a mariner here--that wedlock does not

[p. 254]

hold across the seas. However, that matter may rest. But, coming to my Tin Islands again: they'll delight you. And I tell you, a kingdom will not be so hard to carve out as it was in Egypt, or as you found in Yucatan. There are beasts there, of course, and no one who can hunt need ever go hungry. But the greater beasts are few. There are cave-bears and cave-tigers in small numbers, to be sure, and some river-horses and great snakes. But the greater lizards seem to avoid the land; and as for birds, there is rarely seen one that can hurt a grown man. Oh, I tell you, it will be a most desirable kingdom."

"Tob seems to have imagined himself king of the Tin Islands with much reality."

He sighed a little. "In truth I did, and there is no denying it; and I tell you plain, there is not another man living that I would have broken this voyage for but Deucalion. But don't think I regret it, and don't think I want to push myself above my place. This breeze and the ebb are taking the old ship finely along her ways. See those fire-baskets on the harbor forts? We're abreast of them now. We'll have dropped them and the city out of sight by daylight, and the flood will not begin to run up till then. But I fear unless the wind hardens down with the dawn we'll have to bring up to an anchor when the flood makes. Tides run very hard in these narrow seas. Aye, and there are some shrewdish tide-rips round my Tin Islands, as you shall see when we reach them."

There were many fearful glances backward when day came and showed the waters, and the burning

[p. 255]

mountains that hemmed them in beyond the shores. All seemed to expect some navy of Phorenice to come surging up to take them back to servitude and starvation in the squalid wards of the city; and I confess ingenuously that I was with them in all truth when they swore they would fight the ship till she sank beneath them before they would obey another of the commands of Phorenice. However, their brave heroics were displayed to small purpose. For the full flow of the tide we hung in our place, barely moving past the land, but yet not seeing either oar or sail; and then, when the tide turned, away we went once more with speed, mightily comforted.

Tob's woman must needs bring drink on deck, and bid all pour libations to her as a future queen. But Tob cuffed her back into the aftercastle, slamming to the hatch behind her heels, and bidding the crew send the liquor down their dusty throats. "We are done with that foolery," said he. "My lord Deucalion will be king of this new kingdom we shall build in the Tin Islands, and a right proper king he'll make, as you untravelled ones would know if you'd sailed the outer seas with him as I have done." Beneath which I read a regret, but said nothing, having made my plans from the moment of stepping on board, as will appear on a later sheet.

So on down the great estuary we made our way, and though it pleasured the others on board when they saw that the seas were desolate of sails, it saddened me when I recalled how once the waters had been whitened with the glut of shipping.

They had started off on their voyage with a bare

[p. 256]

two days' provision in their equipment, and so, of necessity even after leaving the great estuary, we were forced to voyage coastwise, putting into every likely river and sheltered beach to slay fish and meat for future victualling. "And when the winter comes," said Tob, "as its gales will be heavier than this old ship can stomach, I had determined to haul up and make a permanent camp ashore, and get a crop of grain grown and threshed before setting sail again. It is the usual custom in these voyages. And I shall do it still, subject to my lord's better opinion."

So here, having by this time completed a two-months' leisurely journey from the city, I saw my opportunity to speak what I had always carried in my mind. "Tob," I said, "I am a poor, weak, defenceless man, and I am quite at your mercy; but what if I do not voyage all the way to the Tin Islands and oust you of this kingship?"

He brightened perceptibly. "Aye," he grunted, "you are very weak, my lord, and mighty defenceless. We know all about that. But what's else? You must tell all your meaning plain. I'm a common mariner, and understand little of your fancy talk."

"Why, this. That it is not my wish to leave the continent of Atlantis. If you will put me down on any part of this side that faces Europe, I will commend you strongly to the Gods. I would I could give you money, or (better still) articles that would be useful to you in your colonizing; but as it is, you see me destitute."

"As to that, you owe me nothing, having done

[p. 257]

vastly more than your share each time we have put inshore for the hunting. But it will not do, this plan of yours. I will shamedly confess that the sound of that kingship in my Tin Islands sounds sweet to me. But no, my lord, it will not do. You are no mariner yet, and understand little of geography, but I must tell you that the part of Atlantis there"--he jerked his thumb towards the line of trees and the mountains that lay beyond the fringe of surf--"is called the Dangerous Lands, and a man must needs be a salamander and be learned in magic (so I am told) before he can live there."

I laughed. "We of the Priests' Clan have some education, Tob, though it may not be on the same lines as your own. In fact, I may say I was taught in the colleges concerning the boundaries and the contents of our continent with a nicety that would surprise you. And once ashore, my fate will still be under the control of the most High Gods."

He muttered something in his profane seaman's way about preferring to keep his own fate under control of his own most strong right arm, but saying that he would keep the matter in his thoughts, he excused himself hurriedly to go and see to somewhat concerning the working of the ship, and there left me.

But I think the sweets of kingly rule were a strong argument in favor of letting me have my way (which I should have had otherwise if it had not been given peacefully), and on the third day after our talk he put the ship in-shore again for revictualling. We lurched into a river-mouth, half swamped over a roaring bar, and ran up against the bank and made fast

[p. 258]

there to trees, but booming ourselves a safe distance off with oars and poles, so that no beast could leap on board out of the thicket.

Fish-spearing and meat-hunting were set about with promptitude, and on the second day we were happy enough to slay a yearling river-horse, which gave provisions in all sufficiency. A space was cleared on the bank, fires lit, and the meat hung over the smoke in strips; and when as much was cured as the ship would carry, the shipmen made a final gorge on what remained, filled up a great stack of hollow reeds with drinking water, and were ready to continue the voyage.

With sturdy generosity did Tob again attempt to make me sail on with them as their future king, and as steadfastly did I make refusal; and at last I stood alone on the bank among the gnawed bones of their feast, with my weapons to bear me company, and he and his men and the women stood in the little old ship, ready to drop down river with the current.

"At least," said Tob, "we'll carry your memory with us, and make it big in the Tin Islands for everlasting."

"Forget me," I said; "I am nothing. I am merely an incident that has come in your way. But if you want to carry some memory with you that shall endure, preserve the cult of the most High Gods as it was taught to you when you were children here in Atlantis. And afterwards, when your colony grows in power, and has come to sufficient magnificence, you may send to the old country for a priest."

"We want no priest, except one we shall make ourselves,

[p. 259]

and that will be me. And as for the old Gods--well, I have laid my ideas before the fellows here, and they agree to this: We are done with those old Gods for always. They seem worn out, if one may judge from Their present lack of usefulness in. Atlantis; and, anyway, there will be no room for Them on the Tin Islands. Let go those warps there aft, and shove her head out. We are under way now, my lord, and beyond recall, and so I am free to tell you what we have decided upon for our religious exercises. We shall set up the memory of a living Hero on earth and worship that. And when in years to come the picture of his face grows dim, we shall doubtless make an image of him, as accurate as our art permits, and build him a temple for shelter, and bring there our offerings and prayers. And as I say, my lord, I shall be priest, and when I am dead, the sons of my body shall be priests after me, and the eldest a king also."

"Let me plead with you," I said. "This must not be."

The ship was drifting rapidly away with the current, and they were hoisting sail. Tob had to shout to make himself heard. "Aye, but it shall be. For I, too, am a strong man after my kind, and I have ordered it so. And if you want the name of our Hero that some day shall be God, you wear it on yourself. Deucalion shall be God for our children."

"This is blasphemy!" I cried. "Have a care, fool, or this impiety will sink you!"

"We will risk it," he bawled back, "and consider the odds against us are small. Regard! Here is

[p. 260]

the last horn of wine on the ship, and my woman has treasured it against this moment. Regard, all men, together with Those above and Those below! I pour this wine as a libation to Deucalion, great lord that is to-day, Hero that shall be to-morrow, God that will be in time to come!" And then all those on the ship joined in the acclaim till they were beyond the reach of my voice, and were battling their way out to the sea through the roaring breakers of the bar.

Solitary I stood at the brink of the forest, looking after them and musing sadly. Tob, despite his lowly station, was a man I cared for more than many. Like all seamen, I knew that he paid his devotions to one of the obscurer Gods, but till then I had supposed him devout in his worship. His new avowal came to me as a desolating shock. If a man like Tob could forsake all the older Gods to set up on high some poor mortal who had momentarily caught his fancy, what could be expected from the mere thoughtless mob when swayed by such a brilliant tongue as Phorenice's? It seemed I was to begin my exile with a new dreariness added to all the other adverse prospects of Atlantis.

But then behind me I heard the rustle of some great beast that had scented me, and was coming to attack through the thicket, and so I had other matters to think upon. I had to let Tob and his ship go out over the rim of the horizon unwatched.

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 261]

  

CHAPTER XV

  

ZAEMON'S SUMMONS

SINCE the days when man was first created upon the earth by Gods who looked down and did Their work from another place, there have always been areas of the land ill-adapted for his maintenance, but none more so than that part of Atlantis which lies over against the savage continents of Europe and Africa. The common people avoid it, because of a superstition which says that the spirits of the evil dead stalk about there in broad daylight, and slay all those that the more open dangers of the place might otherwise spare. And so it has happened often that the criminals who might have fled there from justice have returned of their own free will and voluntarily given themselves up to the tormentors rather than face its fabulous terrors.

To the educated, many of these legends are known to be mythical; but withal there are enough disquietudes remaining to make life very arduous and stocked with peril. Everywhere the mountains keep their contents on the boil; earth tremors are every day's experience; gushes of unseen evil vapors steal upon one with such cunningness and speed that it is often hard to flee in time before one is choked and killed; poisons well up into the rivers, yet leave their color

[p. 262]

unchanged; great cracks split across the ground, reaching down to the fires beneath, and the waters gush into these, and are shot forth again with devastating explosion; and always may be expected great outpourings of boiling mud or molten rock.

Yet with all this there are great sombre forests in these lands, with trees whose age, is unimaginable, and fires among the herbage are rare. All beneath the trees is water, and the air is full of warm steam and wetness. For a man to live in that constant hot damp is very mortifying to the strength. But strength is wanted, and cunning also beyond the ordinary, for these Dangerous Lands are the abode of the lizards, which of all beasts grow to the most enormous size, and are the most fearsome to deal with.

There are countless families and species of these lizards, and with some of them a man can contend with prospect of success. But there are others whose hugeness no human force can battle against. One I saw, as it came up out of a lake after gaining its day's food, that made the wet land shake and pulse as it trod. It could have taken Phorenice's mammoth into its belly, [**] and even a mammoth in full charge could not have harmed it. Great horny plates covered its head and body, and on the ridge of its back

[p. 263]

and tail and limbs were spines that tore great slivers from the black trees as it passed among them.

Now and again these monsters would get caught in some vast fissuring of the ground, but not often. Their speed of foot was great, and their sagacity keen. They seemed to know when the worst boilings of the mountains might be expected, and then they found safety in the deeper lakes, or buried themselves in wallows of the mud. Moreover, they were more kindly constituted than man to withstand one great danger of these regions, in that the heat of the water did them no harm. Indeed, they will lie peacefully in pools where sudden stream-bursts are making the water leap into boiling fountains; and I have seen one run quickly across a flow of molten rock which threatened to cut it off, and not be so much as singed in the transit.

In the midst of such neighbors, then, was my new life thrown, and existence became perilous and hard to me from the outset. I came near to knowing what fear was, and indeed only a fervent trust in the most High Gods, and a firm belief that my life was always under Their fostering care, prevented me from gaining that horrid knowledge. For long enough, till I learned somewhat of the ways of this steaming, sweltering land, I was in as miserable a case as even Phorenice could have wished to see me. My clothes rotted from my back with the constant wetness, till I went as naked as a savage from Europe; my limbs were racked with agues, and I could find no herbs to make drugs for their relief; for days together I could find no better food than

[p. 264]

tree-grubs and leaves; and often when I did kill beasts, knowing little of their qualities, I ate those that gave me pain and sickness.

But as man is born to make himself adaptable to his surroundings, so as the months dragged on did I learn the limitation of this new life of mine, and gather some knowledge of its resources. As example: I found a great black tree, with a hollow core, and a hole into its middle near the roots. Here I harbored, till one night some monstrous lizard, whose sheer weight made the tree rock like a sapling, endeavored to suck me forth as a bird picks a worm from a hollow log. I escaped by the will of the Gods--I could as much have done harm to a mountain as injure that horny tongue with my weapons--but I gave myself warning that this chance must not happen again.

So I cut myself a ladder of foot-holes on the inside of the trunk till I had reached a point ten man-heights from the ground, and there cut other notches, and with tree-branches made a floor on which I might rest. Later, for luxury, I carved me arrow-slit windows in the walls of my chamber, and even carried up sand for a hearth, so that I might cook my victual up there instead of lighting a fire in all the dangers of the open below.

By degrees, too, I bean to find how the large-scaled fish of the rivers and the lesser turtles might be more rapidly captured, and so my ribs threatened less to start through their proper covering of skin as the days went on. But the lack of salads and gruels I could never overcome. All the green meat

[p. 265]

was tainted so powerfully with the taste of tars that never could I force my palate to accept it. And of course, too, there remained the peril of the greater lizards and the other dangers native to the place.

But as the months began to mount into years, and the brute part of my nature became more satisfied, there came other longings which it was less easy to provide for. From the ivory of a river-horse's tooth I had endeavored to carve me a representation of Nais as last I had seen her. But, though my fingers might be loving and my will good, my art was of the dullest, and the result--though I tried time and time again--was always clumsy and pitiful. Still, in my eyes it carried some suggestion of the original--a curve here, an outline there--and it made my old love glow anew within me as I sat and ate it with my eyes. Yet it did little to satisfy my longings for the woman I had lost; rather it whetted my cravings to be with her again, or at least to have some knowledge of her fate.

Other men of the Priests' Clan have come out and made an abode in these Dangerous Lands, and by mortifying the flesh have gained an intimacy with the Higher Mysteries which has carried them far past what mere human learning and repetition could teach. Indeed, here and there one, who from some cause and another has returned to the abodes of men, has carried with him a knowledge that has brought him the reputation among the vulgar for the workings of magic and miracles, which--since all arts must be allowed which aid so holy a cause--have added very materially to the ardor with which these

[p. 266]

common people pursue the cult of the Gods. But for myself I could not free my mind to the necessary clearness for following these abstruse studies. During that voyage home from Yucatan I had communed with them with growing insight; but now my mind was not my own. Nais had a lien upon it, and refused to be ousted; and, in truth, her sweet trespass was my chief solace.

But at last my longing could no further be denied. Through one of the arrow-slit windows of my tree-house I could see far away a great mountain-top whitened with perpetual snow, which our Lord the Sun dyed with blood every night of His setting. Night after night I used to watch that ruddy light with wide-straining eyes. Night after night I used to remember that in days agone when I was entering upon the priesthood it had been my duty to adore our great Lord as He rose for His day behind the snows of that very mountain. And always the thought followed on these musings that from that distant crest I could see across the continent to the Sacred Mount which had the city below it where I had buried my love alive.

So at last I gave way and set out, and a perilous journey I made of it. In the heavy mists which hung always on the lower ground, my way lay blind before me, and I was constantly losing it. Indeed, to say that I traversed three times the direct distance is setting a low estimate. Throughout all those swamps the great lizards hunted, and as the country was new to me I did not know places of harbor, and a hundred times was within an ace of being spied

[p. 267]

and devoured at a mouthful. But the High Gods still desired me for Their own purposes, and blinded the great beasts' eyes when I slunk to cover as they passed. Twice rivers of scalding water roared boiling across my path, and I had to delay till I could collect enough black timber from the forests to build rafts that would give me dry ferriage.

It will be seen then that my journey was in a way infinitely tedious, but to me, after all those years of waiting, the time passed on winged feet. I had been separated from my love till I could bear the strain no longer; let me but see from a distance the place where she lay, and feast my eyes upon it for a while, and then I could go back to my abode in the tree and there remain patiently awaiting the will of the Gods.

The air grew more chilly as I began to come out above the region of trees, on to that higher ground which glares down on the rest of the world, and I made buskins and a coat of woven grasses to protect my body from the cold, which began to blow upon me keenly. And later on, where the snow lay eternally, and was blown into gullies and frozen into solid banks and bergs of ice, I had hard work to make any progress among its perilous mazes, and was, moreover, so numbed by the chill that my natural strength was vastly weakened. Overhead, too, following me up with forbidding swoops, and occasionally coming so close that I had to threaten it with my weapons, was one of those huge man-eating birds which live by pulling down and carrying off any creature that their instinct tells them is weakly and likely soon to die.

[p. 268]

But the lure ahead of me was strong enough to make these difficulties seem small, and though the air of the mountain agreed with me ill, causing sickness and panting, I pressed on with what speed I could muster towards the elusive summit. Time after time I thought the next spurt would surely bring me out to the view for which my soul yearned, but always there seemed another bank of snow and ice yet to be climbed. But at last I reached the crest, and gave thanks to the most High Gods for Their protection and favor.

Far, far away I could see the Sacred Mountain with its ring of fires burning pale under the day, and although the splendid city which nestled at its foot could not be seen from where I stood, I knew its position and I knew its plan, and my soul went out to that throne of granite in the square before the royal pyramid, where once, years before, I had buried my love. Had Phorenice left the tomb unviolated?

I stood there leaning on my spear, filling my eye with the prospect, warming even to the smoke of mountains that I recognized as old acquaintances. Gods! how my love burned within me for this woman! My whole being seemed gone out to meet her, and to leave room for nothing beside. For long enough a voice seemed dimly to be calling me, but I gave it no regard. I had come out to that hoary mountain-top for communion with Nais alone, and I wanted none others to interrupt.

But at length the voice calling my name grew too loud to be neglected, and I pulled myself out of my

[p. 269]

sweet pulsing with a start to think that here, for the first time since parting with Tob and his company, I should see another human fellow-being. I gripped my weapon and asked who called. The reply came clearly from up the slopes of mountain, and I saw a man coming towards me over the snows. He was old and feeble. His body was bent, and his hair and beard were white as the ground on which he trod, and presently I recognized him as Zaemon. He was coming towards me with incredible speed for a man of his years and feebleness, but he carried in his hand the glowing Symbol of our Lord the Sun, and holy strength from this would add largely to his powers.

He came close to me and made the sign of the Seven, which I returned to him, with its completion, with due form and ceremony. And then he saluted me in the manner prescribed as messenger appointed by the high council of the priests seated before the Ark of the Mysteries, and I made humble obeisance before him.

"In all things I will obey the orders that you put before me," I said.

"Such is your duty, my brother. The command is that you return immediately to the Sacred Mountain, so that if human means may still prevail, you, as the most skilful general Atlantis owns within her borders, may still save the country from final wreck and punishment. The woman Phorenice persists in her infamies. The poor land groans under her heel. And now she has laid siege to our Sacred Mountain itself, and swears that not one soul shall be left alive

[p. 270]

in all Atlantis who does not bend humbly to her will."

"It is a command and I obey it. But let me ask of another matter that is intimate to both of us. What of Nais?"

"Nais rests where you left her, untouched. Phorenice knows by her arts--she has stolen nearly all the ancient knowledge now--that still you live, and she keeps Nais unharmed beneath the granite throne in the hopes that some time she may use her as a weapon against you. Little she knows the sternness of our priests' creed, my brother. Why, even I, that am the girl's father, would sacrifice her blithely if her death or ruin might do a tittle of good to Atlantis."

"You go beyond me with your devotion."

The old man leaned forward at me, with glowering brow. "What!"

"Or my old blind adherence to the ancient dogma has been sapped and weakened by events. You must buy my full obedience, Zaemon, if you want it. Promise me Nais--and your arts, I know, can snatch her--and I will be true servant to the high council of the priests, and will die in the last ditch if need be for the carrying out of their order. But let me see Nais given over to the fury of that wanton woman, and I shall have no inwards left, except to take my vengeance and to see Atlantis piled up in ruins as her funeral-stone."

Zaemon looked at me bitterly. "And you are the man the high council thought to trust as they would trust one of themselves? Truly we are in an age

[p. 271]

of weak men and faithless now. But, my lord--nay, I must call you brother still: we cannot be too nice in our choosing to-day--you are the best there is, and we must have you. We little thought you would ask a price for your generalship, having once taken oath on the walls of the Ark of the Mysteries itself, that always, come what might, you would be a servant of the high council of the Clan without fee and without hope of advancement. But this is the age of broken vows, and you are doing no more than trim with the fashion. Indeed, brother, perhaps I should thank you for being no more greedy in your demands."

"You may spare me your taunts. You, by self-denial and profound search into the highest of the higher mysteries, have made yourself something wiser than human; I have preserved my humanity, and with it its powers and frailties; and it seems that each of us has his proper uses, or you would not be come now here to me. Rather you would have done the generaling yourself."

"You make a warm defence, my brother. But I have no leisure now to stand before you with argument. Come to the Sacred Mountain, fight me this wanton, upstart Empress, and, by my beard! you shall have your Nais as you left her as a reward."

"It is a command of the high council which shall be obeyed. I will come with my brother now, as soon as he is rested."

"Nay," said the old man, "I have no tiredness, and as for coming with me, there you will not be able. But follow at what pace you may."

[p. 272]

He turned and set off down the snowy slopes of the mountain, and I followed; but gradually he distanced me; and so he kept on, with speed always increasing, till presently he passed out of my sight round the spur of an ice-cliff, and I found myself alone on the mountain-side. Yes, truly alone. For his foot-marks in the snow from being deep, grew shallower and less noticeable, so that I had to stoop to see them. And presently they vanished entirely, and the great mountain's flank lay before me trackless and untrodden by the foot of man since time began.

I was not shaken by any great amazement. Though it was beyond my poor art to compass this thing myself, having occupied my mind in exile more with memories of Nais than in study of those uppermost recesses of the Higher Mysteries in which Zaemon was so prodigiously wise, still I had some inkling of his powers.

Zaemon, I knew, would be back again in his dwelling on the Sacred Mountain, shaken and breathless, even before I had found an end to his tracks in the snow, and it behooved me to join him there in the quickest possible time. I had his promise now for my reward, and I knew that he would carry it into effect. Beforetime I had made an error. I had valued Atlantis most, and Nais, my private love, as only second. But now it was in my mind. to be honest with others even as with myself. Though all the world were hanging on my choice, I could but love my Nais most, and serve her first and foremost of all.

Footnotes

^262:* Translator's note: Professor Reeder of the Wyoming State University has recently unearthed the skeleton of a Brontosaurus, 130 feet in length, which would have weighed 50 tons when alive. It was 35 feet in height at the hips, and 25 feet at the shoulder, and 40 people could be seated with comfort within its ribs. Its thigh bone was eight feet long. The fossils of a whole series of these colossal lizards have been found.

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 273]

  

CHAPTER XVI

  

SIEGE OF THE SACRED MOUNTAIN

NOW my passage across the great continent of Atlantis, if tedious and haunted by many dangers, need not be recounted in detail here. Only one halt did I make of any duration, and that was unavoidable. I had killed a stag one day, bringing it down after a long chase in an open savannah. I scented the air carefully, to see if there was any other beast which could do me harm within reach, and thinking that the place was safe, set about cutting my meat, and making a sufficiency into a bundle for carriage.

But under foot among the grasses there was a great legged worm, a monstrous green thing, very venomous in its bite; and presently as I moved I brushed it with my heel, and like the dart of light it swooped with its tiny head and struck me with its fangs in the lower thigh. With my knife I cut through its neck, and it fell to writhing and struggling and twining its hundred legs into all manner of contortions; and then, cleaning my blade in the ground, I stabbed with it deep all round the wound, so that the blood might flow freely and wash the venom from its lodgment. And then with the blood trickling healthily down from my heel, I shouldered the meat and strode off, thankful for being so well

[p. 274]

quit of what might have made itself a very ugly adventure.

As I walked, however, my leg began to be filled with a tightness and throbbing which increased every hour, and presently it began to swell also, till the skin was stretched like drawn parchment. I was taken, too, with a sickness that racked me violently, and if one of the greater and more dangerous beasts had come upon me then, he would have eaten me without a fight. With the fall of darkness I managed to haul myself up into a tree, and there abode in the crutch of a limb in wakefulness and pain throughout the night.

With the dawn, when the night beasts had gone to their lairs, I clambered down again, and leaning heavily on my spear, limped onward through the sombre forests along my way. The moss which grows on the northern side of each tree was my guide, but gradually I began to note that I was seeing moss all round the trees, and, in fact, was growing lightheaded with the pain and the swelling of the limb. But still I pressed onward with my journey, my last instinct being to obey the command of the high council, and so procure the enlargement of Nais as had been promised.

My last memory was of being met by some one in the black forest who aided me, and there my waking senses took wings into forgetfulness.

But after an interval wit returned, and I found myself on a bed of leaves in a cleft between two rocks, which was furnished with some poor skill, and fortified with stakes and buildings against the entrance

[p. 275]

of the larger marauding beasts. My wound was dressed with a poultice of herbs, and at the other side of the cavern there squatted a woman, cooking a mess of wood-grubs and honey over a fire of sticks.

"How came I here?" I asked.

"I brought you," said she.

"And who are you?"

"A nymph they call me, and I practise as such, collecting herbs and curing the diseases of those that come to me, telling fortunes, and making predictions. In return I receive what each can afford; and if they do not pay according to their means, I clap on a curse to make them wither. It's a lean enough living when wars and the pestilence have left so few poor folk to live in the land."

"Do you visit Atlantis?"

"Not I. Phorenice would have me boiled in brine, living, if she could lay easy hands on me. Our dainty Empress tolerates no magic but her own. They say she is for pulling down the priests off their mountain now."

So you do get news of the city?"

"Assuredly. It is my trade to get good news, or otherwise how could I tell fortunes to the vulgar? You see, my lord, I detected your quality by your speech, and knowing you are not one of those that come to me for spells and potions, I have no fear in speaking to you plainly."

"Tell me then: Phorenice still reigns?"

"Most vilely."

"As a maiden?"

[p. 276]

"As the mother of twin sons. Tatho's her husband now, and has been these three years."

"Tatho! Who followed him as viceroy of Yucatan?"

"There is no Yucatan. A vast nation of little hairy men, so the tale goes, coming from the west, overran the country. They had clubs of wood tipped with stone as their only arm, but numbers made their chief weapon. They had no desire for plunder, or the taking of slaves, or the conquering of cities. To eat the flesh of Atlanteans was their only lust, and they followed it prodigiously. Their numbers were like the bees in a swarm.

"They came to each of the cities of Yucatan in turn, and though the colonists slew them thousands, the weight of numbers always prevailed. They ate clean each city they took, and left it to the beasts of the forest, and went on to the next. And so in time they reached the coast towns, and Tatho and the few that survived took ship and sailed home. They even ate Tatho's wife for him. They must be curious persevering things, these little hairy men. The Gods send they do not get across the seas to Atlantis, or they would be worse plague to the poor country than Phorenice."

Now I had heard of these little hairy creatures before, and though indeed I had never seen them, I had gathered that they were a little less than human and a little more than bestial--a link, so to speak, between the two orders; and specially held in check by the Gods in certain forest solitudes. Also I had learned that on occasion, when punishment was needful,

[p. 277]

they could be set loose as a devastating army upon men, devouring all before them. But I said nothing of this to the nymph, she being but a vulgar woman, and indeed half silly, as is always the case with these self-styled sorceresses who gull the ignorant, common folk. But within myself I was bitterly grieved at the fate of that fine colony of Yucatan, in which I had expended such an infinity of pains to do my share of the building.

But it did not suit my purpose to have my name and quality blazoned abroad till the time was full, and so I said nothing to the nymph about Yucatan, but let the talk continue upon other matters. "What about Egypt?" I asked.

"In its accustomed darkness, so they say. Who cares for Egypt these latter years? Who cares for any one or anything for that matter except for himself and his own proper estate? Time was when the country folk and hunters hereabouts brought me offerings to this cave for sheer pity's sake. But now they never come near unless they see a way of getting good value in return for their gifts. And, by result, instead of living fat and hearty, I make lean meals off honey and grubs. It's a poor life, a nymph's, in these latter years, I tell you, my lord. It's the fashion for all classes to believe in no kind of mystery now."

"What manner of pestilence is this you spoke of?"

"I have not seen it. Thank the Gods it has not come this way. But they do say that it has grown from the folk Phorenice has slain, and whose bodies remain unburied. She is always slaying, and so the

[p. 278]

bodies lie thicker than the birds and beasts can eat them. For which of our sins, I wonder, did the Gods let Phorenice come to reign? I wish that she and her twins were boiled alive in brine before they came between an honest nymph of the forest and her living.

"They say she has put an image of herself in all the temples of the city now, and has ordered prayers and sacrifices to be made night and morning. She has decreed all other Gods inferior to herself and forbidden their worship, and those of the people that are not sufficiently devout for her taste have their hamstrings slit by her tormentors to aid them constantly into a devotional attitude. Will you eat of my grubs and honey? There is nothing else. Your back was bloody with carrying meat when I met you, but you had lost your load. You must either taste this mess of mine now or go without."

I harbored with that nymph in cave six days, she using her drugs and charms to cure my leg the while; and when I was recovered, I hunted the plains and killed her a fat cloven-hoofed horse as payment, and then went along my ways.

The country from there onward had at one time carried a sturdy population which held its own firmly, and, as its numbers grew, took in more ground, and built more homesteads farther afield. The houses were perched in trees for the most part, as there they were out of reach of cave-bear and cave-tiger and the other more dangerous beasts. But others, and these were the better ones, were built on the ground, of logs so ponderous and so firmly clamped and dove-tailed

[p. 279]

that the beasts could not pull them down; and once inside a house of this fashion its owners were safe, and could progue at any attackers through the interstices between the logs, and often wound, sometimes make a kill.

But not one in ten of these outlying settlers remained. The houses were silent when I reached them, the fire-hearth before the door weed-grown, and the patch of vegetables taken back by the greedy fingers of the forest into mere scrub and jungle. And farther on, when villages began to appear, strongly walled, as the custom is, to ward off the attacks of beasts, the logs which aforetime had barred the gateway lay strewn in a sprouting undergrowth, and naught but the kitchen middens remained to prove that once they had sheltered human tenants. Phorenice's influence seemed to have spread as though it were some horrid blight over the whole face of what was once a smiling and an easy-living land.

So far I had met with little enough interference from any men I had come across. Many had fled with their women into the depths of the forest at the bare sight of me; some stood their ground with a threatening face, but made no offer to attack, seeing that I did not offer them insult first; and a few, a very few, offered me shelter and provision. But as I neared the city, and began to come upon muddy, beaten paths, I passed through governments that were more thickly populated, and here appeared strong chance of delay. The watcher in the tower which is set above each village would spy me and cry: "Here is a masterless man," and then the people

[p. 280]

that were within would rush out with intent to spoil me of my weapons, and afterwards to appoint me as a laborer.

I had no desire to slay these wretched folk, being filled with pity at the state to which they had fallen; and often words served me to make them stand aside from the path, and stare wonderingly at my fierceness, and let me go my ways. And when at other times words had no avail, I strove to strike as lightly as could be, my object being to get forward with my journey and leave no unnecessary dead behind me. Indeed, having found the modern way of these villages, it grew to be my custom to turn off into the forest and make a circuit whenever I came within smell of their garbage.

Similarly, too, when I got farther on, and came among greater towns also, I kept beyond challenge of their walls, having no mind to risk delay from the whim of any new law which might chance to be set up by their governors. My progress might be slinking, but my pride did not upbraid me very loudly; indeed, the fever of haste burned within me so hot that I had little enough carrying space for other emotions.

But at last I found myself within a half-day's journey of the city of Atlantis itself, with the Sacred Mountain and its ring of fires looming high beside it, and the call for caution became trebly accentuated. Everywhere evidences showed that the country had been drained of its fighting men. Everywhere women prayed that the battles might end with the rout of the priests or the killing of Phorenice, so that

[p. 281]

the wretched land might have peace and time to lick its wounds.

An army was investing the Sacred Mountain, and its one approach was most narrowly guarded. Even after having journeyed so far, it seemed as if I should have to sit hopelessly down without being able to carry out the orders which had been laid upon me by the high council, and earn the reward which had been promised. Force would be useless here. I should have one good fight--a gorgeous fight--one man against an army, and my usefulness would be ended. . . . No; this was the occasion for guile, and I found covert in the outskirts of a wood, and lay there cudgelling my brain for a plan.

Across the plain before me lay the grim great walls of the city, with the heads of its temples and its palaces and its pyramids showing beyond. The step-sides of the royal pyramid held my eye. Phorenice had expended some of her new-found store of gold in overlaying their former whiteness with sheets of the shining yellow metal. But it was not that change that moved me. I was remembering that, in the square before the pyramid, there stood a throne of granite carved with the snake and the outstretched hand, and in the hollow beneath the throne was Nais, my love, asleep these eight years now because of the drug that had been given to her, but alive still, and waiting for me, if only I on my part could make a way to the place where Zaemon defied the Empress, and announce my coming.

In that covert of the woods I lay a day and a night raging with myself for not discovering some plan to

[p. 282]

get within the defences of the Sacred Mountain, but in the morning which followed there came a man towards me running.

"You need not threaten me with your weapons," he cried. "I mean no harm. It seems that you are Deucalion, though I should not have known you myself in those rags and skins, and behind that tangle of hair and beard. You will give me your good word, I know. Believe me, I have not loitered unduly."

He was a lower priest whom I knew and held in little esteem; his name was Ro, a greedy fellow and not overworthy of trust. "From whom do you come?" I asked.

"Zaemon laid a command on me. He came to my house, though how he got. there I cannot tell, seeing that Phorenice's army blocks all possible passage to and from the Mountain. I told him I wished to be mixed with none of his schemings. I am a peaceful man, Deucalion, and have taken a wife who requires nourishment. I still serve in the same temple, though we have swept out the old Gods by order of the Empress, and put her image in their place. The people are tidily pious nowadays, those that are left of them, and the living is consequently easy. Yes, I tell you there are far more offerings now than there were in the old days. And so I had no wish to be mixed with matters which might well make me be deprived of a snug post, and my head to boot."

"I can believe it all of you, Ro."

"But there was no denying Zaemon. He burst into one of his black furies, and while he spoke at

[p. 283]

me, I tell you I felt as good as dead. You know his powers?"

"I have seen some of them."

"Well, the Gods alone know which are the true Gods and which are the others. I serve the one that gives me employment. But Those that Zaemon serves give him power, and that's beyond denying. You see that right hand of mine? It is dead and paralyzed from the wrist, and that is a gift of Zaemon. He bestowed it, he said, to make me collect my attention. Then he said more hard things concerning what he was pleased to term my apostasy, not letting me put up a word in my own defence of how the change was forced upon me. And finally, said he, I might either do his bidding on a certain matter to the letter, or take that punishment which my falling away from the old Gods had earned. 'I shall not kill you,' said he, 'but I will cover all your limbs with a paralysis such as you have tasted already, and when at length death reaches you in some gutter, you will welcome it.'"

"If Zaemon said those words he meant them. So you accepted the alternative?"

"Had I, with a wife depending on me, any other choice? I asked his pleasure. It was to find you when you came in here from some distant part of the land and deliver to you his message.

"'Then tell me where is the meeting-place,' said I, 'and when.'

"'There is none appointed, nor is a day fixed,' said he. 'You must watch and search always for him. But when he comes, you will be guided to his

[p. 284]

place.' Well, Deucalion, I think I was guided, but how I do not know. But now I have found you, and if there's such a thing as gratitude, I ask you to put in your word with Zaemon that this deadness be taken away from my hand: It's an awful thing for a man to be forced to go through life like this, for no real fault of his own. And Zaemon could cure it from where he sat if he was so minded."

"You seem still to have a very full faith in some of the old Gods' priests," I said. "But so far I do not see that your errand is done. I have had no message yet."

"Why, the message is so simple that I do not see why he could not have got some one else to carry it. You are to make a great blaze. You may fire the grasses of the plain in front of this wood if you choose. And on the night which follows you are to go round to that flank of the Sacred Mountain away from the city where the rocks run down sheer, and there they will lower a rope and haul you up to their hands above."

"It seems easy, and I thank you for your pains. I will ask Zaemon that your hand may be restored to you."

"You shall have my prayers if it is. And look, Deucalion, it is a small matter, and it would be less likely to slip your memory if you saw to it at once on your landing. Later you may be disturbed. Phorenice is bound to pull you down off your perch up there now she has made her mind to it. She never fails, once she has set her hand to a thing. Indeed, if she was no Goddess at birth, she is making herself

[p. 285]

into one very rapidly. She has got all the ancient learning of our priests, and more besides. She has discovered the Secret of Life these recent months--"

"She has found that?" I cried, fairly startled. "How? Tell me how? Only the Three know that. It is beyond our knowledge even who are members of the Seven."

"I know nothing of her means. But she has the secret, and now she is as good an immortal (so she says) as any of them. Well, Deucalion, it is dangerous for me to be missing from my temple overlong, so I will go. You will carry that matter we spoke of in your mind? It means much to me." His eye wandered over my ragged person. "And if you think my service is of value to you--"

"You see me poor, my man, and practically destitute."

"Some small coin," he murmured, "or even a link of bronze? I am at great expense just now buying nourishment for my wife. Well, if you have nothing, you cannot give. So I'll just bid you farewell."

He took himself off then, and I was not sorry. I had never liked Ro. But I wasted no more precious time then. The grass blazed up for a signal almost before his timorous heels were clear of it; and that night when the darkness gave me cover, I took the risk of what beasts might be prowling, and went to the place appointed. There was no rope dangling, but presently one came down the smooth cliff-face like some slender snake. I made a loop, slipped it over a leg, and pulled hard as a signal.

[p. 286]

[paragraph continues] Those above began to haul, and so I went back to the Sacred Mountain after an absence of so many toilsome and warring years. There were none to disturb the ascent. Phorenice's troops had no thought to guard that gaunt, bare, seamless precipice.

The men who hauled me up were old, and panted heavily with their task, and, until I knew the reason, I wondered why a knot of younger priests had not been appointed for the duty. But I put no question. With us of the Priests' Clan on the Sacred Mountain it is always taken as granted that when an order is given, it is given for the best. Besides, these priests did not offer themselves to question. They took me off at once to Zaemon, and that is what I could have wished.

The old man greeted me with the royal sign. "All hail to Deucalion," he cried, "King of Atlantis, duly called thereto by the high council of the priests."

"Is Phorenice dead?" I asked.

"It remains for you to slay her and take your kingdom, if, indeed, when all is done, there remains a man or a rood of land to govern. The sentence has gone out that she is to die, and it shall be carried into effect, even though we have to set loose the most dreadful powers that are stored in the Ark of the Mysteries, and wreck this continent in our effort. We have borne with her infamies all these years by command sent down by the most High Gods; but now she has gone beyond endurance, and They it is who have given the word for her cutting off."

"You are one of the highest Three; I am only one of the Seven; you best know the cost."

[p. 287]

"There can be no counting of the cost now, my brother and my King. It is an order."

"It is an order," I repeated formally, "so I obey."

"If it were not impious to do so, it would be easy to justify this decision of the Gods. The woman has usurped the throne; yet she was forgiven and bidden rule on wisely. She has tampered with our holy religion; yet she was forgiven. She has killed the people of Atlantis in greedy, useless wars, and destroyed the country's trade; yet she was forgiven. She has desecrated the old temples, and latterly has set up in them images of herself to be worshipped as a deity; yet she was forgiven. But at last her evil cleverness has discovered to her the tremendous Secret of Life and Death, and there she overstepped the boundary of the High Gods' forbearance.

"I myself went to carry a final warning, and once more faced her in the great banqueting-hall. Solemnly I recited to her the edict, and she chose to take it as a challenge. She would live on eternally herself, and she would share her knowledge with those that pleased her. Tatho that was her husband should also be immortal. Indeed, if she thought fit, she would cry the secret aloud so that even the common people might know it, and death from mere age would become a legend.

"She cared no whit how she might upset the laws of Nature. She was Phorenice, and was the highest law of all. And finally she defied me there in that banqueting-hall and defied also the High Gods that stood behind my mouth. 'My magic is as strong as yours, you pompous fool,' she cried, 'and presently you

[p. 288]

shall see the two stand side by side upon their trial.'

"She began to collect an army from that moment, and we on our part made our-preparations. It was discovered by our arts that you still lived, and King of Atlantis you were made by solemn election. How you were summoned you know as nearly as it is lawful that one of your degree should know; how you came you understand best yourself; but here you are, my brother, and being King now, you must order all things as you see best for the preservation of your high estate, and we others live only to give you obedience."

"Then being King, I can speak without seeming to make use of a threat. I must have my Queen first, or I am not strong enough to give my whole mind to this ruling."

"She shall be brought here."

"So! Then I will be a general now, and see to the defences of this place, and view the men who are here to stand behind them."

I went out of the dwelling then, Zaemon giving place and following me. It was night still, but there is no darkness on the upper part of the Sacred Mountain. A ring of fires, fed eternally from the earth-breath which wells up from below, burns round one-half of the crest, lighting it always as bright as day, and in fact forming no small part of its fortification. Indeed, it is said that in the early dawn of history men first came to the Mountain as a stronghold because of the natural defence which the fires offered.

[p. 289]

There is no bridging these flames or smothering them. On either side of their line for a hundred paces the ground glows with heat, and a man would be turned to ash who tried to cross it. Round full one-half of the mountain slopes the fires make a rampart unbreakable, and on the other side the rock runs in one sheer precipice from the crest to the plain which spreads beyond its foot. But it is on this farther side that there is the only entrance way which gives passage to the crest of the Sacred Mountain from below. Running diagonally up the steep face of the cliff is a gigantic fissure, which succeeding ages (as man has grown more luxurious) have made more easy to climb.

Looking at the additions, in the ancient days, I can well imagine that none but the most daring could have made the ascent. But one generation has thrown a bridge over a bad gap here, and another has cut into the living stone and widened a ledge there, till in these latter years there is a path with cut steps and carved balustrade such as the feeblest or most giddy might traverse with little effort or exertion. But always when these improvers made smooth the obstacles, they were careful to weaken in no possible way the natural defences, but rather to add to them.

Eight gates of stone there were cutting the pathway, each commanding a straight, steep piece of the ascent, and overhanging each gate was a gallery secure from arrow-shot, yet so contrived that great stones could be hurled through holes in the floor of it, in such a manner that they must irretrievably

[p. 290]

smash to a pulp any men advancing against it from below. And in caves dug out from the rock on either hand was a great hoard of these stones, so that no enemy through sheer expenditure of troops could hope to storm a gate by exhausting its ammunition.

But though there were eight of these granite gates in the series, we had the whole number to depend on no longer. The lowest gate was held by a garrison of Phorenice's troops, who had built a wall above them to protect their occupation. The gate had been gained by no brilliant feat of arms--it had been won by threats, bribery, and promises; or, in other words, it had been given up by the blackest treachery.

And here lay the key-note of the weakness in our defence. The most perfect ramparts that brain can invent are useless without men to line them, and it was men we lacked. Of students entering into the colleges of the Sacred Mountain there had been none now for many a year. The younger generation thought little of the older Gods. Of the men that had grown up among the sacred groves, and filled offices there, many had become lukewarm in their faith and remained on only through habit, and because an easy living stayed near them there; and these, when the siege began, quickly made their way over to the other side.

Phorenice was no fool to fight against unnecessary strength. Her heralds made proclamation that peace and a good subsistence would be given to those who chose to come out to her willingly; and as an alternative she would kill by torture and mutilation those she caught in the place when she took it by storm,

[p. 291]

as she most assuredly would do before she had finished with it. And so great was the prestige of her name that quite one-half of those that remained on the Mountain took themselves away from the defence.

There was no attempt to hold back these sorry priests, nor was there any punishing them as they went. Zaemon, indeed, was minded (so he told me with grim meaning himself) to give them some memento of their apostasy to carry away which would not wear out, but the others of the high council made him stay his vengeful hand. And so, when I came to the place, the garrison numbered no more than eighty, counting even feeble old dotards who could barely walk; and of men not past their prime I could barely command a score.

Still, seeing the narrowness of the passages which led to each of the gates, up which in no place could more than two men advance together, we were by no means in desperate straits for the defence as yet; and if my new-given kingdom was so far small, consisting as it did in effect of the Sacred Mountain, and no other part of Atlantis, at any rate there seemed little danger of its being further contracted.

Another of the wise precautions of the men of old stood us in good stead then. In the ancient times, when grain first was grown as food, it came to be looked upon as the acme of wealth. Tribute was always paid from the people to their priests, and presently, so the old histories say, it was appointed that this should take the form of grain, as this was a medium both dignified and fitting. And those of the

[p. 292]

people who had it not were forced to barter their other produce for grain before they could pay this tribute.

On the Sacred Mountain itself vast storehouses were dug in the rock, and here the grain was teemed in great yellow heaps, and each generation of those that were set over it took a pride in adding to the accumulation.

In more modern days it had been a custom among the younger and more forward of the priests to scoff at this ancient provision, and to hold that a treasure of gold or weapons or jewels would have more value and no less of dignity; and more than once it has been a close thing lest these innovators should not be outvoted. But as it was, the old constitution had happily been preserved, and now in these years of trial the Clan reaped the benefit. And so with these granaries, and a series of great tanks and cisterns which held the rainfall, there was no chance of Phorenice reducing our stronghold by mere close investment, even though she sat down stubbornly before it for a score of years.

But it was the paucity of men for the defence which oppressed me most. As I took my way about the head of the Mountain, inspecting all points, the emptiness of the place smote me like a succession of blows. The groves, once so trim, were now shaggy and unpruned. Wind had whirled the leaves in upon the temple floors, and they lay there upswept. The college of youths held no more than a musty smell to bear witness that men had once been grown there. The homely palaces of the higher priests, at

[p. 293]

one time so ardently sought after, lay many of them empty, because not even one candidate came forward now to canvass for election.

Evil thoughts surged up within me as I saw these things, that were direct promptings from the nether Gods. "There must be something wanting," these tempters whispered, "in a religion from which so many of its priests fled at the first pinch of persecution."

I did what I could to thrust these waverings resolutely behind me; but they refused to be altogether ousted from my brain; and so I made a compromise with myself: First, I would with the help that might be given me, destroy this wanton Phorenice, and regain the kingdom which had been given me to my own proper rule; and afterwards I would call a council of the Seven and council of the Three, and consider without prejudice if there was any matter in which our ancient ritual could be amended to suit the more modern requirements. But this should not be done till Phorenice was dead and I was firmly planted in her room. I would not be a party, even to myself, to any plan which smacked at all of surrender.

And there as I walked through the desolate groves and beside the cold altars, the High Gods were pleased to show Their approval of my scheme, and to give me opportunity to bind myself to it with a solemn oath and vow. At that moment, from His distant resting-place in the east, our Lord the Sun leaped up to begin another day. For long enough, from where I stood below the crest of the Mountain,

[p. 294]

[paragraph continues] He himself would be invisible. But the great light of His glory spread far into the sky, and against it the Ark of the Mysteries loomed in black outline from the highest crag where it rested, lonely and terrible.

For any one unauthorized to go nearer than a thousand paces to this storehouse of the Highest Mysteries meant instant death. On that day when I was initiated as one of the Seven I had been permitted to go near and once press my lips against its ample curves; and the rank of my degree gave me the privilege to repeat that salute again once on each day when a new year was born. But what lay inside its great interior, and how it was entered, that was hidden from the Seven, even as it was from the other priests and the common people in the city below. Only those who had been raised to the sublime elevation of the Three had a knowledge of the dreadful powers which were stored within it.

I went down on my knees where I was, and Zaemon knelt beside me, and together we recited the prayers which had been said by the priests from the beginning of time, giving thanks to our great Lord that He has come to brighten another day. And then, with my eyes fixed on the black outline of the Ark of Mysteries I vowed that, come what might, I at least would be true servant of the High Gods to my life's end, and that my whole strength should be spent in restoring Their worship and glory.

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 295]

  

CHAPTER XVII

  

NAIS THE REGAINED

NOW from where we stood together, just below the crest of the Sacred Mountain, we could see down into the city, which lay spread out below us like a map. The harbor and the great estuary gleamed at its farther side, and the fringe of hills beyond smoked and fumed in their accustomed fashion; the great stone circle of our Lord the Sun stood up grim and bare in the middle of the city, and nearer in reared up the great mass of the royal pyramid, the gold on its sides catching new gold from the Sun. There, too, in the square before the pyramid stood the throne of granite, dwarfed by the distance to the size of a mole's hill, in which these nine years my love had lain sleeping.

Old Zaemon followed my gaze. "Aye," he said, with a sigh, "I know where your chief interest is. Deucalion when he landed here new from Yucatan was a strong man. The King whom we have chosen--and who is the best we have to choose--has his weakness."

"It can be turned into additional strength. Give me Nais here, living and warm to fight for, and I am a stronger man by far than the cold viceroy and soldier that you speak about."

[p. 296]

"I have passed my word to that already, and you shall have her, but at the cost of damaging somewhat this new kingdom of yours. Maybe, too, at the same time we shall rid you of this Phorenice and her brood. But I do not think it likely. She is too wily, and, once we begin our play, she is likely to guess whence it comes and how it will end, and so will make an escape before harm can reach her. The High Gods, who have sent all these trials for our refinement, have seen fit to give her some knowledge of how these earth tremors may be set a-moving."

"I have seen her juggle with them. But may I hear your scheme?"

"It will be shown you in good time enough. But for the present I would bid you sleep. It will be your part to go into the city to-night, and take your woman (that is my daughter) when she is set free, and bring her here as best you can. And for that you will need all a strong man's strength." He stepped back and looked me up and down. "There are not many folk that would take you for the tidy, clean-chinned Deucalion now, my brother. Your appearance will be a fine armor for you down yonder in the city to-night when we wake it with our earthshaking and terror. As you stand now, you are hairy enough and shaggy enough and naked enough and dirty enough for some wild savage new landed out of Europe. Have a care that no fine citizen down yonder takes a fancy to your thews and seizes upon you as his servant."

"I somewhat pity him in his household if he does."

[p. 297]

Old Zaemon laughed. "Why, come to think of it, so do I."

But quickly he got grave again. Laughter and Zaemon were very rare playmates. "Well, get you to bed, my King, and leave me to go into the Ark of Mysteries and prepare there with another of the Three the things that must be done. It is no light business to handle the tremendous powers which we must put into movement this night. And there is danger for us as there is for you. So if by chance we do not meet again till we stand up yonder behind the stars, giving account to the Gods, fare you well, Deucalion."

I slept that day as a soldier sleeps, taking full rest out of the hours, and letting no harassing thought disturb me. It is only the weak who permit their sleep to be broken on these occasions. And when the dark was well set, I roused and fetched those who should attend to the rope. Our Lady the Moon did not shine at that turn of the month, and the air was full of a great blackness. So I was out of sight all the while they lowered me.

I reached the tumbled rocks that lay at the deep foot of the cliff, and then commenced to use a nice caution, because Phorenice's soldiers squatted uneasily round their camp-fires, as though they had forebodings of the coming evil. I had no mind to further stir their wakefulness. So I crept swiftly along in the darkest of the shadows, and at last came to the spot where that passage ends which before I had used to get beneath the walls of the city.

The lamp was in place, and I made my way along

[p. 298]

the windings swiftly. The air, so it seemed to me, was even more noxious with vapors than it had been when I was down there before, and I judged that Zaemon had already begun to stir those internal activities which were shortly to convulse the city. But again I had difficulty in finding an exit, and this, not because there were people moving about at the places where I had to come out, but because the set of the masonry was entirely changed. In olden time the Priests' Clan oversaw all the architects' plans, and ruled out anything likely to clash with their secret passages and chambers. But in this modern day the priests were of small account, and had no say in this matter, and the architects often through sheer blundering sealed up and made useless many of these outlets and hiding-places.

As it was, then, I had to get out of the net-work of tunnels and galleries where I could, and not where I would, and in the event found myself at the farther side of the city, almost up to where the outer wall joins down to the harbor. I came out without being seen, careful even in this moment of extremity to preserve the ordinances, and closed all traces of exit behind me. The earth seemed to spring beneath my feet like the deck of a ship in smooth water; and though there was no actual movement as yet to disturb the people--and indeed these slept on in their houses and shelters without alarm--I could feel myself that the solid deadness of the ground was gone, and that any moment it might break out into devastating waves of movement.

Gods! Should I be too late to see the untombing

[p. 299]

of my love? Would she be laid there bare to the public gaze when presently the people swarmed out into the open spaces through fear at what the great earth-tremor might cause to fall? I could see, in fancy, their rude, cruel hands thrust upon her as she lay there helpless, and my inwards dried up at the thought.

I ran madly down and down the narrow winding streets with the one thought of coming to the square which lay in front of the royal pyramid before these things came to pass. With exquisite cruelty I had been forced with my own hands to place her alive in her burying-place beneath the granite throne, and if thews and speed could do it, I would not miss my reward of taking her forth again with the same strong hands.

Few disturbed that furious hurry. At first here and there some wretch who harbored in the gutter cried: "A thief! Throw a share or I pursue!" But if any of these followed, I do not know. At any rate, my speed then must have outdistanced any one. Presently, too, as the swing of the earth underfoot became more keen, and the stone-work of the buildings by the street-side began to grate and groan and grit and send forth little showers of dust, people began to run with scared cries from out of their doors. But none of these had a mind to stop the ragged, shaggy, savage man who ran so swiftly past and flung the mud from his naked feet.

And so in time I came to the great square, and was there none too soon. The place was filling with people who flocked away from the narrow streets,

[p. 300]

and it was full of darkness and noise and dust and sickness. Beneath us the ground rippled in undulations like a sea, which with terrifying slowness grew more and more intense.

Ever and again a house crashed down unseen in the gloom and added to the tumult. But the great pyramid had been planned by its old builders to stand rude shocks. Its stones were dovetailed into one another with a marvellous cleverness, and were further clamped and joined by ponderous tongues of metal. It was a boast that one-half the foundations could be dug from beneath it, and still the pyramid would stand four-square under heaven, more enduring than the hills.

Flickering torches showed that its great stone doors lay open, and ever and again I saw some frightened inmate scurry out and then be lost to sight in the gloom. But with the royal pyramid and its ultimate fate I had little concern; I did not even care then whether Phorenice was trapped, or whether she came out sound and fit for further mischief. I crouched by the granite throne which stood in the middle of that splendid square, and heard its stones grate together like the ends of a broken bone as it rocked to the earth-waves.

In that night of dust and darkness it was hard to see the outline of one's own hand, but I think that the Gods in some requital for the love which had ached so long within me, gave me especial power of sight. As I watched, I saw the great carved rock which formed the capstone of the throne move slightly, and then move again, and then again; a tiny jerk for each

[p. 301]

earth-pulse, but still there was an appreciable shifting; and, moreover, the stone moved always to one side.

There was method in Zaemon's desperate work, and this in my blind panic of love and haste I had overlooked. So I went up the steps of the throne on the side from which the great capstone was moving, and clung there afire with expectation.

More and more violent did the earth-swing grow, though the gradations of its increase could not be perceived, and the din of falling houses and the shrieks and cries of hurt and frightened people went louder up into the night. Thicker grew the dust that filled the air, till one coughed and strangled in the breathing, and more black did the night become as the dust rose and blotted the rare stars from sight. I clung to an angle of the granite throne, crouching on the uppermost step but one below the capstone, and could scarcely keep my place against the violence of the earth-tremors.

But still the huge capstone that was carved with the snake and the outstretched hand held my love fast locked in her living tomb, and I could have bit the cold granite at the impotence which barred me from her. The people who kept thronging into the square were mad with terror, but their very numbers made my case more desperate every moment. "Phorenice, Goddess, aid us now!" some cried, and when the prayer did not bring them instant relief, they fell to yammering out the old confessions of the faith which they had learned in childhood, turning in this hour of their dreadful need to those old Gods which, through

[p. 302]

so many dishonorable years, they had spurned and deserted. It was a curious criticism on the balance of their real religion, if one had cared to make it.

Louder grew the crash of falling masonry; and from the royal pyramid itself, though indeed I could not even see its outline through the darkness, there came sounds of grinding stones and cracking bars of metal which told that even its superb majestic strength had a breaking strain. There came to my mind the threat that old Zaemon had thundered forth in that painted, perfumed banqueting-hall: "You shall see," he had cried to the Empress, "this royal pyramid which you have polluted with your debaucheries torn tier from tier and stone from stone, and scattered as feathers spread before a wind!"

Still heavier grew the surging of the earth, and the pavement of the great square gaped and upheaved, and the people who thronged it screamed still more shrilly as their feet were crushed by the grinding blocks. And now too the great pyramid itself was commencing to split and gape and topple. The roofs of its splendid chambers gave way, and the ponderous masonry above shuttered down and filled them. In part, too, one could see the destruction now, and not guess at it merely from the fearful hearings of the darkness. Thunders had begun to roar through the black night above and add their bellowings to this devil's orchestration of uproar, and vivid lightning splashes lit the flying dust-clouds.

It was perhaps natural that she should be there, but it came as a shock when a flare of the lightning

[p. 303]

showed me Phorenice safe out in the square, and indeed standing not far from myself.

She had taken her place in the middle of a great flagstone, and stood there swaying her supple body to the shocks. Her face was calm, and its loveliness was untouched by the years. From time to time she brushed away the dust as it settled on the short red hair which curled about her neck. There was no trace of fear written upon her face. There was some weariness, some contempt, and I think a tinge of amusement. Yes, it took more than the crumbling of her royal pyramid to impress Phorenice with the infinite powers of those she warred against.

Gods! how the sight of her cool indifference maddened me then. I had it in me to have strangled her with my hands if she had come within my reach. But as it was she stood in her place, swaying easily to the earth-waves as a sailor sways on a ship's deck, and beside her, crouched on the same great flagstone and overcome with nausea, was Ylga, that again was raised to be her fan-girl. It came to my mind that Ylga was twin sister to Nais, and that I owed her for an ancient kindness, but I had leisure to do nothing for her then, and indeed it was little enough I could have done. With each shock the great capstone of the throne to which I clung jarred farther and farther from its bed-place, and my love was coming nearer to me. It was she who claimed all my service then.

Once in their blind panic a knot of the people in the square thought that the granite throne was too solid to be overturned, and saw in it an oasis of safety. They flocked towards it, many of them dragging

[p. 304]

themselves up the steep deep high steps on hands and knees because their feet had been injured by the billowing flagstones of the square.

But I was in no mood to have the place profaned by their silly tremblings and stares: I beat at them with my hands, tearing them away, and hurling them back down the steepness of the steps. They asked me what was my title to the place above their own, and I answered them with blows and gnashing teeth. I was careless as to what they thought me or who they thought me. Only I wished them gone. And so they went, wailing, and crying that I was a devil of the night, for they had no spirit left to defend themselves.

Farther and farther the great stone that made the top of the throne slid out from its bed, but its slowness of movement maddened me. A life's education left me in that moment, and I had no trace of stately patience left. In my puny fury I thrust at the great block with my shoulder and head, and clawed at it with my hands till the muscles rose on me in great ropes and knots, and the High Gods must have laughed at my helplessness as They looked. All was being ordered by the Three, who were their trusted servants in their good time. The work of the Gods may be done slowly, but it is done exceeding sure.

But at last when all the people of the city were numb with terror and incapable of further emotion (save only for Phorenice, who still had nerve enough to show no concern), what had been threatened came to pass. The capstone of the throne slid out till it reached the balance, and the next shock threw it with

[p. 305]

a roar and a clatter to the ground. And then a strange tremor seized me.

After all the scheming and effort, what I had so ardently prayed for had come about; but yet my inwards sank at the thought of mounting on the stone where I had mounted before, and taking my dear from the hollow where my hands had laid her. I knew Phorenice's vengefulness, and had a high value for her cleverness. Had she left Nais to lie in peace, or had she stolen her away to suffer indignities elsewhere? Or had she ended her sleep with death, and (as a grisly jest) left the corpse for my finding? I could not tell; I dared not guess. Never during a whole hard-fighting life have my emotions been so wrenched as they were at that moment. And, for excuse, it must be owned that love for Nais had sapped my hardihood over a matter in which she was so privately concerned.

It began to come to my mind, however, that the infernal uproar of the earth-tremor was beginning to slacken somewhat, as though Zaemon knew he had done the work that he had promised, and was minded to give the wretched city a breathing space. So I took my fortitude in hand and clambered up on to the flat of the stone. The lightning flashes had ceased, and all was darkness again and stifling dust, but at any moment the sky might be lit once more, and if I were seen in that place, shaggy and changed though I might be, Phorenice, if she were standing near, would not be slow to guess my name and errand.

So changed was I for the moment that I will finely confess that the idea of a fight was loathsome to me

[p. 306]

then. I wanted to have my business done and get gone from the place.

With hands that shook I fumbled over the face of the stone and found the clamps and bars of metal still in position where I had clenched them, and then reverently I let my fingers pass between these, and felt the curves of my love's body in its rest beneath. An exultation began to whirl within me. I did not know if she had been touched since I last left her; I did not know if the drug would have its due effect, and let her be wakened to warmth and sight again; but, dead or alive, I had her there, and she was mine, mine, mine, and I could have yelled aloud in my joy at her possession.

Still the earth shook beneath us, and masonry roared and crashed into ruin. I had to cling to my place with one hand while I unhasped the clamps of metal that made the top of her prison with the other. But at last I swung the upper half of them clear, and those which pinned down her feet I let remain. I stooped and drew her soft body up on to the flat of the stone beside me, and pressed my lips a hundred times to the face I could not see.

Some mad thought took me, I believe, that the mere fierceness and heat of my kisses would bring her back again to life and wakefulness. Indeed, I will own plainly that I did but sorry credit to my training in calmness that night. But she lay in my arms cold and nerveless as a corpse, and by degrees my sober wits returned to me.

This was no place for either of us. Let the earth's tremors cease (as was plainly threatened), let daylight

[p. 307]

come, and let a few of these nerveless people round recover from their panic, and all the great cost that had been expended might be counted as waste. We should be seen, and it would not be long before some one put a name to Nais; and then it would be an easy matter to guess at Deucalion under the beard and the shaggy hair and the browned nakedness of the savage who attended on her. Tell of fright? By the Gods! I was scared as the veriest trembler who blundered among the dust-clouds that night when the thought came to me.

With all that ruin spread around, it would be hopeless to think that any of those secret galleries which tunnelled under the ground would be left unbroken, and so it was useless to try a passage under the walls by the old means. But I had heard shouts from that frightened mob which came to me through the din and the darkness that gave another idea for escape. "The city is accursed," they had cried: "if we stay here it will fall on us. Let us get outside the walls where there are no buildings to bury us."

If they went, I could not see. But one gate lay nearest to the royal pyramid, and I judged that in their panic they would not go farther than was needful. So I put the body of Nais over my shoulder (to leave my right arm free) and blundered off as best I could through the stifling darkness.

It was hard to find a direction; it was hard to walk in that inky darkness over ground that was tossed and tumbled like a frozen sea; and as the earth still quaked and heaved, it was hard also to keep a footing.

[p. 308]

[paragraph continues] But if I did fall myself a score of times, my dear burden got no bruise, and presently I got to the skirts of the square and found a street I knew. The most venomous part of the shaking was done, and no more buildings fell, but enough lay sprawled over the roadway to make walking into a climb, and the sweat rolled from me as I labored along my way.

There was no difficulty about passing the gate. There was no gate. There was no wall. The Gods had driven their plough through it, and it lay flat, and proud Atlantis stood as defenceless as the open country. Though I knew the cause of this ruin, though in fact I had myself in some measure incited it, I was almost sad at the ruthlessness with which it had been carried out. The royal pyramid might go, houses and palaces might be levelled, and for these I cared little enough; but when I saw those stately ramparts also filched away, there the soldier in me woke, and I grieved at this humbling of the mighty city that once had been my only mistress.

But this was only a passing regret, a mere touch of the fighting-man's pride. I had a different love now, that had wrapped herself round me far deeper and more tightly, and my duty was towards her first and foremost. The night would soon be past, and then dangers would increase. None had interfered with us so far, though many had jostled us as I clambered over the ruins; but this forbearance could not be reckoned upon for long. The earth-tremors had almost died away, and after the panic and the storm, then comes the time for the spoiling.

All men who were poor would try to seize what lay

[p. 309]

nearest to their hands, and those of higher station, and any soldiers who could be collected and still remained true to command, would ruthlessly stop and strip any man they saw making off with plunder. I had no mind to clash with these guardians of law and property, and so I fled on swiftly through the night with my burden, using the unfrequented ways, and crying to the few folk who did meet me that the woman had the plague, and would they lend me the shelter of their house, as ours had fallen. And so in time we came to the place where the rope dangled from the precipice, and after Nais had been drawn up to the safety of the Sacred Mountain, I put my leg in the loop of the rope and followed her.

Now came what was the keenest anxiety of all. We took the girl and laid her on a bed in one of the houses, and there in the lit room for the first time I saw her clearly. Her beauty was drawn and pale. Her eyes were closed, but so thin and transparent had grown the lids that one could almost see the brown of the pupil beneath them. Her hair had grown to inordinate thickness and length, and lay as a cushion behind and beside her head.

There was no flicker of breath; there was none of that pulsing of the body which denotes life; but still she had not the appearance of ordinary death. The Nais I had placed nine long years before to rest in the hollow of the stone was a fine grown woman, full-bosomed and well-boned. The Nais that remained for me was half her weight. The old Nais it would have puzzled me to carry for an hour: this was no burden to impede a grown man.

[p. 310]

In other ways too she had altered. The nails of her fingers had grown to such a great length that they were twisted in spirals, and the fingers themselves and her hands were so waxy and transparent that the bony core upon which they were built showed itself beneath the flesh in plain dull outline. Her clay-cold lips were so white that one sighed to remember the full beauty of their carmine. Her shoulders and neck had lost their comely curves, and made bony hollows now in which the dust of entombment lodged black and thickly.

Reverently I set about preparing those things which if all went well would restore her. I heated water and filled a bath, and tinctured it heavily with those essences of the life of beasts which the priests extract and store against times of urgent need and sickness. I laid her chin-deep in this bath, and sat beside it to watch, maintaining that bath at a constant blood heat.

An hour I watched; two hours I watched; three hours--and yet she showed no flicker of life. The heat of her body given her by the bath was the same as the heat of my own. But in the feel of her skin when I stroked it with my hand there was something lacking still. Only when our Lord the Sun rose for His day did I break off my watching, while I said the necessary prayer which is prescribed, and quickly returned again to the gloom of the house.

I was torn with anxiety, and as the time went on and still no sign of life came back, the hope that had once been so high within me began to sicken and leave me downcast and despondent. From without came

[p. 311]

the din of fighting. Already Phorenice had sent her troops to storm the passage-way, and the priests who defended it were shattering them with volleys of rocks. But these sounds of war woke no pulse within me. If Nais did not wake, then the world for me was ended, and I had no spirit left to care who remained uppermost. The Gods in Their due time will doubtless smite me for this impiety. But I make a confession of it here on these sheets, having no mind to conceal any portion of this history for the small reason that it does me a personal discredit.

But as the hours went on, and still no flicker of life came to lessen the dumb agony that racked me, I grew more venturesome, and added more essences to the bath, and drugs also, such as experience had shown might wake the disused tissues into life. I watched on with staring eyes, rubbing her wasted body now and again, and always keeping the heat of the bath at a constant. From the first I had barred the door against all who would have come near to help me. With my own hands I had laid my love to sleep, and I could not bear that others should rouse her, if indeed roused she should ever be. But after those first offers no others came, and the snarl and din of fighting told of what occupied them.

It is hard to take note of small changes which occur with infinite slowness when one is all the while on the tense watch, and high-strung though my senses were, I think there must have been some indication of returning life shown before I was keen enough to notice it. For of a sudden, as I gazed, I saw a

[p. 312]

faint rippling on the surface of the water of the bath. Gods! would it come back again to my love at last--this life, this wakefulness? The ripple died out as it had come, and I stooped my head nearer to the bath to try if I could see some faint heaving of her bosom, some small twitching of the limbs. No, she lay there still without even a flutter of movement. But as I watched, surely it seemed to my aching eyes that some tinge was beginning to warm that blank whiteness of skin?

How I filled myself with that sight. The color was returning to her again beyond a doubt. Once more the dried blood was becoming fluid and beginning again to course in its old channels. Her hair floated out in the liquid of the bath like some brown tangle of the ocean weed, and ever and again it twitched and eddied to some impulse which in itself was too small for the eye to see.

She had slept for nine long years, and I knew that the wakening could be none of the suddenest. Indeed, it came by its own gradations and with infinite slowness, and I did not dare do more to hasten it. Further drugs might very well stop eternally what those which had been used already had begun. So I sat motionless where I was, and watched the color come back, and the waxenness go, and even the fulness of her curves in some small measure return. And when growing strength gave her power to endure them, and she was racked with those pains which are inevitable to being borne back again in this fashion to life, I too felt the reflex of her agony, and writhed in loving sympathy.

[p. 313]

Still further, too, was I wrung by a torment of doubt as to whether life or these rackings would in the end be conqueror. After each paroxysm the color ebbed back from her again, and for a while she would lie motionless. But strength and power seemed gradually to grow, and at last these prevailed, and drove death and sleep beneath them. Her eyelids struggled with their fastenings. Her lips parted, and her bosom heaved. With shivering gasps her breath began to pant between her reddening lips. At first it rattled dryly in her throat, but soon it softened and became more regular. And then with a last effort her eyes, her glorious loving eyes, slowly opened.

I leaned over and called her softly by name.

Her eyes met mine, and a glow arose from their depths that gave me the greatest joy I have met in all the world.

"Deucalion, my love," she whispered. "Oh, my dear, so you have come for me. How I have dreamed of you! How I have been racked! But it was worth it all for this."

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 314]

  

CHAPTER XVIII

  

STORM OF THE SACRED MOUNTAIN

IT was Nais herself who sent me to attend to my sterner duties. The din of the attack came to us in the house where I was tending her, and she asked its meaning. As pithily as might be, for she was in no condition for tedious listening, I gave her the history of her nine years' sleep.

The color flushed more to her face. "My lord is the properest man in all the world to be King," she whispered.

"I refused to touch the trade till they had given me the Queen I desired, safe and alive, here upon the Mountain."

"How we poor women are made the chattels of you men! But, for myself, I seem to like the traffic well enough. You should not have let me stand in the way of Atlantis's good, Deucalion. Still, it is very sweet to know you were weak there for once, and that I was the cause of your weakness. What is that bath over yonder? Ah! I remember; my wits seem none of the clearest just now."

"You have made the beginning. Your strength will return to you by quick degrees. But it will not bear hurrying. You must have a patience."

"Your ear, sir, for one moment, and then I will

[p. 315]

rest in peace. My poor looks, are they all gone? You seem to have no mirror here. I had visions that I should wake up wrinkled and old."

"You are as you were, dear, that first night I saw you--the most beautiful woman in all the world."

"I am pleased you like me," she said, and took the cup of broth I offered her. "My hair seems to have grown; but it needs combing sadly. I had a fancy, dear, once, that you liked ruddy hair best, and not a plain brown." She closed her eyes then, lying back among the cushions where I had placed her, and dropped off into healthy sleep, with the smiles still playing upon her lips. I put the coverlet over her, and kissed her lightly, holding back my beard lest it should sweep her cheek. And then I went out of the chamber.

That beard had grown vastly disagreeable to me these last hours, and I then went into a room in the house, and found instruments, and shaved it down to the bare chin. A change of robe also I found there, and took it instead of my squalid rags. If a man is in truth a King, he owes these things to the dignity of his office.

But, if the din of the fighting was any guide, mine was a narrowing kingdom. Every hour it seemed to grow fiercer and more near, and it was clear that some of the gates in the passage up the cleft in the cliff, impregnable though all men had thought them, had yielded to the vehemence of Phorenice's attack. And, indeed, it was scarcely to be marvelled at. With all her genius spurred on to fury by the blow that had been struck at her by wrecking so fair a part of

[p. 316]

the city, the Empress would be no light adversary even for a strong place to resist, and the Sacred Mountain was no longer strong.

Defences of stone, cunningly planned and mightily built, it still possessed, but these will not fight alone. They need men to line them, and, moreover, abundance of men. For always in a storm of this kind some desperate fellows will spit at death and get to hand grips, or slingers and archers slip in their shot, or the throwing-fire gets home, or (as here) some new-fangled machine like Phorenice's fire-tubes make one in a thousand of their wavering darts find the life; and so, though the general attacking loses his hundreds, the defenders also are not without their dead.

The slaughter, as it turned out, had been prodigious. As fast as the stormers came up, the priests who held the lowest gate remaining to us rained down great rocks upon them till the narrow alley of the stair was paved with their writhing dead. But Phorenice stood on a spur of the rock below them urging on the charges, and with an insane valor company after company marched up to hurl themselves hopelessly against the defences. They had no machines to batter the massive gates, and their attack was as pathetically useless as that of a child who hammers against a wall with an orange; and meanwhile the terrible stones from above mowed them down remorselessly.

Company after company of the troops marched into this terrible death-trap, and not a man of all of them ever came back. Nor was it Phorenice's policy

[p. 317]

that they should do so. In her lust for this final conquest, she was minded to pour out troops till she had filled up the passes with the slain, so that at last she might march on to a level fight over the bridge of their poor bodies. It was no part of Phorenice's mood ever to count the cost. She set down the object which was to be gained, and it was her policy that the people of Atlantis were there to gain it for her.

Two gates then had she carried in this dreadful fashion, slaughtering those priests that stood behind them who had not been already shot down. And here I came down from above to take my share in the fight. There was no trumpet to announce my coming, no herald to proclaim my quality, but the priests as a sheer custom picked up "Deucalion!" as a battle-cry; and some shouted that, with a King to lead, there would be no further ground lost.

It was clear that the name carried to the other side and bore weight with it. A company of poor, doomed wretches who were hurrying up stopped in their charge. The word "Deucalion!" was bandied round and handed back down the line. I thought, with some grim satisfaction, that here was evidence I was not completely forgotten in the land.

There came shouts to them from behind to carry on their advance; but they did not budge; and presently a glittering officer panted up, and commenced to strike right and left among them with his sword. From where I stood on the high rampart above the gate I could see him plainly and recognized him at once.

"It matters not what they use for their battle-cry,"

[p. 318]

he was shouting. "You have the orders of your divine Empress, and that is enough. You should be proud to die for her wish, you cowards. And if you do not obey, you will die afterwards under the instruments of the tormentors, very painfully. As for Deucalion, he is dead any time these nine years."

"There it seems you lie, my lord Tatho!" I shouted down to him.

He started, and looked up at me.

"So you are there in real truth, then? Well, old comrade, I am sorry. But it is too late to make a composition now. You are on the side of these mangy priests, and the Empress has made an edict that they are to be rooted out, and I am her most obedient servant."

"You used to be skilful of fence," I said, and indeed there was little enough to choose between us. "If it please you to stop this pitiful killing, make yourself the champion of your side, and I will stand for mine, and we will fight out this quarrel in some fair place, and bind our parties to abide by the result."

"It would be a grand fight between us two, old friend, and it goes hard with me to balk you of it. But I cannot pleasure you. I am general here under Phorenice, and she has given me the strongest orders not to peril myself. And besides, though you are a great man, Deucalion, you are not chief. You are not even one of the Three."

"I am King."

Tatho laughed. "Few but yourself would say so, my lord."

[p. 319]

"Few, truly, but what they are they are powerful. I was given the name for the first time yesterday, and as a first blow in the campaign there was some mischief done in the city. I was there myself, and saw how you took it."

"You were in Atlantis!"

"I went for Nais. She is on the Mountain now, and to-morrow will be my Queen. Tatho, as a priest to a priest, let me solemnly bring to your memory the infinite power you bite against on this Sacred Mountain. Your teaching has warned you of the weapons that are stored in the Ark of the Mysteries. If you persist in this attack, at the best you can merely lose; at the worst you can bring about a wreck over which even the High Gods will shudder as They order it."

"You cannot scare us back now by words," said Tatho, doggedly. "And as for magic, it will be met by magic. Phorenice has found by her own cleverness as many powers as were ever stored up in the Ark of the Mysteries."

"Yet she looked on helplessly enough last night, when her royal pyramid was trundled into a rubbish heap. Zaemon had prophesied that this should be so, and for a witness, why, I myself stood closer to her than we two stand now, and saw her."

"I will own you took her by surprise somewhat there. I do not understand these matters myself; I was never more than one of the Seven in the old days; and now, quite rightly, Phorenice keeps the knowledge of her magic to herself: but it seems time is needed when one magic is to be met by another."

[p. 320]

"Well," I said, "I know little about the business either. I leave these matters now to those who are higher above me in the priesthood. Indeed, having a liking for Nais, it seems I am debarred from ever being given understanding about the highest of the high Mysteries. So I content myself with being a soldier, and when the appointed day comes, I shall fall and kiss my mother the Earth for the last time. You, so I am told, have ambition for longer life."

He nodded. "Phorenice has found the Great Secret, and I am to be the first that will share it with her. We shall be as Gods upon the earth, seeing that Death will be powerless to touch us. And the twin sons she has borne me will be made immortal also."

"Phorenice is headstrong. No, my lord, there is no need to shake your head and try to deny it. I have had some acquaintance with her. But the order has been made, and her immortality will be snatched from her very rudely. Now mark solemnly my words. I, Deucalion, have been appointed King of Atlantis by the high council of the priests who are the mouthpiece of the most High Gods, and if I do not have my reign, then there will be no Atlantis left to carry either King or Empress. You know me, Tatho, for a man that never lies."

He nodded.

"Then save yourself before it is too late. You shall have again your viceroyalty in Yucatan."

"But, man, there is no Yucatan. A great horde of little hairy creatures, that were something less than human and something more than beasts, swept down upon our cities and ate them out. Oh, you may sneer

[p. 321]

if you choose. Others sneered when I came home, till the Empress stopped them. But you know what a train of driver-ants is that you meet with in the forests? You may light fires across their path, and they will march into them in their blind bravery, and put them out with their bodies, and those that are left will march on in an unbroken column, and devour all that stands in their path. I tell you, my lord, those little hairy creatures were like the ants--aye, for numbers and wooden bravery, as well as for appetite. As a result, to-day there is no Yucatan."

"You shall have Egypt, then."

He burst at me hotly. "I would not take seven Egypts and ten Yucatans. My lord, you think more poorly of me than is kind when you ask me to become a traitor. In your place would you throw your Nais away if the doing it would save you from a danger?"

"That is different."

"In no degree. You have a kindness for her. I have all that and more for Phorenice, who is, besides, my wife and the mother of my children. If I have qualms--and I freely confess I know you are desperate men up there, and have dreadful powers at your command--my shiverings are for them and not for myself. But I think, my lord, this parley is leading to nothing, and though these common soldiers here will understand little enough of our talk, they may be picking up a word here and there, and I do not wish them to go on to their death (as you will see them do shortly) and carry evil reports about me to whatever Gods they chance to come before."

He saluted me with his sword and drew back, and

[p. 322]

once more the missiles began to fly, and the doomed wretches who had been halting beside the steep rock walls of the pass began once more to press hopelessly forward. They had scaling-ladders certainly, but they had no chance of getting these planted. They could do naught but fill the narrow way with their bodies, and to that end they had been sent, and to that end they humbly died. Our priests with crow and lever wrenched from their lodging-places the great rocks which had been made ready, and sent them crashing down, so that once more screams filled the pass, and the horrid butchery was renewed.

But ever and again some arrow, or some sling-stone, or some fire-tube's dart would find its way up from below and through the defences, and there we would be with a man the less to carry on the fight. It was well enough for Phorenice to be lavish with her troops; indeed, if she wished for success, there were no two ways for it; and when those she had levied were killed, she could readily press others into the service, seeing that she had the whole broad face of the country under her rule. But with us it was different. A man down on our side was a man whose arm would bitterly be missed, and one which could in no possible way be replaced.

I made calculation of the chances, and saw clearly that if we continued the fight on the present plan, they would storm the gates one after another as they came to them, and that by the time the uppermost gate was reached there would be no priest alive to defend it. And so, not disdaining to fashion myself on Phorenice's newer plan, which held that a general

[p. 323]

should at times in preference plot coldly from a place of some safety, and not lead the thick of the fighting, I left those who stood to the gate with some rough soldier's words of cheer, and withdrew again up the narrow stair of the pass.

This one approach to the Sacred Mountain was, as I have said before, vastly more difficult and dangerous in the olden days when it stood as a mere bare cleft as the High Gods made it. But a chasm had been bridged here, and a shelf cut through the solid rock there, and in many places the roadway was built up on piers from distant crags below so as to make all uniform and easy. It came to my mind now that if I could destroy this path, we might gain a breathing-space for further effort.

The idea seemed good, or at least no other occurred to me which would in any way relieve our desperate situation, and I looked around me for means to put it into execution. Up and down, from the Mountain to the plains below, I had traversed that narrow stair of a pass some thousands of times, and so in a manner of speaking knew every stone and every turn and every cut of it by heart. But I had never looked upon it with an eye to shaving off all roadway to the Sacred Mountain, and so now, even in this moment of dreadful stress, I had to traverse it no less than three times afresh before I could decide upon the best site for demolition.

But once the point was fixed, there was little delay in getting the scheme in movement. Already I had sent men to the storehouses among the priests' dwellings to fetch me rams and crows and acids and hammers,

[p. 324]

and such other material as was needed, and these stood handy behind one of the upper gates. I put on every pair of hands that could be spared to the work, no matter what was their age and feebleness; yes, if Nais could have walked go far I would have pressed her for the labor; and presently carved balustrade and way-side statue, together with the lettered wall-stones and the foot-worn cobbles roared down into the gulf below, and added their din to the shrieks and yells and crashes of the fighting. Gods! but it was a hateful task, smashing down that splendid handiwork of the men of the past. But it was better that it should crash down to ruin in the abyss below than that Phorenice should profane it with her impious sandals.

At first I had feared that it would be needful to sacrifice the knot of brave men who were so valiantly defending the gate then being attacked. It is disgusting to be forced into a measure of this kind, but in hard warfare it is often needful to the carrying out of his schemes for a general to leave a part of his troops to fight to a finish, and without hope of rescue, as valiantly as they may; and all he can do for their reward is to commend them earnestly to the care of the Gods. But when the work of destroying the pathway was nearly completed, I saw a chance of retrieving them.

We had not been content merely with breaking arches and throwing down the piers. We had got our rams and levers under the living rock itself on which all the whole fabric stood; and fire stood ready to heat the rams for their work; and when the

[p. 325]

word was given, the whole could be sent crashing down the face of the cliffs beyond chance of repair.

All was, I say, finally prepared in this fashion, and then I gave the word to hold. A narrow ledge still remained undestroyed, and offered footway, and over this I crossed. The cut we had made was immediately below the uppermost gate of all, and below it there were three more massive gates still unviolated, besides the one then being so vehemently attacked. Already the garrisons had been retired from these, and I passed through them all in turn, unchallenged and unchecked, and came to that busy rampart where the twelve priests left alive worked, stripped to the waist, at heaving down the murderous rocks.

For awhile I busied myself at their side, stopping an occasional fire-tube dart or arrow on my shield and passing them the tidings. The attack was growing fiercer every minute now. The enemy had packed the pass below wellnigh full of their dead, and our battering-stones had less distance to fall, and so could do less execution. They pressed forward more eagerly than ever with their scaling-ladders, and it was plain that soon they would inevitably put the place to the storm. Even during the short time I was there their sling-stones and missiles took life from three more of the twelve who stood with me on the defence.

So I gave the word for one more furious avalanche of rock to be pelted down, and while the few living were crawling out from those killed by the discharge, and while the next band of reinforcements came scrambling up over the bodies, I sent my nine remaining

[p. 326]

men away at a run up the steep stairway of the path, and then followed them myself. Each of the gates in turn we passed, shutting them after us, and breaking the bars and levers with which they were moved, and not till we were through the last did the roar of shouts from below tell that the besiegers had found the gate they bit against was deserted.

One by one we balanced our way across the narrow ledge which was left where the path had been destroyed, and one poor priest that carried a wound grew giddy and lost his balance here, and toppled down to his death in the abyss below before a hand could be stretched out to steady him. And then, when we were all over, heat was put to the rams, and they expanded with their resistless force, and tore the remaining ledges from their hold in the rock. I think a pang went through us all then when we saw for ourselves the last connecting-link cut away from between the poor remaining handful of our Sacred Clan on the Mountain and the rest of our great nation, who had grown so bitterly estranged to us, below.

But here at any rate was a break in the fighting. There were no further preparations we could make for our defence, and high though I knew Phorenice's genius to be, I did not see how she could very well do other than accept the check and retire. So I set a guard on the ramparts of the uppermost gate to watch all possible movements, and gave the word to the others to go and find the rest which so much they needed.

For myself, dutifully I tried to find Zaemon first,

[p. 327]

going on the errand my proper self, for there was little enough of kingly state observed on the Sacred Mountain, although the name and title had been given me. But Zaemon was not to be come at. He was engaged inside the Ark of Mysteries with another of the Three, and being myself only one of the Seven, I had not rank enough in the priesthood to break in upon their workings. And so I was free to turn where my likings would have led me first, and that was to the house which sheltered Nais.

She waked as I came in over the threshold, and her eyes filled with a welcome for me. I went across and knelt where she lay, putting my face on the pillow beside her. She was full of tender talk and sweet endearments. Gods! What an infinity of delight I had missed by not knowing my Nais earlier! But she had a will of her own through it all, and some quaint conceits which made her all the more adorable. She rallied me on the new cleanness of my chin, and on the robe which I had taken as a covering. She professed a pretty awe for my kingship, and vowed that had she known of my coming dignities she would never have dared to discover a love for me. But about my marriage with Phorenice she spoke with less lightness. She put out her thin white hand and drew my face to her lips.

"It is weak of me to have a jealousy," she murmured, "knowing how completely my lord is mine alone; but I cannot help it. You have said you were her husband for awhile. It gives me a pang to think that I shall not be the first to lie in your arms, Deucalion."

[p. 328]

"Then you may gayly throw your pang away," I whispered back. "I was husband to Phorenice in mere word, for how long I do not precisely know. But in anything beyond I was never her husband at all. She married me by a form she prescribed herself, ignoring all the old rites and ceremonies, and whether it would hold as legal or not we need not trouble to inquire. She herself has most nicely and completely annulled that marriage, as I have told you. Tatho is her husband now, and father to her children, and he seems to have a fondness for her which does him credit."

We said other things too in that chamber, those small repetitions of endearments which are so precious to lovers and so beyond the comprehension of other folk, but they are not to be set down on these sheets. They are a mere private matter which can have no concern to any one beyond our two selves, and more weighty subjects are piling themselves up in deep index for the historian.

Phorenice, it seemed, had more rage against the Priests' Clan on the Mountain and more bright genius to help her to a vengeance than I had credited. Her troops stormed easily the gates we had left to them, and swarmed up till they stood where the pathway was broken down. In the fierceness of their rush the foremost were thrust over the brink by those pressing up behind before the advance could be halted, and these went screaming to a horrid death in the great gulf below. But it was no position here that a lavish spending of men could take, and presently all were drawn off, save for some half-score

[p. 329]

who stood as outpost sentries and dodged out of arrow-shot behind angles of the rock.

It seems, too, that the Empress herself reconnoitred the place, using due caution and quickness, and so got for herself a full plan of its requirements without being obliged to trust the measuring of another eye. With extraordinary nimbleness she must have planned an engine such as was necessary to suit her purposes, and given orders for its making; for even with the vast force and resources at her disposal, the speed with which it was built was prodigious.

There was very little noise made to tell of what was afoot. All the wood-work and metal-work was cut and tongued and forged and fitted first by skilled craftsmen below in the plain at the foot of the cleft; and when each ponderous balk and each cross-piece and each plank was dragged up the steep pass through the conquered gates, it was ready instantly for fitting into its appointed place in the completed machine.

The cleft was straight where they set about their building, and there was no curve or spur of the cliff to hide their handiwork from those of the priests who watched from the ramparts above our one remaining gate. But Phorenice had a coyness lest her engine should be seen before it was completed, and so to screen it she had a vast fire built at the uppermost point where the causeway was broken off, and fed diligently with wet sedge and green wood, so that a great smoke poured out, rising like a curtain that shut out all view. And so though the priests on the rampart above the gate picked off now and

[p. 330]

again some of those who tended the fire, they could do the besiegers no further injury, and remained up to the last quite in ignorance of their tactics.

The passage up the cleft was in shadow during the night hours, for, though all the crest of the Sacred Mountain was always lit brightly by the eternal fires which made its defence on the farther side, their glow threw no gleam down that flank where the cliff ran sheer to the plains beneath. And so it was under cover of the darkness that Phorenice brought up her engine into position for attack.

Planking had been laid down for its wheels, and the wheels themselves well greased, and it may be that she hoped to march in upon us while all slept. But there was a certain creaking and groaning of timbers and labored panting of men which gave advertisement that something was being attempted, and the alarm was spread quietly in the hope that if a surprise had been planned, the real surprise might be turned the other way.

A messenger came to me, running, where I sat in the house at the side of my love, and she, like the soldier's wife she was made to be, kissed me and bade me go quickly and care for my honor, and bring back my wounds for her to mend.

On the rampart above the gate all was silence, save for the faint rustle of armed men, and out of the black darkness ahead, from the other side of the broken causeway, came the sounds of which the messenger had warned me.

The captain of the gate came to me and whispered: "We have made no light till the King came, not

[p. 331]

knowing the King's will in the matter. Is it wished I send some of the throwing-fire down yonder, on the chance that it does some harm, and at the same time lights up the place? Or is it willed that we wait for their surprise?"

"Send the fire," I said, "or we may find that Phorenice's brain has been one too many for us." The captain of the gate took one of the balls in his hand, lit the fuse, and hurled it. The horrid thing burst among a mass of men who were laboring with a huge engine, spattering them with its deadly fire, and lighting their garments. The plan of the engine showed itself plainly. They had built them a vast great tower, resting on wheels at its base, so that it might be pushed forward from behind, and slanting at its foot to allow for the steepness of the path and leave it always upright.

It was storied inside, with ladders joining each floor, and through slits in the side which faced us bowmen could cover an attack. From its top a great bridge reared high above it, being carried vertically till the tower was brought near enough for its use. The bridge was hinged at the third story of the tower, and fastened with ropes to its extreme top; but, once the ropes were cut, the bridge would fall, and light upon whatever came within its swing, and be held there by the spikes with which it was studded beneath.

I saw, and inwardly felt myself conquered. The cleverness of Phorenice had been too strong for my defence. No war-engine of which we had command could overset the tower. The whole of its massive

[p. 332]

timbers were hung with the wet new-stripped skins of beasts, so that even the throwing-fire could not destroy it. What puny means we had to impede those who pushed it forward would have little effect. Presently it would come to the place appointed, and the ropes would be cut, and the bridge would thunder down on the rampart above our last gate, and the stormers would pour out to their final success.

Well, life had loomed very pleasant for me these few days, with a warm and loving Nais once more in touch of my arms, but the High Gods in Their infinite wisdom knew best always, and I was no rebel to stay stiff-necked against their decision. But it is ever a soldier's privilege, come what may, to warm over a fight, and the most exquisitely fierce joy of all is that final fight of a man who knows that he must die, and who lusts only to make his bed of slain high enough to carry a due memory of his powers with those who afterwards come to gaze upon it. I gripped my axe, and the muscles of my arms stood out in knots at the thought of it. Would Tatho come to give me sport? I feared not. They would send only the common soldiers first to the storm, and I must be content to do my killing on those.

And Nais, what of her? I had a quiet mind there. When any spoilers came to the house where she lay, she would know that Deucalion had been taken up to the Gods, and she would not be long in following him. She had her dagger. No, I had no fears of being parted long from Nais now.

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 333]

  

CHAPTER XIX

  

DESTRUCTION OF ATLANTIS

A TOTTERING old priest came up and touched me on the shoulder. "Well?" I said, sharply, having small taste for interruption just now.

"News has been carried to the Three, my King, of what is threatened."

"Then they will know that I stand here now, brother, to enjoy the finest fight of all my life. When it is finished I shall go to the Gods, and be there standing behind the stars to welcome them when presently they also arrive. They have my regrets that they are too old and too feeble to die and look upon a fine killing themselves."

"I have commands from them, my King, to lay upon you, which I fear you will like but slenderly. You are forbidden to find your death here in the fighting. They have further use for you yet."

I turned on the old man angrily enough. "I shall take no such order, my brother. I am not going to believe it was ever given. You must have misunderstood. If I am a man, if I am a priest, if I am a soldier, if I am a King, then it stands to my honor that no enemy should pass this gate while yet I live.

[p. 334]

[paragraph continues] And you may go back and throw that message at their teeth."

The old man smiled enviously. He, too, had been a keen soldier in his day. "I told them you would not easily believe such a message, and asked them for a sign, and they bore with me, and gave me one. I was to give you this jewel, my King."

"How came they by that? It is a bracelet from the elbow of Nais."

"They must have stripped her of it. I did not know it came from Nais. The word I was to bring you said that the owner of the jewel was inside the Ark of the Mysteries, and waited you there. The use which the Three have for you further concerns her also."

Even when I heard that, I will freely confess that my obedience was sorely tried, and I have the less shame in setting it down on these sheets, because I know that all true soldiers will feel a sympathy for my plight. Indeed, the promise of the battle was very tempting. But in the end my love for Nais prevailed, and I gave the salutation that was needful in token that I heard the order and obeyed it.

To the knot of priests who were left for the defence I turned and made my farewells. "You will have what I shall miss, my brothers," I said. "I envy you that fight. But, though I am King of Atlantis, still I am only one of the Seven, and so am the servant of the Three and must obey their order. They speak in words the will of the most High Gods, and we must do as they command. You will stand behind the stars before I come, and I ask of you that

[p. 335]

you will commend me to Those you meet there. It is not my own will that I shall not appear there by your side."

They heard my words with smiles, and very courteously saluted me with their weapons, and there we parted. I did not see the fight, but I know it was good, from the time which passed before Phorenice's hordes broke out on to the crest of the Mountain. They died hard, that last remnant of the lesser priests of Atlantis.

With a sour enough feeling I went up to the head of the pass, and then through the groves, and between the temples and colleges and houses which stood on the upper slopes of the Sacred Mountain, till I reached that boundary beyond which in milder days it was death for any but the privileged few to pass. But the time, it appeared to me, was past for conventions, and, moreover, my own temper was hot; and it is likely that I should have strode on with little scruple if I had not been interrupted. But in the temple which marked the boundary there was old Zaemon waiting; and he, with due solemnity of words, and with the whole of some ancient ritual ordained for that purpose, sought dispensation from the High Gods for my trespass, and would not give me way till he was through with his ceremony.

Already Phorenice's tower and bridge were in position, for the clash and yelling of a fight told that the small handful of priests on the rampart of the last gate were bartering their lives for the highest return in dead that they could earn. They were trained fighting men all, but old and feeble, and the

[p. 336]

odds against them were too enormous to be stemmed for over long. In a very short time the place would be put to the storm, and the roof of the Sacred Mountain would be at the open mercy of the invader. If there was any further thing to be done, it was well that it should be set about quickly while peace remained. It seemed to me that the moment was for prompt action, and the time for lengthy pompous ceremonial was done for good.

But Zaemon was minded otherwise. He led me up to the Ark of the Mysteries, and chided my impatience, and waited till I had given it my reverential kiss, and then he called aloud, and another old man came out of the opening which is in the top of the Ark, and climbed painfully down by the battens which are fixed on its sides. He was a man I had never seen before, hoary, frail, and emaciated, and he and Zaemon were then the only two remaining priests who had been raised to the highest degree known to our Clan, and who alone had knowledge of the highest secrets and powers and mysteries.

"Look!" cried Zaemon, in his shrill old voice, and swept a trembling finger over the shattered city, and the great spread of sea and country which lay in view of us below. I followed his pointing and looked, and a chill began to crawl through me. All was plainly shown. Our Lord the Sun burned high overhead in a sky of cloudless blue, and day shimmered; in His heat. All below seemed from that distance peaceful and warm and still, save only that the mountains smoked more than ordinary, and some

[p. 337]

spouted fires, and that the sea boiled with some strange disorder.

But it was the significance of the sea that troubled me most. Far out on the distant coast it surged against the rocks in enormous rolls of surf; and up the great estuary, at the head of which the city of Atlantis stands, it gushed in successive waves of enormous height which never returned. Already the lower lands on either side were blotted out beneath tumultuous waters, the harbor walls were drowned out of sight, and the flood was creeping up into the lower wards of the great city itself.

"You have seen?" asked Zaemon.

"I have seen."

"You understand?"

"In part."

"Then let me tell you all. This is the beginning, and the end will follow swiftly. The most High Gods, that sit behind the stars, have a limit to even Their sublime patience; and that has been passed. The city of Atlantis, the great continent that is beyond, and all that are in them are doomed to unutterable destruction. Of old it was foreseen that this great wiping-out would happen through the sins of men, and to this end the Ark of the Mysteries was built under directions of the Gods. No mortal implements can so much as scratch its surface, no waves or rocks wreck it. Inside is stored on sheets of the ancient writing all that is known in the world of learning that is not shared by the common people, also there is grain in a store, and sweet water in tanks sufficient for two persons for the space of four years,

[p. 338]

together with seeds, weapons, and all such other matters as were deemed fit.

"Out of all this vast country it has been decreed by the High Gods that two shall not perish. Two shall be chosen, a man and a woman, who are fit and proper persons to carry away with them the ancient learning to dispose of it as they see best, and afterwards to rear up a race who shall in time build another kingdom and do honor to our Lord the Sun and the other Gods in another place. The woman is within the Ark already, and seated in the place appointed for her, and though she is daughter of mine, the burden of her choosing is with you. For the man, the choice has fallen upon yourself."

I was half numb with the shock of what was befalling. "I do not know that I care to be a survivor."

"You are not asked for your wishes," said the old man. "You are given an order from the High Gods who know you to be Their faithful servant."

Habit rode strong upon me. I made salutation in the required form, and said that I heard and would obey.

"Then it remains to raise you to the sublime degree of the Three, and if your learning is so small that you will not understand the keys to many of the Powers, and the Highest of the Mysteries, when they are handed to you, that fault cannot be remedied now."

Certainly the time remaining was short enough. The fight still raged down at the gate in the pass, though it was a wonder how the handful of priests had held their ground so long. But the ocean rolled

[p. 339]

in upon the land in an ever-increasing flood, and the mountains smoked and belched forth more volleys of rock as the weight increased on their lower parts, and presently those that besieged the Mountain could not fail to see the fate that threatened them. Then there would be no withholding their rush. In their mad fury and panic they would sweep all obstruction resistlessly before them, and those who stood in their path might look to themselves.

But there was no hurrying Zaemon and his fellow sage. They were without temple for the ceremony, without sacrifice or incense to decorate it. They had but the sky for a roof to make their echoes, and the Gods themselves for witness. But they went through the work of raising me to their own degree, with all the grand and majestic form which has gathered dignity from the ages, and by no one sentence did they curtail it. A burning mountain burst with a bellowing roar as the incoming waters met its fires, but gravely they went on, in turn reciting their sentences. Phorenice's troops broke down the last resistance, and poured in a frenzied stream among the groves and temples, but still they quavered never in the ritual.

It had been said that this ceremony is the grandest and the most impressive of all those connected with our holy religion; and certainly I found it so; and I speak as one intimate with all the others. Even the tremendous circumstances which hemmed them in could do nothing to make these frail old men forget the deference which was due to the highest order of the Clan.

[p. 340]

For myself, I will freely own I was less rapt. I stood there bareheaded in the heat, a man trying to concentrate himself, and yet torn the while by a thousand foreign emotions. The awful thing that was happening all around compelled some of my attention. A continent was in the very act and article of meeting with complete destruction, and if Zaemon and the other priest were strong enough to give their minds wholly up to a matter parochial to the priesthood, I was not so stoical. And, moreover, I was filled with other anxieties and thoughts concerning Nais. Yet I managed to preserve a decent show of attention to the ceremony, making all those responses which were required of me, and trying as well as might be to preserve in my mind those sentences which were the keys to power and learning, and not mere phrasings of grandeur and devotion.

But it became clear that if the ceremony of my raising did not soon arrive at its natural end, it would be cut short presently with something of suddenness. Phorenice's conquering legions swarmed out on the crest of the Mountain, and now carried full knowledge of the dreadful thing that was come upon the country. They were out of all control, and ran about like men distracted; but knowing full well that the priests would have brought this terrible wreck to pass by virtue of the powers which were stored within the Ark of the Mysteries, it would be their natural impulse to pour out a final vengeance upon any of these same priests they could come across before it was too late.

It began to come to my mind that if the ceremony

[p. 341]

did not very shortly terminate, the further part of the plan would stand very small chance of completion, and I should come by my death after all by fighting to a finish, as I had pictured to myself before. My flickering attention saw the soldiers coming always nearer in their frantic wanderings, and saw also-the sea below rolling deeper and deeper in upon the land.

The fires, too, which ringed in half the Mountain, spurted up to double their old height, and burned with an unceasing roar. But for all distraction these things gave to the two old priests who were raising me, we might have been in the quietness of some ancient temple, with not so much as a fly to buzz an interruption.

But at last an end came to the ceremony. "Kneel," cried Zaemon, "and make obeisance to your mother the Earth, and swear by the High Gods that you will never make improper use of the powers over Her which this day you have been granted."

When I had done that, he bade me rise as a fully installed and duly initiated member of the Three. "You will have no opportunity to practise the workings of this degree with either of us, my brother," said he, "for presently our other brother and I go to stand before the Gods to deliver to Them an account of our trust, and of how we have carried it out. But what items you remember here and there may turn of use to you hereafter. And now we two give you our farewells, and promise to commend you highly to the Gods when soon we meet Them in Their place behind the stars. Climb now into the Ark,

[p. 342]

and be ready to shut the door which guards it, if there is any attempt by these raging people to invade that also. Remember, my brother, it is the Gods' direct will that you and the woman Nais go from this place living and sound, and you are expressly forbidden to accept challenge or provocation to fight on any pretext whatever. But as long as may be done in safety, you may look out upon Atlantis in her death-throes. It is very fitting that one of the only two who are sent hence alive should carry the full tale of what has befallen."

I went to the top of the Ark of Mysteries then, climbing there by the battens which are fastened to the sides, and then descended by the stair which is inside and found Nais in a little chamber waiting for me.

"I was bidden stay here by Zaemon," she said, "who forced me to this place by threats and also by promises that my lord would follow. He is very ungentle, that father of mine, but I think he has a kindness for us both, and anyway he is my father and I cannot help loving him. Is there no chance to save him from what is going to happen?"

"He will not come into this Ark, for I asked him. It has been ordained from the ancient time when first the Ark was built that when the day for its purpose came, one woman and one man should be its only tenants, and they are here already. Zaemon's will in the matter is not to be twisted by you or by me. He has a message to be delivered to the Gods, and (if I know him at all) he grudges every minute that is lost in carrying it to Them."

[p. 343]

I left her then, and went out again up the stair, and stood once more on the roof of the Ark. On the Mountain-top men still ran about distracted, but gradually they were coming to where the Ark rested on the highest point. For the moment, however, I passed them lightly. The drowning of the great continent that had been spread out below filled the eye. Ocean roared in upon it with still more furious waves. The plains and the level lands were foaming lakes. The great city of Atlantis had vanished eternally. The mountains alone kept their heads above the flood, and spewed out rocks and steam and boiling stone, or burst when the waters reached them, and created great whirlpools of surging sea and twisted trees and bubbling mud.

In the space of a few breaths every living creature that dwelt in the lower grounds had been smothered by the waters, save for a few who huddled in a pair of galleys that were driven oarless inward, over what had once been black forest and hunting land for the beasts. And even as I watched, these also were swallowed up by the horrid turmoil of sea, and nothing but the sea beasts, and those of the greater lizards which can live in such outrageous waters, could have survived even that stage of the destruction. Indeed, none but those men who had now found standing-ground on the upper slopes of the Sacred Mountain survived, and it was plain that their span was short, for the great mass of the continent sank bodily deeper and more deep every minute before our aching eyes beneath the boiling inrush of the seas.

But though the great mass of the soldiery were

[p. 344]

dazed and maddened at the prospect of the overwhelming which threatened them, there were some with a strength of mind too valiant to give any outward show of discomposure. Presently a compact little body of people came from out the houses and the temples and headed directly across the open ground towards the Ark. On the outside marched Phorenice's personal guards with their weapons new bloodied. They had been forced to fight a way through their own fellow-soldiers. The poor demented creatures had thought it was every one for himself now, till these guards (by their mistress's order) proved to them that Phorenice still came first.

And in the middle of them, borne in a litter of gold and ivory by her grotesque European slaves, rode the Empress, still calm, still lovely, and seemingly divided in her sentiments between contempt and amusement. Her two children lay in the litter at her feet. On her right hand marched Tatho gorgeously apparelled, and with a beard curled and plaited into a thousand ringlets. On the other side, plying her industry with unruffled deference, walked Ylga, once again fan-girl, and so still second lady in this dwindling kingdom.

The party of them halted half a score of paces from the Ark by Phorenice's order. "Do not go nearer to those unclean old men. They carry a rank odor with them, and for the moment we are short of essences to sweeten the air of their neighborhood." She lifted her eyebrows and looked up at me. "Truly a quiet little gathering of old acquaintances. Why, there is Deucalion, that once I

[p. 345]

took the flavor of and threw aside when he cloyed me."

"I have Nais here," I said, "and presently we two will be all that are left alive of this nation."

"Nais is quite welcome to my leavings," she laughed. "I will look down upon your country cooings when presently I go back to the place behind the stars from which I came. You are a very rustic person, Deucalion. They tell me, too, that three or four of these foul-smelling old men up here have named you King. Did you swell with much dignity? Or did you remember that there was a pretty Empress left that would still be Empress so long as there was an Atlantis to govern? Come, sir, find your tongue. By my face! you must have hungered for me very madly these years we have been parted, if new-grown ruggedness of feature is an evidence."

"Have your gibe. I do not gibe back at a woman who presently will die."

"Bah! Deucalion, you live behind the times. Have they not told you that I know the Great Secret and am indeed a Goddess now? My arts can make life run on eternally."

"Then the waters presently will test them hard," I said, but there the talk was taken into other lips. Zaemon went forward to the front of the litter with the Symbol of our Lord the Sun glowing in his hand, and burst into a flow of cursing. It was hard for me to hear his words. The roar of the waters which poured up over the land, and beat in vast waves against the Sacred Mountain itself, grew nearer and more loud. But the old man had his say.

[p. 346]

Phorenice gave orders to her guards for his killing; yes, tried even to rise from the litter and do the work herself: but Zaemon held the Symbol to his front, and its power in that supreme moment mastered all the arts that could be brought against it. The majesty of the most High Gods was vindicated, and that splendid Empress knew it and lay back sullenly among the cushions of her litter a beaten woman.

Only one person in that rigid knot of people found power to leave the rest, and that was Ylga. She came out to the side of the Ark, and leaned up and cried me a farewell through the gathering roar of the flood.

"I would I might save you and take you with us," I said.

"As for that," she said, with a gesture, "I would not come if you asked me. I am not a woman that will take anything less than all. But I shall meet what comes presently with the memory that you will have me always somewhere in your recollection. I know somewhat of men, even men of your stamp, Deucalion, and you will never forget that you came very near to loving me once."

I think, too, she said something further, concerning Nais, but the bellowing rush of the waters drowned all other words. A great mist made from the steam sent up by the swamped burning mountains stopped all accurate view, though the blaze from the fires lit it like gold. But I had a last sight of a horde of soldiery rushing up the slopes of the Mountain, with a scum of surge billowing at their heels and licking many of them back in its clutch. And then

[p. 347]

my eye fell on old Zaemon waving to me with the Symbol to shut down the door in the roof of the Ark.

I obeyed his last command, and went down the stair, and closed all ingress behind me. There were bolts placed ready, and I shot these into their sockets, and there were Nais and I alone, and cut off from all the rest of our world that remained.

I went to the place where she lay, and put my arms tightly around her. Without, we heard men beating desperately on the Ark with their weapons, and some who even climbed by the battens to the top and wrenched to try and move the door from its fastenings. The end was coming very nearly to them now, and the great crowd of them were mad with terror.

I would have given much to have known how Phorenice fared in that final tumult, and how she faced it. I could see her, with her lovely face and her wondrous eyes, and her ruddy hair curling about her neck, and by all the Gods! I thought more of her at that last moment than of the poor land she had conquered and misgoverned and brought to this horrid destruction. There is no denying the fascination which Phorenice carried with her.

But the end did not dally long with its coming. There was a little surge that lifted the Ark a hand's breadth or so in its cradle, and set it back again with a jar and a quiver. The blows from axes and weapons ceased on its lower part, but redoubled into frenzied batterings on its rounded roof. There were some screams and cries also which came to us but dully through the thickness of its ponderous sheathing, though likely enough they were sent forth at

[p. 348]

the full pitch of human lungs outside. And then another surge came, roaring and thundering, which picked up the great vessel as though it had been a feather, and spun it giddily; and after that we touched earth or rock no more.

We tossed about on the crest and troughs of delirious seas, a sport for the greedy Gods of the ocean. The lamp had fallen, and we crouched there in darkness, dully weighed with the burden of knowledge that we alone were saved out of what was yesterday a mighty nation.

 

 

 

 

     
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 349]

  

CHAPTER XX

  

ON THE BOSOM OF THE DEEP

THE Ark was rudderless, oarless, and machine-less, and could travel only where the High Gods chose. The inside was dark, and full of an ancient smell, and crowded with groanings and noise. I could not find the fire-box to relight the fallen lamp, and so we had to endure blindly what was dealt out to us. The waves tossed us in merciless sport, and I clung on by the side of Nais, holding her to the bed. We did not speak much, but there was full companionship in our bereavement and our silence.

When Atlantis sank to form new ocean-bed, she left great whirlpools and spoutings from her drowned fires as a fleeting legacy to the Gods of the sea. And then, I think (though in the black belly of the Ark we could not see these things), a vast hurricane of wind must have come on next so as to leave no piece of the desolation incomplete. For seven nights and seven days did this dreadful turmoil continue, as counted for us afterwards by the reckoner of hours which hung within the Ark, and then the howling of the wind departed, and only the roll of a long still swell remained. It was regular and it was oily, as I could tell by the difference of the motion, and then

[p. 350]

for the first time I dared to go up the stair and open had found the gate they bit against was deserted.

The sweet salt air came gushing down to freshen the foulness within, and as the Ark rode dryly over the seas, I went below and brought up Nais to gain refreshment from the curing rays of our Lord the Sun. Duly the pair of us adored Him, and gave thanks for His great mercy in coming to light another day, and then we laid ourselves down where we were to doze, and take that easy rest which we so urgently needed.

Yet, though I was tired beyond words, for long enough sleep would not visit me. Wearily I stared out over the oily sun-lit waters. No blur of land met the eye. The ring of ocean was unbroken on every side, and overhead the vault of heaven remained unchanged. The bosom of the deep was littered with the poor wreckage of Atlantis, to remind one, if there had been a need, that what had come about was fact, and not some horrid dream. Trees, squared timber, a smashed and upturned boat of hides, and here and there the rounded corpse of a man or beast shouldered over the swells, and kept convoy with our Ark as she drifted on in charge of the Gods and the current.

But sleep came to me at last, and I dropped off into unconsciousness, holding the hand of Nais in mine, and when next I woke I found her open-eyed also and watching me tenderly. We were finely rested, both of us, and rest and strength bring one complacency. We were more ready now to accept the station which the High Gods had made for us

[p. 351]

without repining, and so we went below again into the belly of the Ark to eat and drink and maintain strength for the new life which lay before us.

A wonderful vessel was this Ark, now we were able to see it at leisure and intimately. Although for the first time now in all its centuries of life it swam upon the waters, it showed no leak or sun-crack. Inside, even its floor was bone-dry. That it was built from some wood, one could see by the grainings, but nowhere could one find suture or joint. The living timbers had been put in place and then grown together by an art which we have lost to-day, but which the Ancients knew with much perfection; and afterwards some treatment, which is also a secret of those forgotten builders, had made the wood as hard as metal and impervious to all attacks of the weather.

In the gloomy cave of its belly were stored many matters. At one end, in great tanks on either side of a central alley, was a prodigious store of grain. Sweet water was in other tanks at the other end. In another place were drugs, and simples, and essences of the life of beasts; all these things being for use while the Ark roamed under the guidance of the Gods on the bosom of the deep. On all the walls of the Ark, and on all the partitions of the tanks and the other wood-work, there were carved in the rude art of bygone times representations of all the beasts which lived in Atlantis; and on these I looked with a hunter's interest, as some of them were strange to me, and had died out with the men who had perpetuated them in these sculptures. There was a good store of weapons, too, and the tools for handicrafts.

[p. 352]

Now for many weeks our life endured in this Ark as the Gods drove it about here and there across the face of the waters. We had no government over direction; we could not by so much as a hair's-breadth a day increase her speed. The High Gods that had chosen the two of us to be the only ones saved out of all Atlantis, had sole control of our fate, and into Their hands we cheerfully resigned our future direction.

Of that land which we reached in due time, and where we made our abiding-place, and where our children were born, I shall tell of in its place; but since this chronicle has proceeded so far in an exact order of the events as they came to pass, it is necessary first to narrate how we came by the sheets on which it is written.

In a great coffer, in the centre of the Ark's floor, the whole of the Mysteries learned during the study of ages were set down in accurate writing. I read through some of them during the days which passed, and the awfulness of the Powers over which they gave control appalled me. I had seen some of these Powers let loose in Atlantis, and was a witness of her destruction. But here were Powers far higher than those; here was the great Secret of Life and Death which Phorenice also had found, and for which she had been destroyed; and there were other things also of which I cannot even bring my style to scribe.

The thought of being custodian of these writings was more than I could endure, and the more the matter rested in my mind, the more intolerable became the burden. And at last I took hot irons, and with

[p. 353]

them seared the wax on the sheets till every letter of the old writings was obliterated. If I did wrong, the High Gods in Their infinite justice will give me punishment; if it is well that these great secrets should endure on earth, They in Their infinite power will dictate them afresh to some fitting scribes; but I destroyed them there as the Ark swayed with us over the waves; and later, when we came to land, I rewrote upon the sheets the matters which led to great Atlantis being dragged to her death-throes.

Nais, that I love so tenderly--

[Translator's Note.--The remaining sheets are too broken to be legible.]

    
The Lost Continent, by Cutcliffe Hyne, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 354] [p. 355]

The following advertisements from 1900 appeared in the original book. They are included for completeness.--JBH.

  

BY H. G. WELLS

WHEN THE SLEEPER WAKES. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 50.

"This romance of the twenty-second century," as the London Daily Telegraph says, "will prove absolutely enthralling. The hero goes into a trance in 1900, and when he awakes two centuries later he finds that his property has increased so greatly that he owns more than half the world."

THIRTY STRANGE STORIES. New Edition. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 50.

Creepy, ingenious, original, and more than clever they all are. They fascinate you like the eye of a snake. . . . It would be impossible to find a group of stories that will give the reader more sensations, or hold his attention more firmly .--Boston Herald.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS. With Illustrations. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 50.

One of the conspicuous books of the year, from its striking originality of title and plot.--Washington Times.

THE INVISIBLE MAN. A Grotesque Romance. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 00.

In his audacious imaginative insight into the romantic possibilities underlying the discoveries or the suggestion of modern science Mr. Wells stands unrivalled. . . . It is just like a transcript from real life, recalling the best work of Poe in its accent of sincerity and surpassing it in its felicity of style.--The Spectator, London.

HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS

NEW YORK AND LONDON

--> Any of the above works will be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the price.

[p. 356]

  

BY JAMES M. LUDLOW

A KING OF TYRE. A Tale of the Times of Ezra and Nehemiah. 16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 00.

Another distinct success in the field of historical fiction. . . . Must be unhesitatingly set down as a highly satisfactory performance.--Boston Beacon.

It is altogether a fresh and enjoyable tale, strong in its situations and stirring in its actions.--Cincinnati Commercial-Gazette.

The picture of the life and manners of that far-away period is carefully and artistically drawn, the plot is full of interest, and the whole treatment of the subject is strikingly original, and there is a dramatic intensity in the story which will at once remind the reader of "Ben-Hur."--Boston Traveller.

THE CAPTAIN OF THE JANIZARIES. A Tale of the Times of Scanderbeg and the Fall of Constantinople. 16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 50; 8vo, Paper, 50 cents.

Strong in its central historical character, abounding in incident, rapid and stirring in action, animated and often brilliant in style.--Christian Union, N. Y.

Something new and striking interests us in almost every chapter. The peasantry of the Balkans, the training and government of the Janizaries, the interior of Christian and Moslem camps, the horrors of raids and battles, the violence of the Sultan, the tricks of spies, the exploits of heroes, engage Mr. Ludlow's fluent pen.--N. Y. Tribune.

THAT ANGELIC WOMAN. A Novel. 16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 00.

The plot is skilfully drawn, the whole story shows dramatic power, and the conclusion will satisfy those readers who prefer a happy ending of an exciting tale.--Observer, N.Y.

A capital little story. . . . It will take but a couple of hours to read it, and there is no one who will not be all the better for its wholesome lessons.--N. Y. Journal of Commerce.

A charming little story, the delightful companion of the busy reader's leisure hour.--Evangelist. N. Y.

________________

HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS

NEW YORK AND LONDON

--> Any of the above works will be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the price.

 

    


===== BOOK: tml.txt =====


    
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

  

TEUTONIC MYTH AND LEGEND

  

by DONALD A. MACKENZIE

  

An Introduction to the Eddas & Sagas, Beowulf, The Nibelungenlied, etc.

  

London, Gresham Publications

  

[1912?]

  

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, October 2003, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
THE PUNISHMENT OF LOKE
 From the painting by J. Doyle Penrose, R.H.A., By permission of the artist.

Click to enlarge
Title Page Colophon

 

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

PREFACE

This volume deals with the myths and legends of the Teutonic peoples--Norsemen, Goths, Vandals, Burgundians, Franks, Angles, Saxons, and all the other Germanic tribes whose descendants now occupy England, Northern France, Switzerland, Belgium, Holland, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Norway and Iceland. The volume might have been called Northern European Myth and Legend. It is the body of folk tales, epics and religious beliefs which all Anglo-Saxons have inherited directly from their ancestors, and find most deeply embedded in every-day words and thoughts such as names for the days of the week, names recalling the gods and goddesses of our forefathers.

In France and Switzerland--after the Roman conquest--the folk lays were influenced by the higher and milder civilization which prevailed. Where the Roman influence extended the tribal songs were welded into detailed narratives, and each had for a central figure a popular hero like Dietrich of Bern.

A similar process subsequently prevailed in the north. Thus originated the "saga cycles," distributed over a wide area by wandering minstrels, who altered and adapted them to meet the requirements of time and locality. The highest literary development occurred when educated poets made still freer use of the subject matter of tribal lays and produced epic narratives which were not sung, but recited before cultured

[p. viii]

audiences. These were later revised and committed to manuscripts for reading. To this class belong two of outstanding merit--the German Nibelungenlied and the distinctive Anglo-Saxon Beowulf.

In the following pages our readers are afforded a comprehensive survey of the divine and heroic literature of Northern Europe. The drama of Norse myth has been reconstructed, so far as possible, in continuous narrative form, with the inclusion of the old Svipdag myth, which exercised so marked an influence on Middle Age romance. We have grouped together the various adventurous journeys made by heroes to Hela, so that our readers may be familiarized with our ancestors' conceptions of the Other World. The prose renderings of heroic narratives include the Beowulf epic, the Balder-Hother romance, the Hamlet legend, the saga of the Volsungs, and the less familiar Dietrich legends, in which the deeds of the primitive Thor are attached to the memory of the Gothic Emperor of Rome.

The folk tales and folk beliefs of Northern Europe have not a few points of contact with those of Scotland, Wales, Ireland and Brittany. We have therefore dealt in our Introduction with the archaic giant lore of Scotland, which links with that of Cornwall, and drawn attention to the "Seven Sleepers" legends of the Highlands which have hitherto been overlooked. Some of the striking resemblances must be traced to remoter influences than those prevailing in the Viking Age. Both Celts and Teutons were blends of the same ancient races--the Alpine "broad heads" and the Northern "long heads." They had therefore a common heritage of beliefs. But Teutonic lore is mainly "father-kin" in character, while Celtic is mainly "mother-kin." The deities of the north are

[p. ix]

controlled by a Great Father and their elves by a King. The deities of the Celts are children of a Great Mother and their fairies are ruled over by a Queen.

In the Anglo-Saxon epic, Beowulf, the story regarding Grendel and his mother is of special interest in this connection because it is "mother-kin" lore of Celtic character. The inference is that the poet who gave the epic its final shape in England had a Celtic mother, or at any rate, came under the influence of Celtic ideas. Like Shakespeare, who utilized old plays, he may have re-fashioned an earlier Anglian poem, appropriated its geographical setting and infused the whole with the fire of his genius.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xi]

  

CONTENTS

          CHAP.

        

       Page

     
       

       INTRODUCTION

       <page xvii>

     
      I.

       STORY OF CREATION

       <page 1>

     
      II.

       THE NINE WORLDS

       <page 11>

     
      III.

       THE DEEDS OF ODIN

       <page 21>

     
      IV.

       HOW EVIL ENTERED ASGARD

       <page 29>

     
      V.

       THE WINTER WAR

       <page 44>

     
      VI.

       TRIUMPH OF LOVE

       <page 53>

     
      VII.

       THE LOST SWORD OF VICTORY

       <page 64>

     
      VIII.

       FALL OF ASGARD

       <page 72>

     
      IX.

       THE GODS RECONCILED

       <page 82>

     
      X.

       LOKE'S EVIL PROGENY

       <page 90>

     
      XI.

       THOR'S GREAT FISHING

       <page 98>

     
      XII.

       THE CITY OF ENCHANTMENTS

       <page 112>

     
      XIII.

       THOR IN PERIL

       <page 126>

     
      XIV.

       THE GREAT STONE GIANT

       <page 137>

     
      XV.

       BALDER THE BEAUTIFUL

       <page 146>

     
      XVI.

       THE BINDING OF LORE

       <page 165>

     
      XVII.

       THE DUSK OF THE GODS

       <page 177>

     
      XVIII.

       THE COMING OF BEOWULF

       <page 187>

     
      XIX.

       CONFLICT WITH DEMONS

       <page 197>

     
      XX.

       BEOWULF AND THE DRAGON

       <page 210>

     
      XXI.

       HOTHER AND BALDER

       <page 221>

     
      XXII.

       THE TRADITIONAL HAMLET

       <page 232>

     
      [p. xii]

        

        

     
      XXIII.

       HAMLET'S STORM-MILL

       <page 246>

     
      XXIV.

       LAND OF THE NOT-DEAD AND MANY MARVELS

       <page 254>

     
      XXV.

       THE DOOM OF THE VOLSUNGS

       <page 282>

     
      XXVI.

       HOW SIGMUND WAS AVENGED

       <page 292>

     
      XXVII.

       HELGI HUNDINGSBANE

       <page 299>

     
      XXVIII.

       SIGURD THE DRAGON SLAYER

       <page 309>

     
      XXIX.

       BRYNHILD AND GUDRUN

       <page 322>

     
      XXX.

       THE LAST OF THE VOLSUNGS

       <page 338>

     
      XXXI.

       GUDRUN'S VENGEANCE

       <page 343>

     
      XXXII.

       SIEGFRIED AND THE NIBELUNGS

       <page 354>

     
      XXXIII.

       THE PROMISE OF KRIEMHILD

       <page 362>

     
      XXXIV.

       HOW BRUNHILD AND KRIEMHILD WERE WON

       <page 372>

     
      XXXV.

       THE BETRAYAL OF SIEGFRIED

       <page 382>

     
      XXXVI.

       THE NIBELUNGEN TRAGEDY

       <page 391>

     
      XXXVII.

       DIETRICH OF BERN

       <page 404>

     
      XXXVIII.

       THE LAND OF GIANTS

       <page 415>

     
      XXXIX.

       THE WONDERFUL ROSE GARDEN

       <page 424>

     
      XL.

       VIRGINAL, QUEEN OF THE MOUNTAINS

       <page 434>

     
      XLI.

       DIETRICH IN EXILE

       <page 439>

     
      XLII.

       THE KING'S HOMECOMING

       <page 448>

     
       

       INDEX

       455

     
    

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiii]

  

PLATES IN COLOR

           

       Facing Page

     
      THE PUNISHMENT OF LOKE

        

     
                 From   the painting by J. Doyle Penrose, R.H.A.

       Frontispiece

     
      IDUN AND THE APPLES

        

     
                 From   the painting by J. Doyle Penrose, R.H.A.

       58

     
      FREYJA AND THE NECKLACE

        

     
                 From   the painting by J. Doyle Penrose, R.H.A.

       94

     
      HUNDINGSBANE'S RETURN TO VALHAL

        

     
                 From   the painting by E. Wallcousins 

       268

     
    

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xv]

  

PLATES IN MONOCHROME

           

       Facing Page

     
      ODIN

        

     
               From the design   by Sir E. Burne-Jones

       8

     
      ODIN

        

     
               From the statue   by B. E. Fogelberg

       16

     
      THOR AND THE GIANTS

        

     
               From the painting   by M. E. Winge

       24

     
      A VALKYRIE

        

     
               From the   sculpture by Sinding

       48

     
      FREYJA

        

     
               From the painting   by N. J. O. Blommer

       56

     
      FREY

        

     
               From the design   by Sir E. Burne-Jones

       64

     
      THOR

        

     
               From the statue   by B. E. Fogelberg

       104

     
      LOKE AND HODUR

        

     
               From the   sculpture by C. G. Qvarnstrom

       152

     
      LOKE AT AeGER'S FEAST

        

     
               From the painting   by Constantin Hansen

       172

     
      THE DUSK OF THE GODS

        

     
               From the painting   by P. N. Arbo

       184

     
      VIKING SHIP FROM GOKSTAD

        

     
               Now in the   University, Christiania

       192

     
      VIKING RELICS

       200

     
      VIKING ORNAMENTS

       208

     
      ENTRANCE TO PASSAGE-GRAVE AT UBY, DENMARK

       216

     
      RORIK

        

     
               From the painting   by H. W. Koekkoek

       232

     
      
     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xvii]

  

INTRODUCTION

"Teutonic Myth and Legend" applies to the ancient religious conceptions and traditional tales of the "non-Celtic" northern peoples, whom Continental scholars prefer to call "Germanic" in the widest sense of the term. The myths varied in different districts and at different periods. It is doubtful if there ever was in any particular age complete uniformity of religious belief over a wide area of separated States. In fact, there are indications that sects and creeds were at least as numerous among Teutonic peoples in early times as at the present day. Stories repeated orally were also subject to change; they were influenced by popular taste, and rendered more effective by the introduction of local colouring.

Teutonic Mythology survives in its most concrete form in Scandinavian literature. On that account it has to be considered from the northern point of view, although much of it is clearly not of northern origin. Our principal sources of knowledge of this great Pagan religious system are the two Eddas of Iceland.

These Eddas are collections of mythical and heroic poems and stories. One is called the Elder or Poetic Edda; the other, Snorri's or the Prose Edda. The latter was discovered first; it came into the possession of appreciative scholars in the seventeenth century, by whom it was studied and carefully preserved.

[p. xviii]

The Prose Edda is a synopsis of Northern Mythology, with poetic quotations from lost poems and references to an earlier work. It was partly written and partly compiled by the great Icelandic scholar, Snorri Sturlason. He was born some time between 1179 and 1181, and was the son of a chief. Adopted by the learned Jon Loptsson, grandson of Saemund the Wise, he passed his early years at Oddi, where his literary tendencies were fostered and cultivated. He married a wealthy heiress, and settled in 1206 at Reykjaholt, where he lived in comparative luxury. Nominally a Christian, he was in reality an educated Pagan. He was a poet and historian, a lawyer and a politician; he combined great ambition with want of courage, and avarice with "aversion from effort"; he was also of loose morals. In 1215 he became President of Iceland, and afterwards resided for a time in Norway, where he was a Court poet. In 1222 he was again President of his native island. He held office for about ten years, and exercised his influence at every opportunity to enrich himself. He obtained a divorce from his wife, after living with her for twenty-five years, and married an heiress. It is not surprising, therefore, to find him involved in serious quarrels with his kinsmen. There were also political complications which had a tragic sequel. He was murdered by his son-in-law in 1241, at the instigation of the King of Norway.

In addition to the Prose Edda, Snorri's works included Heimskringla, or Sagas of Norse Kings, which opens with Ynglinga Saga, and the History of Olaf.

The discovery of Snorri's Edda in the seventeenth century caused a search to be made for the older collection to which it referred. Happily the quest was fruitful, and the lost manuscript came into the hands

[p. xix]

of an Icelandic bishop, who called it for the first time the "Edda of Saemund".

Saemund was a scion of the royal house of Norway, who was born in 1056 and died in 1133. He studied in France and Germany, and was afterwards parish priest of Oddi in Iceland. According to tradition, he was the author of a prose work on mythology which unfortunately perished. It is probable, however, that Snorri was acquainted with the lost manuscript while resident at Oddi, and he may have used it when compiling the Prose Edda. At any rate, scholars are now agreed that Saemund was neither the author nor compiler of the particular Edda which was long associated with his name.

The Elder Edda is a collection of mythical and heroic poems--lays of the gods and lays of the Volsung and other heroes--by various unknown authors. They are valuable treasures of antiquity, for they throw great light on northern beliefs and manners and customs. Some survive in fragments; others are fairly complete, and are introduced by brief prose summaries. A portion of them were evidently of pre-Christian origin.

As literary productions they are of unequal merit. They are all ear-poems, composed to be sung or recited, and therefore melodious, musically vowelled, and clear, as compared with the eye-poems of many modern authors, which have more harmony than melody, and are composed for the reader. A particular group of these Eddic poems are more dramatic and imaginative than the others, and certain critics are inclined to hold that their high development was caused by Celtic influence. Iceland was peopled not only from Norway, but also from the Hebrides, where the Vikings mingled with the people and married the island maidens. Many

[p. xx]

settlers were also of mixed Irish descent. Nor was the old English element absent, as certain borrowed words show clearly. But, when these facts are given adequate consideration, it must be borne in mind that literature, and especially poetry, owes usually more to the individual than to the race. If we knew as little of Keats as we do of the author of Beowulf, it might be held that he was a son of Greek parents who settled in England.

The survival of these Pagan Eddic poems in Christian times is suggestive of the slow extinction of old beliefs. Christianity was adopted in Iceland in 1000, a century after it had spread throughout Norway, and two hundred years before the people of Sweden can be said to have abandoned their ancient religion. It must not be inferred, however, that the Icelanders were exemplary Christians in Saemund's day or even in Snorri's. The bulk of them were, no doubt, half-Pagan, like those Ross-shire Highlanders in the vicinity of Loch Maree, who, as late as the seventeenth century, offered up sacrifices of bulls and performed other heathenish rites, to the horror of the Presbytery of Dingwall. The Icelanders must have clung, long after the introduction of Christianity, to the Pagan beliefs and practices of the great sea kings. They continued, we know, to chant the lays and recite the old traditional tales about the gods and ocean heroes of the mother country. The collectors may, indeed, have had more than a literary appreciation of oral song and haunting tradition.

When Snorri was a boy, a Danish priest named Saxo was engaged writing a history of his native land. The first nine books are like the Histories of the Kings of Britain by Geoffrey of Monmouth, for they are founded on the traditional poems and tales of the time. Saxo Grammaticus ("the Lettered") writes of Odin and the

[p. xxi]

other gods as if they were men, and when he refers to them as "gods" he takes occasion to scorn the hollowness of the claim, rarely failing to comment on the absurdity of the beliefs entertained by ignorant people. His history is a quarry of folklore and romance. To it we owe our Shakespeare's Hamlet, for the story which is retold in these pages from the Danish priest's immortal work, was the original source of our great poet's inspiration.

This "history" is indispensable to students of Scandinavian religion. Rydberg, the poet and folklorist of Sweden, is the author of a monumental work on Teutonic Mythology, [*1] in which he made exhaustive and critical examination of the tales embedded in Saxo's works, showing their relation to the Eddas and Sagas and existing oral poems of the north, and making masterly endeavour by their aid to reconstruct the great mythological drama of the northern peoples. He has not escaped criticism, but his reputation has withstood much of it. On every point he has raised he cannot be regarded as conclusive, but no scholar before or since has shown greater aptitude for restoring form from mythological chaos. His intimate knowledge of his native lore gave him special equipment for his work. Not infrequently scholars, by a process of detached reasoning, miss the mark when dealing with folklore, because their early years, unlike Rydberg's, were not passed in its strange atmosphere. The theorist is never as reliable as he who was aforetime a faithful believer in giants and elves, spirit voices and awesome omens.

"No one," wrote Frederick York Powell, [*2] "has

[p. xxii]

commented upon Saxo's mythology with such brilliancy, such minute consideration, and such success as the Swedish scholar, Victor Rydberg. . . . Sometimes he stumbles badly, but he has placed the whole subject on a fresh footing, and much that is to follow will be drawn from his Teutonic Mythology."

To Rydberg the writer owns his indebtedness in the present work, a portion of which is constructed according to his conclusions.

Edda is a word of uncertain origin. In a twelfth-century poem it is used to mean "great grandmother", and it is suggested that late sceptical compilers applied it to signify "old wives' tales". The theory has a somewhat modern note, for in legends, especially those of Scotland, the "old wife" is either feared or respected. The Hag, who is the terrible mother of giants, is called Cailleach Mor, "the big old wife", and the wise witch who imparts secrets and powers to men is simply "old wife".

Edda became associated in Iceland with the technical rules of verse. "Never to have seen Edda" signified a complete ignorance of poetic art, so it may be that among a mingled people the "great grandmother" was an imported Muse of a Matriarchal tribe. Saga, we know, was individualized as a maiden, and was wooed by Odin. A recent theory [*1] is that Edda is derived from "Oddi", the place where Saemund preached and Snorri studied.

The Eddas are, of course, the collected folk-songs and folk-tales of the northern peoples. In addition we have also available, for purposes of study, other old manuscripts and a considerable mass of valuable lore gleaned in recent years from oral sources, as well as the renowned surviving Sagas and minor poems of the skalds (song-smiths), which abound with mythological references.

[p. xxiii]

Some folk-tales are fragments of forgotten mythologies; others are part of the floating material from which mythologies were made. The two classes should therefore be studied together for purposes of elucidation, while consideration must ever be given to folk-customs which also enshrine ancient religious beliefs. The gods evolved from beliefs, and these loomed vast and vague on man's mental horizon ere they were given definite and symbolic expression. Indeed, detached stories of gods, especially Nature-gods, must have existed for indefinite periods ere they were subjected to a unifying process and embraced in a complete philosophy of life. A Mythology, therefore, must not be regarded as a spontaneous creation of a particular Age, but rather as a growth which had of necessity a history like, for instance, the Art of a finely sculptured stone, or that of the shapely and decorated Celtic bronze shield found embedded in Thames mud.

Matthew Arnold regarded poetry as a "criticism of life". That definition may, in a restricted sense, be applied to a Mythology, especially one of highly developed and complicated construction. We can conclude that it evolved from a school of thought which made critical selection of existing material when the work was undertaken of systematizing religious beliefs to suit the needs of a particular Age. As religion and law had in ancient times most intimate association, an official religion was ever a necessity in a well-organized State, and especially in one composed of mingled peoples. A Mythology, therefore, was probably the product of a national movement, and closely connected with the process of adjusting laws and uniting tribes under a central government. In the union and classification of gods we have suggested the union of peoples and the

[p. xxiv]

probable political relations of one tribe with another. No deity could be overlooked, if the interests of all sections were to be embraced, because the destinies of each were controlled by a particular god or group of gods of immemorial import. The gods of subject peoples would, of course, become subject to those of their rulers.

A Mythology was therefore not only a criticism; it was also a compromise. The lesser gods were accepted by those who imposed the greater, and new tales had to be invented to adjust their relationships one to another. Contradictory elements were thus introduced. The gods differed greatly. Some had evolved from natural phenomena; others were deified heroes. A seaside tribe showed reverence to gods which had origin in their own particular experiences and ideals, which differed to a marked degree from those, for instance, of an inland, forest-dwelling people. Settled communities and nomadic peoples professed beliefs in accordance with their particular modes of life. Between the various classes of a single social organization, even, there would exist religious conceptions which were fundamentally opposed. Invaders who formed a military aristocracy would import and perpetuate their own particular beliefs and rites, while those of the conquered people continued as aforetime. Indeed, archaeological remains demonstrate to the full that different burial customs were practised simultaneously in the same district, although each had origin in religious conceptions of divergent character. Two examples may be cited--(1) the crouched burial with food vessel, associated with the belief that the spirits of the dead haunted the place of interment and had to be propitiated, and (2) the cremation burial which ensured that the spirit, like that of Patroklos, would never again return from Hades when it had received its meed of fire

[p. xxv]

[paragraph continues] (Iliad xxiii. 75). In our northern tales there are evidences of various burial customs. Balder is cremated in Asgard, but he is interred in a barrow in the heroic story from Saxo. Beowulf and Sigurd are burned, Helgi is given sepulture in a mound, and Sigmund and his son are enclosed in a chambered grave when buried alive.

But while peoples who were mingled together practised different religious rites, invaders ever showed reverence, as did the Romans, to local gods and local beliefs. In the process of time one section would be influenced by the other. A fusion of religions would result from a fusion of peoples, but every district and every community would not be similarly affected. The clash of ideas would also be productive of speculative thought, and each Age would contribute something new from its accumulated ideas and experiences. Yet in the midst of the mass of floating lore there would ever survive beliefs of remote conception, for a folk-religion is conservative in essence. A people's inherited superstitions are not readily eradicated. The past endures in the present. Even in our own day folk-beliefs and folk-customs of Pagan origin have tardy survival after many long centuries of Christian influence.

When, therefore, the thinkers and teachers of Scandinavia framed their great Mythological system, they had to select and compromise; they were not only critics but diplomatists as well. New tales had to be invented, and old tales adjusted, to instruct and convert and unite all sections. Social relationships were given a religious bearing; the gods of the common people were shown to be subject to those of their rulers. All outstanding popular beliefs had to be accounted for, with the result that heroic tales were mingled with Nature myths, and the whole was infused with ethical and political purpose.

[p. xxvi]

[paragraph continues] The Mythology was thus coloured by the thought of the times and the conditions and character of the people, while it was given, of course, appropriate setting amidst local scenery.

Northern Teutonic Mythology must have had gradual growth. It appears to have attained its highest development in the Viking Age, when a united and masterful people, stirred, no doubt by well-organized political conditions, to a great awakening, spread far and wide to impose their rule and their culture upon alien peoples. When earlier migrations took place, amidst the battle storms of violent tribal fusion, the new religious system was in process of formation. The Angles and Saxons, for instance, were not greatly influenced by the Odin cult when they reached these island shores. Their deified tribal heroes were still predominant. That has been made abundantly clear by Stopford Brooke in his masterly study, History of Early English Literature.

So far as we are able to reconstruct the Mythology--nor can we expect complete agreement among the experts in this regard--it appears to have been highly developed and adjusted to the minutest detail. The official religion, of course, may not have been accepted in its completeness by all classes; sections may have still clung to favoured deities, while they recognized others unknown to their ancestors. Odin, we know, was esteemed more highly by scholarly skalds than by fighting men, who continued to exalt and worship Thor as chief or most influential god, and to repose their trust in the magical influence exercised in battle by the shadowy but ancient war-god Tyr. No doubt the teachers remained the while serenely confident that ultimately the spirit-god would be held in greater regard by thinking men than gods of physical might. But the growth of

[p. xxvii]

this great Pagan mythology was arrested by the gradual advance of Christianity, and it is given popular reconstruction in these pages as it possibly existed, especially ill the north, when the influence of the new and greater religion coloured the Balder story, and the idea was interpolated of a greater All-father than Odin. The Saxo stories are drawn upon to fill gaps, although gaps may have ever existed. We may add that we call the Mythology Northern Teutonic in preference to "Germanic", because of its geographical setting, and for the pregnant reason that it has survived mainly in the form given to it by the mingled peoples of the North.

The local character of this particular mythological system is strongly emphasized in "the story of creation". Only a Northern people living in close proximity to Arctic ice-fields could have conceived of a chaos-gulf bounded on the north by a cold and darksome Nifelheim, and on the south by a warm and bright Muspelheim. Life begins to be when and where the ice-blocks are thawed. The gods and their doings are also coloured by their Scandinavian environment. "Light -battles" and fierce Nature-wars are emphasized in a land of pronounced seasonal changes. No matter whence certain deities; were imported, here in the land of long winter nights they are acclimatized and naturalized. They contend against indigenous frost-giants; they fight and then become the allies of indigenous Vana-gods; they visit a sea-folk's terrible storm-god Aeger in his hall at the sea bottom; they acquire northern temperaments and become fatalists like all seafarers, ancient and modern.

Teutonic gloom overspreads Teutonic Mythology. Odin and his Asa clan live ever under the shadow of Ragnarok, "The Dusk of the gods". This gloom hangs heavily as northern storm-clouds over early "Teutonic"

[p. xxviii]

literature. It haunts the Eddas and Sagas; it permeates Anglo-Saxon poetry. Dr. Clark Hall says of Beowulf, "There is undoubtedly less colour about the second part than the first, and more gloom. The habit of foreboding which is noticeable in Part I is so prominent in Part II as to give a general tone of fatalistic hopelessness to it. Sunshine and shadow no longer alternate shadow is over all." The same comment might be applied with equal force to the Nibelungenlied. Although "gloomy" and "Celtic" have become synonymous terms of late years, yet Celtic (Irish) Mythology and old Gaelic literature both in Scotland and in Ireland strike, in comparison with what is termed Teutonic, a brighter and more cheerful note. It may be that the gloom is aboriginal--pre-Celtic and pre-Teutonic--a shadow of primitive but persistent mental habits.

In Teutonic Mythology, as in Greek, there are evidences of remote race-memories. The Asiatic "broad-heads" who crossed Europe in "waves", which began to arrive in the vast periods of the late Stone Age, must have imported not only new customs and new weapons, but also fragments of immemorial myths. Superstitions survive longer than stone monuments, and they pass through language to language, and from land to land, with the buoyancy of American timber which drifts across the Atlantic to Hebridean shores. An instance may be noted in the northern "Story of Creation". The body of Ymer, the chaos-giant, is cut to pieces; his flesh and bones become soil and rocks; his skull is the sky dome; his progeny is engulfed in his blood, which is the sea. Babylonian tablets relate a similar story. In the beginning Bel-Merodach slew the chaos-giantess Tiawath; he cut up her body, and with one part he framed the earth and with the other the heavens. Her blood was forced

[p. xxix]

to flow southward by a strong north wind--it became the river which filled the sea.

Comparisons may also be drawn between Teutonic and Greek Mythologies. But these will be found to be of slighter character. Those elements, common to both, which are not Asiatic may be of early Mediterranean origin, for as ancient cities lie below ancient cities) so do ancient mythologies rest upon the wrecks of others of still greater antiquity. As Jubainville has shown in Le Cycle Mythologique Irlandais et la Mythologie Celtique, Greek and Celtic are closely related and mainly of common origin. They are children of one mother; but Scandinavian Mythology cannot be regarded as other than a distant relation.

In all three Mythologies there is a central Nature-myth tragedy. In Greek it is the slaying of Night by Dawn. Hermes, surnamed Argeiphontes, in his character as Dawn-god, slays Argus, the many-eyed, who is Night, with a round stone, which is the Sun. In Celtic (Irish) Mythology the Dawn-god, Lugh, kills Balor of the Evil-eye, who is Night, with the same round sun-stone. The myth also applies to the slaying of Winter by Summer and of Evil by Good. The tragedy of Scandinavian Mythology, on the other hand, is the slaying of Day (or Summer) by Night (or Winter). Blind Hoder shoots Balder (in his Edda character as Summer Sun-god) with the wintry mistletoe-arrow. He is prompted by Loke, the Scandinavian Mephistopheles, who plots to hasten the downfall of the gods. Light is thus overcome by Darkness, Summer by Winter, and Good by Evil.

Another broad and fundamental contrast is afforded by the conceptions of Night in the Northern and other European Mythologies. Instead of the tyrannical Balor of Ireland, or the monstrous Argus of Greece, we have

[p. xxx]

the beneficent northern Night-goddess Nat, daughter of Mimer (Wisdom) and sister of Urd (Fate). She brings to mankind refreshment and inspiration. Her lover is Delling, the red elf of dawn, and their son is Dag (Day).

Nat is evidently of eastern origin. In the Rig-veda the goddess of night (dark daughter of day) is, like Nat, both noble of aspect and character; she "increases riches". In the tenth Mandala she is thus addressed:--

Kind goddess, be propitious to thy servants
 Who at thy coming straightway seek repose.
    .       .       .       .       .       .
 Drive thou away from us, O Night, the wolf,
 Drive thou away the thief, and bear us safely
 Across thy borders. . . .

In Teutonic Mythology, Evil is not necessarily associated with Darkness. The tempter and plotter is handsome Loke in his character as a fire-god; he is evidently an ally of Surtur, who burns up the world at Ragnarok. Loke is corrupted by the Hag of Ironwood, the "Mother of Evil", whose evil progeny includes the fierce wolves--one of which swallows the moon, while the other devours Odin--the great Midgard Serpent, and the repulsive, torture-loving Hel. Her Babylonian counterpart is Tiawath, among whose offspring are immense serpents, fiery dragons, raging hounds, fish-men, &c. The Northern Hag's husband, Gymer, is keeper of her flock, as is also the husband, Kingu, of Tiawath's.

The World, according to northern belief, is supported by a great tree which is ever green. This conception is not peculiar to Scandinavia, but nowhere else is an ash-tree similarly exalted in dignity. At its roots are three wells, and in one is a gnawing dragon or serpent. The gods dwell under its branches; they sit in judgment upon the dead beneath the ash in the Underworld. It

[p. xxxi]

trembles when Ragnarok is at hand; it is the oracle. Evidently the worship of trees and wells was so prevalent in the north, that no more popular idea could be conceived than that of a tree-supported universe. Even in our own day the superstitious reverence shown for "wishing-wells" is not uncommon, and the trees connected with them still flutter with prayer-rags. In Celtic Mythology, Dagda, the oak-god, has for wife Boann, the River Boyne. The well at the river source is one of the many celebrated in dragon-myth story. Finn Magnusen would have us regard "the world-tree" as the symbol of universal nature, but it was more probably a concession to popular belief, and dignified to accord with the general mythological scheme.

Odin would appear to have been originally an isolated tribal god--a deified martial chief, who became associated with a Nature Myth. He is a war-god and a magician; he controls battles and is the inventor of runes; he hangs on the world-ash, which bears one of his names, "Ygg's gallows" (Ygdrasil), as if he were, as he probably was, a king who was sacrificed. Yet his universal character is emphasized by his sky-dome hat and sky cloak flecked with cloud-spots. He is a one-eyed giant, a Cyclops; his lost eye sinks in Mimer's well as the sun sinks in the sea. He is also the wind-god--the Wild Huntsman in the Raging Host. As wind-god he is the "spirit-god" in accordance with the widespread association of "wind" and "breath" and "soul" (spirit, for in stance, is derived from spiro, I breathe). He gives "soul" to the logs of ash and alder which become the first man and the first woman. He is All-father, the framer of the world. Odin was probably exalted, because he was the spirit-god, by the wise men of Scandinavia, and made chief ruler in their Asgard, but his connection with the

[p. xxxii]

other gods is slight and arbitrary. Thor, his son, was originally an oak-god, and, like Jupiter, is wielder of the thunderbolt. It is, however, in keeping with the sublime character of Northern Teutonic Mythology that the "spirit-god" should be supreme, and the constant friend of his kinsman Mimer (Wisdom), whose daughter is Urd (Fate).

The giant stories were constructed on a lower plane of thought. A single exception is Thor's adventure in the palace of Utgard-Loki, where he wrestles in vain with the Hag, who is Old Age, and endeavours to drink up the ocean. The mythical interpretations of the others cannot be pressed too closely, lest more be read into them than was ever intended. It is evident that the reciter's imagination was allowed to run riot, and that the narratives assumed their extended form as popular wonder-tales.

When the tribal heroes of northern peoples were glorified by story-tellers, they were invariably depicted as giant-killers. In the half-mythical history of Geoffrey of Monmouth, Corineus contended successfully against the giants of Cornwall--he slew them in dozens--and after wrestling with the greatest, Goemagot, he cast him over a cliff. Siegfried, in the Nibelungenlied, and Dietrich, in his Thunor (Thor) character, are also slayers of giants. In Highland giant-lore there are several similar heroes who, like Thor, are friends of the agricultural people. The hunting-folks had their own hunting-giants, like the Highland Finn and his warrior band, who are not militiamen as in Ireland.

It has been remarked that the Northern Teutonic frost-giants are indigenous. But there is another class of giants who are as widely scattered as the drinking-cup urns of the ancient and mysterious people that settled

[p. xxxiii]

in the fertile districts of these islands and of Scandinavia, and have been traced through mid-Europe. These are the Mountain -giants. In the neglected archaic lore of Scotland they are called Fomors [*1], but they are not the Fomors of Ireland, nor have they a necessary connection with the sea or with darkness. As river-goddesses in flight are personifications of rivers, so do these Fomors personify the hills they inhabit. Scottish mountain-giants never leave their mountains. They fight continuously one against the other, tossing boulders over wide valleys or arms of the sea. To each is allowed one throw daily: A flings his boulder against B on Monday; B retaliates on Tuesday, and so on. The Holmgang duel would therefore appear to be of hallowed antiquity. These giants sleep at night and share men's terrors in darkness. Three friendly Inverness giants throw from one to the other, each morning, a stone hammer to signify that all is well. Greater than the males are their mothers, the Hags [*2], who also fight with boulders, but have power to change their shapes. There are also Thunder-cloud hags who throw fireballs, tempest-hags, firebrand-hags, sea-hags, &c. They invariably wrestle with human beings like the giants of Cornwall.

Another class of Scottish giants inhabit caves, and some of them are many-headed. They hoard and guard treasure. Heroes who fight against them are invariably assisted by dogs (dogs "which have their day"), and they are instructed by indispensable wise women [*3] who possess magic wands. What appears to be the oldest Thor story belongs to this class. When Thor sets out to visit Geirrod

[p. xxxiv]

he has neither hammer nor belt of strength. The Hag Grid, like the Scottish "wise-woman", warns and instructs him, and gives him her belt and magic wand. In this story Thor flings a boulder and breaks the back of a giantess. He may have wielded thunder-boulders ere his iron hammer was invented.

Scottish giants, therefore, are more like the Scandinavian than the Irish variety. If it is held that they were imported by the Vikings, it might be asked why Thor was forgotten, and why the Asa-gods and the Vans were left behind? If they are classed as Irish, it should be noted that the Danann gods, who overcame the Fomors in Erin, are not found in Scotland. Call it be maintained that the Irish brought over their "gods of Night" and left behind their "gods of Day"? In Wales and Cornwall there are also giants of the Scottish type. Geoffrey of Monmouth, in fact, tells us that giants were the sole inhabitants of ancient Britain when Brute and the first men arrived.

Beyond the realms of Gaul, beneath the sunset
 Lieth an island, girt about by ocean,
 Guarded by ocean--erst the haunt of giants. [*1]
                                             S. Evans's Trans.

It would appear that archaic giant-lore is pre-Celtic and pre-Teutonic, and therefore a common inheritance. In the wars of the Olympians and Titans, of the Irish Danann gods and the Fomors, and of the Asa-gods and the Jotuns, we may have echoes of ancient racial conflicts. The old tribal peoples attributed their successes to their gods, and remembered their battles as the battles of rival gods. For these giants are also gods of archaic conception. In Scotland certain of them are associated with the fortunes of families and tribes. On the other hand, gods

[p. xxxv]

are but exalted giants; the boisterous Olympians find their counterpart in the boisterous Scandinavian Jotuns rather than in the more refined Asa-gods and Vans.

With these giants are associated the elves. In Teutonic lore, which is not necessarily wholly of Teutonic origin, the male elves predominate. In Scotland, as in Greece, elves are mainly females, who are ruled over by a queen. There are also Scottish fairy-smiths, but they are one-eyed and Cyclopean, and not always distinguishable from giants. In fact, the Fian-giants are confused with fairies in ail Inverness mound, and Thomas the Rhymer is added in the character of one of the "Seven Sleepers". Danann gods and fairies are similarly mingled in Ireland. It should be noted in this connection that Teutonic elf-smiths are allies of the giants, and they are sometimes stronger than them. When Siegfried overcame the giant doorkeeper of Nibelung, he found that the dwarf was a still more powerful opponent. Thor is friendly with the elves, but Svipdag, son of Egil, the elf, destroys the thunder-god's hammer with the "Sword of Victory".

The other class of elves--the "Light-elves"--are vaguely defined in Northern Teutonic Mythology. Frey was their ruler in his youth, which suggests that he is himself an elf exalted to a god. The wise Vans are also elfin in character, and were probably the spirit-folk of ail early seafaring people. The story of the unhappy marriage of Njord and Skade may contain a germ of historic fact-the uncongenial association of a tribe of seafarers with a tribe of huntsmen.

The female elves of the commoner type become valkyries; they are also swan-maidens who have tragic liaisons with mankind. Brynhild is a swan-maiden and a valkyrie; she is also in the Nibelungenlied a boulder

[p. xxxvi]

throwing hag. The Balder story, regarding which much has been written, is not, therefore, the only one that underwent radical changes in the process of Mythology-making. According to Professor Frazer in the Golden Bough, Balder was originally a tree-god whose soul was in the mistletoe. The theory is as weighty as is the reputation of that Darwin of folklore.

But perhaps the most interesting class of elves are the sons of Ivalde--Volund and his brothers. They display the attributes now of dwarfs, now of giants, and anon of star deities. It would appear that they absorbed more than one ancient personality in an older Mythology than that in which the Odin cult predominates. Rydberg shows that Volund (Wieland) and the giant Thjasse are indistinguishable. A close study of northern folklore supports that view, and an intimate acquaintance with the mental habits of fairy-and-giant-believing people assists one to appreciate it fully. Thjasse is the only giant who is winged like Volund, as Loke and Freyja are the only members of the Asa-clan who can assume bird guise. Thjasse and Volund are also symbolized as mountain wolves; they are both star deities; they are more like one another than the two Balders, and appear to be products of the same ancient welded lore of an earlier mythological system.

In the Northern "Story of Creation" these elves, or black dwarfs, are, it is evident, intentionally belittled. They have their origin, like maggots, in Ymer's flesh. Yet they provide the gods with indispensable gifts--Odin with his spear, Thor with his hammer, and Frey with his boar and wondrous ship. In Thjasse's flight to Asgard we may have a story invented purposely to account for his fall, because, like Odin, he is a spirit-god. His other names, Byrr and Gustr, signify wind and gale.

[p. xxxvii]

It is not possible now to reconstruct what appears to be a pre-Odin-cult Mythology, in which Ivalde and his sons predominate. The "Milky Way" is "Irmin's Way", and Irmin, invoked by old Hildebrand in the Dietrich story, is "the ruling god It is also Bil's way (Bil is Ivalde's daughter), and as "Bil-rost", according to Rydberg, is the original of Bif-rost. The Anglo-Saxons called the "Milky Way" "Watling Street". [*1]

Volund's brother Egil, the archer, is associated with the clouds and the sea. Sleet and rain are his arrows; his arrows are also "herrings that leap from the hands of Egil", and herrings are "arrows of the sea". [*2] Egil's son, the Iceland Hamlet, is the guardian of the World-Mill; his son Svipdag, with shining sword, resembles a light-hero.

In the older moon-myth Gevar, the Gewar of the Hother-Balder story, is the ward of the moon-ship, and it is attacked and burned by Ivalde. The myth is obscure but suggestive; it survives in fragments only. The swan-maids are wooed by Ivalde's three sons, and Ivalde and Gevar have quarrelled violently as rival lovers.

This group are hunters, skee-runners, and musicians. They are also connected with an early form of the Balder story. Svipdag, as Hotherus, is the wooer of Gevar's daughter Nanna, and Balder, his rival, falls a victim to his "magic sword" in the heroic story in Saxo. If Balder, as a tree-god, was associated with the tree-well, he may have wooed Nanna of the moon by reflecting her image. In this connection it may be noted that wells sprang up in the hoof marks of Balder's horse,

[p. xxxviii]

and in Saxo's story he provides wells for his thirsting soldiers. His rival would thus be the light-hero Svipdag, with his shining summer sword, which was concealed for a season in the Underworld cave where lie the Seasonal "Seven Sleepers". In Northern Teutonic Mythology the popular Balder becomes the Summer Sun-god. instead of Svipdag, and the only husband of Nanna. If the original story was thus transformed by displacing or changing a hero, the process is a familiar one. The shadowy Hoder may be the original rival lover altered to fit into the new mythological system.

It is to this group of ancient tales of rival lovers and swan-maids and moon-maids that we owe the treasures of Middle Age popular romance. The Volsunga-saga and the Nibelungenlied and the Balder heroic story were developed from what Rydberg calls the "Ivalde myth". Svipdag, too, is the original of Siegfried and Sigurd. In his character as a wronged son he suggests Hamlet and Finn-mac-Coul. The latter has a hammer (Ord na Feinne) which links him with Thor, as Thor links with the other giant-killers-Sigurd, Siegfried, and Dietrich. A tribal hero invariably absorbs the attributes of his predecessors, and develops and changes to suit the tastes of audiences and minstrels in various ages and in various countries. In Scandinavia, when the Asa-gods were threatened by the advance of Christianity, Svipdag, as Eric, was exalted as a rival to Christ, and suffered the fate of being associated with the Devil, who was afterwards called "old Erik". Odin was similarly treated; as Nik he became "the old Nick" of Perdition. Finn-mac-Coul was also pictured by early Christian missionaries as an inhabitant of "the lower regions."

The Beowulf story is an interesting link between the

[p. xxxix]

heroic lore of the northern Continental peoples and that of the early Britons. Beowulf, like Dietrich, may have been a historical personage, but in the poem he is a hero of the Svipdag order, yet not necessarily a "light-hero". He slays the warrior-devouring Grendel. Dietrich, in one of the poems of his cycle, also rids the neighbourhood of Attila's court of a man-eating monster. In the next part of Beowulf, which is evidently an addition, whether by the same author or another it matters not here, the hero slays Grendel's mother. Although the poet suggests that she is less formidable than her son, she proves to be a more ferocious opponent. Only by the familiar "magic sword" can she be slain. In this respect she resembles Hilde, the wife of Grim, in the Dietrich story; but she bears a closer resemblance to the British Hag, the mother of the giants. Finn-mac-Coul, when in "The Kingdom of Big Men," had similarly, after slaying sea-giants, to contend against the terrible Sea-Hag-mother. There are several similar stories in Highland giant-lore, and no doubt they were prevalent at one time throughout Britain, especially among members or descendants of the Matriarchal tribes referred to by Caesar.

Stopford Brooke, in his History of Early English Literature, "wonders if the Grendel tale may not be a Celtic story which in very ancient times became Teutonic," and quotes the close Icelandic parallel, the Glam story. "It is a curious question," he says, "how it came to pass that the story of Beowulf and Grendel did not, like the other Sagas of the north, become a part of the north German cycle of romance. . . . I have sometimes thought that the Angles alone threw the myths and tales of it into lays, and that when the whole body of them emigrated to our island, they left the Continent naked

[p. xl]

of the tale. . . . I conjecture that something broke the literary connection on the Continent, or that the story was developed only when the Angles got into Britain." The latter supposition, considered in the light of existing Scottish giant-lore, which was evidently at one time general in ancient Britain, is the more convincing of the two. The theory of a complete and wholesale Anglian migration is as improbable as the theory of a complete and wholesale extermination of the early Britons, which, although still surviving, has really no reliable basis. Dr. Clark Hall, the scholarly translator and editor of Beowulf, accepts the hero as "a thoroughly historical character". So was Dietrich as the Emperor Theodoric. But while, like Stopford Brooke and other rationalistic critics, he dismisses the solar-myth theory, he errs, we think, in the opposite direction. He says: "Is it not possible that besides performing many heroic deeds in war against ordinary mortals, our hero (Beowulf) had two or three mysterious encounters with wild beasts, which grew into our Grendel and dragon stories by the process of exaggeration. . . . I have myself heard, in the nineteenth century, from the lips of an ancient mariner, a passably truthful and not very imaginative man, an amazing yarn about a sea serpent which I have no doubt had some foundation in fact." [*1]

To the audiences who heard the Beowulf poem sung, Grendel was as real as the hero; and no doubt there were, in those ancient days, many similar tales which perished because no great poet enshrined them in enduring verse.

It is believed by scholars that Beowulf was composed in the early part of the eighth century. Whether it was the work of one man or of several is a disputed point.

[p. xli]

[paragraph continues] There appears, however, to be general agreement that it is of Pagan origin, and that the Christian references are interpolations. The only surviving manuscript, which is in the handwriting of two copyists, is preserved in the British Museum. "There are clear indications," says Dr. Clark Hall, "that the poem was originally composed in the Anglian (probably Mercian) dialect, but it has come down to us in West Saxon, with some Kentish forms, in the part copied by the second scribe."

Scattered through the poem are older stories told by the minstrels, including the myths of Scyld and Hermod and the ancient Sigmund story, which found its highest artistic development in the Volsunga-saga and Nibelungenlied. Reference has already been made to the theory that certain lays of the Elder Edda show traces of British influence. Those students who desire to have fuller knowledge of the literature, mythology, and history of our mingled ancestors may examine with profit the conjectures of the various scholars, including Schwartz, Frazer, Bugge, Stopford Brooke, York Powell, Vigfusson, and others.

The Nibelungenlied, or "Lay of the Nibelung", dates in its united form from the latter part of the twelfth century, and is supposed to be, as a poem, of Austrian or Tyrolese origin; but on this point there is no generally accepted opinion. The versification is in Middle High German. There is a large number of existing old manuscripts. The three most important were made by copyists in the thirteenth century. When the oldest of these was discovered in 1755, it was published by a Swiss scholar. Other manuscripts were subsequently brought to light, but the first complete published edition did not attract much attention. In

[p. xlii]

fact, Frederick the Great, to whom it was dedicated, refused to have it in his library, and said it was hardly worth a charge of powder. To-day it is the pride of the Fatherland.

It is evident that the Sigurd and Siegfried stories had a common origin in an ancient nature myth of which the Svipdag legend is an early form. The stories developed as popular stories; their mythological significance was forgotten, and, in course of time, historical personages were identified with certain of the characters. Other legends, like those of Helgi in the Norse version, and of Dietrich in the German, were also attached to the original plot. Both great Sagas were coloured by the civilizations in which they developed.

How floating myths and legends gathered round the memory of a popular hero is clearly shown in the lays of the Dietrich cycle. Dietrich Von Bern is Theoderic the Great. [*1] Although he was born two years after the death of Attila, Emperor of the Huns, he is found at his Court in the Nibelungenlied. Ermenerich (Hermanric) was Emperor of the Ostrogoths, and, when an old man, his dominions were overrun by fiery and savage Huns from Asia. He is believed to have died on the battlefield, where his power was shattered (about 374 A.D.). The Ostrogoths were subject to the Huns until Attila's death in 453 A.D. King Walamer defeated them in a great battle in 454 A.D., and once again the Ostrogoths were made independent. The king's two brothers were Theudemir, father of Theoderic (Dietrich) and Widemer, and they were subsidized from Rome for protecting the frontiers of the Eastern Empire. When payment was suddenly discontinued, Illyria was successfully invaded by Widemer, with the result that the treat), was renewed. Theoderic

[p. xliii]

was taken as a peace hostage to Constantinople, where he resided for ten years and received a Roman education. Theudemir succeeded his brother, and when he died, Theoderic ruled the wandering Ostrogoths.

In 480 A.D. Odoacer, a German captain of mercenaries, deposed Romulus Augustulus, the last of the Western Emperors, who was but a boy of seventeen. Eight years later Zeno, the Eastern Emperor, commissioned Theoderic to invade Italy. Odoacer was overthrown, and our Dietrich of the legends became a great and powerful king in Rome, owing nominal allegiance to the Eastern Emperor. He died in 526, and was buried in a great marble tomb at Ravenna. A fine statue of him, clad in full armour, may be seen in the church of the Franciscans at Innsbruck.

In the Dietrich story Ermenerich is confused with Odoacer, and the hero is depicted as an exile, and thus identified with his father. A mass of floating legends attached to the memory of Dietrich, including the Hildebrand story, which originated in the ancient and world-wide father-and-son conflict theme, and the myths of Thunor (Thor) the thunder-god, the slayer of giants and dwarfs. But even Thor has his human side. He may have been originally a tribal hero who was identified both with an oak-deity and the central figure of a Nature-myth. [*1] He remains "the friend of man" even when elevated to Asgard. All the heroes of the minstrels of Europe link one with another as the fictional descendants of an ancient deified personage, or a

[p. xliv]

humanized deity, of a remoter and simpler mythology than that in which Odin is the chief ruler.

One of the most interesting problems associated with Teutonic Mythology refers to the story of the "Seven Sleepers". Mimer's seven sons lie in magic sleep in the Underworld, awaiting the blast of the horn at Ragnarok. This horn hangs in a cave. Thorkill, who visited Geirrod's domains with King Gorm and his company, saw the suspended horn which turned into a dragon when a man seized it greedily.

Rydberg argued that the various "Seven Sleepers" legends in Europe and North Africa originated in Scandinavia, and were distributed by the northern warriors who overran Italy, Greece, Asia Minor, and Egypt. His main argument rests on one very remarkable coincidence. The "Seven Sleepers" of Ephesus were Christians who were condemned to death by the Emperor Decius. They were given time to renounce their faith, but concealed themselves in a cave, where they lay wrapped in sleep "for 360 years". [*1] During the reign of Theodosius, the Roman Emperor, a shepherd entered the cave, and the sleepers were awakened. Rydberg notes that Decius fell in battle with the Goths "who a few years later invaded Asia Minor and captured Ephesus among other places".

Seven men, who were attired like Romans, lay asleep in a cave in Western Germany. An eighth-century legend relates that a man who discovered them attempted to disrobe one, and his arm withered. In the vicinity dwelt a tribe of Skritobians (Skridfinns).

In Arabia a dog lies with "the sleepers". Mahomet made them foretell his coming, and the dog, named

[p. xlv]

[paragraph continues] Kratim, is one of the ten animals which will enter Paradise.

If the legend originated in Scandinavia, it is a curious fact that this dog should be found also in the Highland stories, with which Rydberg and others who have dealt with the legend were unfortunately unacquainted. The sleepers are found in Craig-a-howe, Black Isle; Ossian's Cave, Glencoe; and Smith's Rock, in Skye. In each case they are Fians (Fingalians), and beside Finn-mac-Coul lies his dog Bran. [*1] In Tomnahurich, Inverness, the chief steeper is Thomas the Rhymer, who also reposes under the Eildon hills.

In the Scottish caves a horn hangs from the roof When it is blown three times, the sleepers will issue forth. A shepherd found the cave (it is always a shepherd) and blew two blasts on the horn. But he was so terrified by the ferocious appearance of the warriors and by a voice which cried, "If the horn is blown once again the world will be upset altogether", that he fled, leaving the warriors resting on their elbows. The Fians cried, "Alas! you have left us worse than you found us". The shepherd locked the door and threw the key into the sea. At Inverness there is a Gaelic saying, "When the horn is blown, True Thomas shall come forth".

If this Highland story was imported by the Norsemen, why should the Arabian dog be a "sleeper" also? It is possible that in Arabia and in the Highlands the tale is found in its most archaic form, and that it is part of the floating material from which Teutonic Mythology was constructed. [*2]

What appears to be a very old version of the legend

[p. xlvi]

is found in South Uist. It was taken down from a minister thirty years ago by an Inspector of Schools, who related it to the writer as follows:--

The Fians (Feinne) were lying in a cave, each resting on his elbow, chin upon hand, self-absorbed, not asleep.

They heard the falling waters, and the storms went over them unheeded. . . . Thousands of years went past.

They were still resting there, musing, when one of them moved his elbow and said:--

"Och! och! 's mi tha sgith." (Och! och! it's me that's tired.)

Thousands of years went past. . . . They heard the falling waters, and the storms went over them unheeded.

Then a great Fian said sharply, "Mur a' sguir sibh dhe 'n chonnspoid seo, theid mi mach 's fagaidh mi an uaimh agaibh fhein." (If you do not stop this wrangling I'll go out, and leave the cave to yourselves.)

Thousands of years went past. . . . They heard the falling waters, and the storms went over them unheeded.

In various legends the movements of the "sleepers" (who do not sleep in Uist) were associated with sorrow and disaster or seasonal changes. Edward the Confessor had a vision, while sitting at a banquet in his palace at Westminster, in which he saw the Ephesian sleepers turning round. A messenger was sent to Ephesus, and it was found that they had turned from their right sides to their left. This was taken as a sign of approaching disaster, and was, in fact, associated with the miseries that Christendom endured from the Saracens. The seasonal reference survives in the St. Swithin's day belief.

[p. xlvii]

Various heroes lie asleep, including Charlemagne, Frederick of Barbarossa, William Tell in Switzerland, Brian Boroimhe in Ireland, and Arthur in Wales. The warning that when the sleepers leave the cave "the world will be upset" was transformed into the popular belief that certain heroes would issue forth in the hour of their country's direst need. The French peasants believed in the coming of Napoleon, as the Swiss did in the return of William Tell. During the Russo-Japanese war the peasantry of Russia were confident that General Skobeleff would hasten to Manchuria to lead the armies to victory. To this day there are many Highlanders who remain convinced that General Sir Hector Macdonald is not dead, but is waiting his hour of return. A similar belief attached to James IV, who fell at Flodden. So do "immemorial modes of thought" survive in the twentieth century from, perhaps, that remote Stone Age period when the fair-haired and blue-eyed "long-heads" spread from North Africa over the undivided lands of ancient Europe to mingle with earlier inhabitants and later "broad-heads" from Asia.

Footnotes

^xxi:1 An English translation by R. B. Anderson was published in London in 1889, but is out of print.

^xxi:2 Introduction to English translation of Saxo Grammaticus.--Nutt.

^xxii:1 Eirikr Magnusson's.

^xxxiii:1 In Scottish Gaelic, Fomhair and Famhair, pronounced "foo-ar" and "faa-har". The Fomorib (men of the sea) theory has long been abandoned by Prof. Rhys.

^xxxiii:2 In Gaelic, Cailleach Mor.

^xxxiii:3 In pre-Christian times witches were the friends of man, and helped him to combat against hags and giants.

^xxxiv:1 In Old English the giants are "eotens".

^xxxvii:1 In Ireland the "Milky Way" is "Lugh's chain". Lugh is the dawn-god, and grandson of the night-god.

^xxxvii:2 Saga Library, Morris and Magnusson, Vol. I, 339.

^xl:1 Beowulf, Clark Hall, Introduction, lix-lx.

^xlii:1 Dietrich is the High German equivalent of Theoderic. Bern is Verona.

^xliii:1 The western Hittites had a storm-god, named Tarku, at the head of their pantheon. The eastern Hittites called him Teshup. This god is a warrior who holds in one hand a hammer, and in the other three wriggling flashes of lightning. The hammer is the symbol of fertility. Thor brings his goats back to life by waving his hammer over them.

^xliv:1 This calculation is according to the legends.

^xlv:1 See Finn and His Warrior Band.

^xlv:2 The dog also figures in a "Seven Sleepers" legend in North Afghanistan.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

TEUTONIC MYTH AND LEGEND

  

CHAPTER I

  

Story of Creation

The Beginning--Ginnunga-gap--All-father--Nifel-heim and Muspel-heim--How Life began--Ymer, the Clay Giant--Audhumla, the Cow--Vana-gods, Giants, and Asa-gods--War in Space--Ymer--deluge.--The Great World-mill--How the Earth was made--Moon-god and Sun-goddess--Hyuki and Bil--The Pail of Song Mead--Wolf Giants pursue Sun and Moon--Mimer and Nat, "Mother of Gods"--The Day-god--The Eagle of Winds--First Man and Woman.

IN the Ages, when naught else was, there yawned in space a vast and empty gulf called Ginnunga-gap. Length it had, and breadth immeasurable, and there was depth beyond comprehension. No shore was there, nor cooling wave; for there was yet no sea, and the earth was not made nor the heavens above.

There in the gulf was the beginning of things. There time first dawned. And in the perpetual twilight was All-father, who governs every realm and sways all things both great and small.

First of all there was formed, northward of the gulf, Nifel-heim, the immense home of misty darkness and

[p. 2]

freezing cold, and to the south, Muspel-heim, the luminous home of warmth and of light.

In the midst of Nifel-heim burst forth the great fountain from whence all waters flow, and to which all waters return. It is named Hvergelmer, "the roaring cauldron", and from it surged, at the beginning, twelve tremendous rivers called Elivagar, that washed southward towards the gulf. A vast distance they traversed from their source, and then the venom that was swept with them began to harden, as does dross pouring from a surface, until they congealed and became ice. Whereupon the rivers grew silent and ceased to move, and gigantic blocks of ice stood still. Vapour arose from the ice-venom and was frozen to rime; layer upon layer heaped up in fantastic forms one above another.

That part of the gulf which lay northward was a region of horror and of strife. Heavy masses of black vapour enveloped the ice, and within were screaming whirlwinds that never ceased, and dismal banks of fleeting mist. But southward, Muspel-heim glowed with intense radiance, and sprayed forth beauteous flakes and sparks of shining fire. The intervening space between the region of tempest and gloom and the region of warmth and light was a peaceful twilight, serene and still as is windless air.

Now when the sparks from Muspel-heim fell through the frozen vapour, and the heat was sent thither by the might of the All-father, drops of moisture began to fall from the ice. It was then and there that life began to be. The drops were quickened and a formless mass took human shape. Thus came into being the great lumbering clay-giant who was named Ymer.

Rough and ungainly was Ymer, and as he stretched himself and began to move about he was tortured by the

[p. 3]

pangs of immense hunger. So he went forth ravenously to search for food; but there was yet no substance of which he could partake. The whirlwinds went past him and over, and the dark mists enveloped him like a shroud.

More drops fell through the gloomy vapours, and next there was formed a gigantic cow, which was named Audhumla, "void darkness". Ymer beheld it standing in the gloom beside blocks of ice, and groped weakly towards it. Wondering, he found that milk ran from its teats in four white streams, and greedily he drank and drank until he was filled with the seeds of life and was satisfied.

Then a great heaviness came over Ymer, and he lay down and fell into deep and dreamless slumber. Warmth and strength possessed him, and sweat gathered in the pit of his left arm, from which, by the might of All-father, were formed a son named Mimer and a daughter named Bestla. From Mimer were descended the Vana-gods. Under the feet of Ymer arose a monstrous six-headed son, who was the ancestor of the evil frost giants, the dreaded Hrimthursar. Then Ymer awoke.

For Audhumla, the great cow, there was no verdure upon which to feed. She stood on the verge of gloom, and found sustenance by licking constantly the huge boulders that were encrusted by salt and rime. For the space of a day she fed in this manner, until the hair of a great head appeared. On the second day the cow returned to the boulder, and ere she had ceased to lick, a head of human semblance was laid bare. On the third day a noble form leapt forth. He was endowed with great beauty, and was nimble and powerful. The name he received was Bure, and he was the first of the Asa-gods.

[p. 4]

There followed in time more beings--noble giants and wicked giants, and gods. Mimer, who is Mind and Memory, had daughters, the chief of whom was Urd, Goddess of Fate and Queen of Life and Death. Bure had a son named Bor, who took for his wife Bestla, the sister of wise Mimer. Three sons were born to them, and the first was called Odin (spirit), the second Ve whose other name is Honer, and the third Vile, whose other names are Lodur and Loke. Odin became the chief ruler of the Asa-gods, and Honer was chief of the Vans until Loke, the usurper, became their ruler.

Now Ymer and his evil sons were moved with wrath and enmity against the family of gods, and soon warfare broke out between them. To neither side was there early victory, and the fierce conflicts were waged through the long ages ere yet the earth was formed. But, at length, the sons of Bor prevailed over their enemies and drove them back. In time there followed great slaughter, which diminished the army of evil giants until one alone remained.

It was thus that the gods achieved their triumph. Ymer was stricken down, and the victors leapt upon him and then slit open the bulging veins of his neck. A great deluge of blood gushed forth, and the whole race of giants was drowned save Bergelmer, "The Mountain-old", who with his wife took refuge on the timbers of the great World-mill, and remained there. From these are descended the Jotuns, who for ever harboured enmity against the gods.

The great World-mill of the gods was under care of Mundilfore (Lodur-Loke). Nine giant maids turned it with much violence, and the grinding of the stones made such fearsome clamour that the loudest tempests could not be heard. The great mill is larger than is

[p. 5]

the whole world, for out of it the mould of earth was ground.

When Ymer was dead, the gods took counsel among themselves, and set forth to frame the world. They laid the body of the clay-giant on the mill, and the maids ground it. The stones were smeared with blood, and the dark flesh came out as mould. Thus was earth produced, and the gods shaped it to their desire. From Ymer's bones were made the rocks and the mountains; his teeth and jaws were broken asunder, and as they went round at their labour the giant maids flung the fragments hither and thither, and these are the pebbles and boulders. The ice-cold blood of the giant became the waters of the vast engulfing sea.

Nor did the giant maids cease their labours when the body of Ymer was completely ground, and the earth was framed and set in order by the gods. The body of giant after giant was laid upon the mill, which stands beneath the floor of Ocean, and the flesh-grist is the sand which is ever washed up round the shores of the world. Where the waters are sucked through the whirling eye of the millstone is a fearsome maelstrom, and the sea ebbs and flows as it is drawn down to Hvergelmer, "the roaring cauldron", in Nifel-heim and thrown forth again. The very heavens are made to swing by the great World-mill, round Veraldar Nagli, "the world spike", which is the Polar Star.

Now when the gods had shaped the earth they set Ymer's skull over it to be the heavens. At each of the four corners they put as sentinels the strong dwarfs East and West and North and South. The skull of Ymer rests upon their broad shoulders.

As yet the sun knew not her home, nor the moon her power, and the stars had no fixed dwelling place.

[p. 6]

Now the stars are bright fire-sparks sprayed from Muspel-heim over the great gulf, and these the gods fixed in the heavens to give light to the world and to shine over the sea. To these and to every wandering fire-flake they assigned due order and motion, so that each has its set place and time and season.

The sun and the moon were also regulated in their courses, for these are the greater fire-disks that were sprayed from Muspel-heim, and to bear them over the paths of the heavens the gods caused the elf-smiths, the sons of Ivalde and the kinsmen of Sindre, to fashion chariots of fine gold.

Mundilfore, who has care of the World-mill, aspired to rival Odin. He had two beautiful children, and one he called Mani (moon), and the other Sol (sun). The gods were filled with anger because of Mundilfore's presumption, and to punish him they took from him his two children, of whom he was exceedingly boastful, to drive the heavenly chariots and count the Years for men. Fair Sol they set to drive the sun-chariot. Her steeds are Arvak, which is "Early Dawn", and Alsvid, which signifies "scorching heat". Under their withers were placed skins of ice-chilled air for coolness and refreshment. They enter the eastern heaven at Hela-gate, through which the souls of dead men pass to the world beneath.

Then the gods set Mani, the handsome youth, to drive the chariot of the moon. With him are two fair children whom he carried away from earth--a boy who was called Hyuki, and a girl whose name is Bil. [*1] They had been sent out in the darkness of night by Vidfinner, their father, to draw song-mead from the mountain spring Byrger, "the hidden", which broke forth from

[p. 7]

the source of Mimer's fount; and they filled their pail Saegr to the brink, so that the precious mead spilled over as they raised it on the pole Simul. When they began to descend the mountain, Mani seized them and took them away. The spots that are ever seen by night on the fair-faced moon are Hyuki and Bil, and beauteous Bil do skalds invoke, so that hearing them she may sprinkle from the moon the magic song-mead upon their lips.

In Mani's keeping is a bundle of thorns from which evildoers among met, must needs suffer the punishment of piercing pains.

The sun is ever in flight, and so also is the moon. They are pursued by bloodthirsty enemies, who seek to compass their destruction ere they reach the sheltering forest of the Varns, behind the western horizon. These are two fierce and gigantic wolves. The one whose name is Skoll, "the adherer", chases the sun, whom one day it will devour; the other is Hati, "the hater", who races in front of "the bright maiden of heaven", in ceaseless pursuit of the moon.

Skoll and Hati are giants in wolf-guise. They were sent forth by the Mother of Evil, the dark and fearsome Hag, Gulveig-Hoder, whose children they are. She dwells in the Iarnvid, the black forest of iron trees, on the world's edge, which is the habitation of a witch family dreaded both by gods and by men. Of the Hag's wolf-sons the most terrible is Hati, who is also called Managarm, "the moon devourer". He feeds on the blood of dying men. The seers have foretold that when he comes to swallow the moon, the heavens and the earth shall turn red with blood. Then, too, must the seats of the mighty gods be reddened with gore, and the sunshine of summer made dim, while great storms burst in fury to rage across the world.

[p. 8]

Again and again, at dreaded eclipse, would these giant wolves have swallowed now the sun and now the moon, had not their evil designs been thwarted by spells which were wrought against them, and the clamour of affrighted men.

Now Nat, which is Night, is the swarthy daughter of the Vana-giant Narve, "the Binder", whose other name is Mimer. Dark is her hair like all her race, and her eyes are soft and benevolent. She brings rest to the toiler, and refreshment to the weary, and sleep and dreams unto all. To the warrior she gives strength so that he may win victory, and care and sorrow she loves to take away. Nat is the beneficent mother of gods. Three times was she wed. Her first husband was Nagelfare of the stars, and their son was Aud of bounteous riches. Her second husband was Annar, "Water", and their daughter, Jord, the earth-goddess, was Odin's wife and the mother of Thor. Her third husband was Delling, the red elf of dawn, and their son was Dagr, which is Day.

To mother Nat and her son Dagr were given jewelled chariots to drive across the world, one after the other, in the space of twelve hours. Nat is first to set forth. Her steed is called Hrim Faxi, "frosted mane". Swiftly it gallops over the heavens, and every morn the sweet foam from its bit falls as dewdrops upon the earth beneath. Dagr's fair steed is called Skin Faxi, "shining mane". From its golden neck is shed radiance and beauty upon the heavens and over all the world. Of all coursers that are, he is praised most by faring men.

There are two seasons, and these are Winter and Summer. Vindsval, son of gloomy Vasud, "the ice wind", was father of grim Winter, and the mild and beneficent Svasud was the sire of fair Summer, beloved by all.

 

Click to enlarge
ODIN
 From the design by Sir E. Burne-Jones.
 Photograph by Frederich Hollyer

 

[p. 9]

The wonder of men is whence comes the wind that shakes the ocean with fear, that fans the low spark into bright flame, and that no eye can behold. At the northern summit of heaven there sits in eagle-guise a great giant called Hraesvelgur, "the swallower of dead men's flesh". When his wide pinions are spread for flight the winds are stirred beneath them and rush down upon the earth. When coming or going, or travelling hither and thither across the heavens, the winds are driven from his wings.

As yet there were no men who had their dwelling upon the earth, although the sun and moon were set in their courses, and the days and seasons were marked out in due order. There came a time, however, when the sons of Bor were walking on the world's shores, and they beheld two logs of wood. They were grown from Ymer's hair, which sprang up as thick forests and verdure abundant from the mould of his -body, which is the earth. One log was of an ash tree, and from it the gods shaped a man; and the other, which was an alder tree, they made into a fair woman. They had but life like a tree which grows until the gods gave them mind and will and desire. Then was the man named Ask and the woman Embla, and from them are descended the entire human race, whose habitation is called Midgard, "middle ward", and Mana-heim, "home of men".

Round Midgard is the embracing sea, and beyond, on the outward shores, is Jotun-heim, the home of giants. Against these the gods raised an ice bulwark shaped from the eyebrows of turbulent Ymer, whose brains they cast high in heaven, where they became heavy masses of scattered cloud, tossing hither and thither.

[p. 10]

  

Address to Odin

In the beginning, ere the gods were born,
 Before the Heavens were builded, thou didst slay
 The giant Ymir, whom the abyss brought forth,
 Thou and thy brethren fierce, the sons of Bor,
 And cast his trunk to choke the abysmal void.
 But of his flesh and members thou didst build
 The earth and Ocean, and above them Heaven.
 And from the flaming world, where Muspel reigns,
 Thou sent'st and fetched'st fire, and madest lights,
 Sun, moon, and stars, which thou hast hung in Heaven,
 Dividing clear the paths of night and day.
 And Asgard thou didst build, and Midgard fort;
 Then me thou mad'st; of us the Gods were born.
 Last, walking by the sea, thou foundest spars
 Of wood, and framed'st men, who till the earth,
 Or on the sea, the field of pirates, sail.
 And all the race of Ymir thou didst drown,
 Save one, Bergelmer;--he on shipboard fled
 Thy deluge, and from him the giants sprang.
 But all that brood thou hast removed far off,
 And set by Ocean's utmost marge to dwell;
 But Hela into Nifelheim thou threw'st,
 And gav'st her nine unlighted worlds to rule,
 A queen, and empire over all the dead.
            --From "Balder Dead", by Matthew Arnold.

 

Footnotes

^6:1 The Jack and Jill of the nursery rhyme.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 11]

  

CHAPTER II

  

The Nine Worlds

Asgard--River and Vafer-Flame--High Thing-stead of the Gods--Odin's Throne--"Abode of Friends"--The Golden Age--Dwarfs--Ygdrasil, "the Tree of Existence"--Roots in the Underworld--The Three Fountains--Eagle and Hawk--"The Cock of the North"--The Biting Deer--The Dragon Nidhog--The Squirrel Gossip--Norns, Hamingjes, and Giptes--Lower Thing-stead of the Gods--Bif-rost--The Sentinel Heimdal--Judgment of the Dead--The Last journey--Bliss of the Just--Doom of the Condemned--Regions of Torture--Valhal--Divisions of the Universe--Night Path of Day and Day Path of Night.

THE Asa-gods built for themselves Asgard, the celestial city, which is set high above the heavens. It stands there in beauty and in glory upon a holy island in the midst of a dark broad river flowing from the thunder-vapours that rise through the great World-tree from Hvergelmer, "the roaring cauldron", the mother of waters. The river is ever troubled with eddies and fierce currents, and above it hover darkly thick banks of kindling mist called "Black Terror Gleam", from which leap everlastingly tongues of vafer-flame, (lightning) filling the air and darting like white froth from whirling billows.

Round Asgard is a dark and lofty wall, and the great boiling river breaks angrily at its base. There is no entry-way save by Odin's mighty gate. And if anyone who is unworthy, be he god or giant or mortal, should cross the river unscathed by the vafer-flames, and seek to open the gate of Asgard, he would be caught suddenly

[p. 12]

by a chain which springs from the lock of strange mechanism, and crushed and utterly destroyed.

In the middle of Asgard was built stately Idavoll, the Court of Judgment, the High Thingstead of the Gods, in which their own divine affairs are discussed and arranged. The beauty of the great hall is unequalled in the nine worlds, for its roof is of shining silver and it is resplendent without and within with burnished and graven gold. Therein was set the great golden throne of Odin, the chief ruler of Asgard, and around it were placed twelve golden seats for the gods who sit with him in judgment, and to whom the All-father gave power to rule and to issue decrees.

When Odin sits on his high golden throne he looks over the homes of giants and elves and mortals and sees all things. He is silent and he listens.

Another fair and stately structure did the gods cause to be made as a sanctuary for the goddesses, and by singers of skalds who echo its praises it is called Vingolf, "the abode of friends".

In Asgard was shaped a smithy which was furnished with anvils and hammers and tongs. With these the gods had made for them, by the cunning elf-smiths, Ivalde's sons and Sindre's kinsmen, every instrument they had need of. They worked in fine metals, and so great was the treasure of gold that all movables were made of it.

On a green place in the celestial city were found the golden tablets with which was played the Game of the Gods. This was in the Golden Age, which lasted until there came from Jotun-heim three giant maids, who brought corruption.

To the gods in ages past it became known that there dwelt in Midgard a race of dwarfs. In the deep, dark

[p. 13]

mould of Ymer's body they swarmed as do maggots in rotted flesh, and they went hither and thither with no purpose or knowledge. All the gods assembled in their high Thingstead, with Odin seated on his golden throne, and there took counsel one with another. To the dwarfs they gave human shape, but their hue was the blackness of earth in which they had being. Over them the gods set Modsognir, who is Mimer, to be king. In the mounds of the earth dwell one tribe of these earth-black elves, within rocks another, and a third have their habitation inside high and precipitous mountains. Besides these are the Trolls, who fly hither and thither carrying bundles of sticks, and have power to change their shape. Now the wonder of the Universe, which was set in order by the will of All-father, is the great ash tree, Ygdrasil, the Tree of Existence, which nourishes and sustains all spiritual and physical life. Its roots are spread through the divisions of the worlds that fill the yawning gulf, and its boughs are above the high celestial city of the gods. It grows out of the past, it lives in the present, and it reaches towards the future.

The World-ash has three great roots. In the realms below Midgard is one root, which receives warmth and life in Hela's glittering plains from the deep fountain of Urd, the goddess of fate and of death; another root reaches the egg-white well of Mimer, who is Wisdom and Memory; and the last root is in gloomy Nifel-heim, where it finds hardening sustenance in Hvergelmer, "the roaring cauldron", the fount of primeval waters, ice-cold and everlasting, which springs up on Hvergelmer mountain.

In the realm of Urd, which is Hela, the souls of good men be. Nigh to it, in the underworld, is Mimer's well in Mimer's grove, where dwells the race which will

[p. 14]

regenerate the world of men. Below cold and darksome Nifel-heim are the nine divisions of torture in which the souls of the wicked are punished. At Hvergelmer the watchman of the root of Ygdrasil is Ivalde, who with his sons contend against the storm-giants who threaten Hela.

The roots of the great World-tree suck up the waters of the three eternal fountains, and these mixed together give imperishable life. In the well of wise Mimer the fibres are made white with the holy mead which gives wisdom to men, and poetry also, and is the very elixir of life eternal.

On the high branches of Ygdrasil, which overshadow Asgard, sits a wise eagle, and between its eyes is perched a hawk named Vedfolner. On the topmost bough is Goldcomb, the "cock of the north", which awakens the gods from sleep and puts the demons to flight. From Hela answers the red cock, whose fire purifies what is good and destroys what is evil.

But the great World-tree bears a more painful burden than mortals can conceive. In the well of Hvergelmer, in the black realm of Nifel-heim, is the corpse-eating dragon Nidhog, "the lower one", which chews constantly at the root; above, four giant harts are ever biting its buds and its leaves; on its side, Age rots it; and many serpents gnaw its tender fibres in the dark underworld. For there never was good to which evil came not, nor growth which has known not decay and the wasting of time.

The Norns of Hela sprinkle the great ash-tree each morning with precious mead from Urd's fount of life, so that its leaves may ever be green. Thence comes the honey-dew, which drips upon the world and is stored by the bees. And in Urd's fountain are the two mystic

[p. 15]

swans which are the ancestors of the swan race in Midgard.

Up and down the World-tree runs constantly the squirrel Ratatosk, which bears gossip between the eagle on the highest branches and the dragon Nidhog at the root, and is thus ever the cause of strife. Greatly dreaded is Nidhog, who flies to the rocks and cliffs of the lower world with the bodies of dead men beneath its wings.

The three Fates, who are called Norns, are Urd and her two sisters--Urd, "present"; Verdande, "past"; and Skuld, "future". By them are spun at will the fates of men and women. There are also Dises, who are maids of Urd, unto whom various duties are assigned. The Hamingjes are those Dises who are guardians of men through their lives, and appear to them in dreams to give warnings and noble counsel, and he whom the holy elf deserts for wrongdoing is indeed lost. The decrees of Urd are executed by the Giptes, and men who are favoured are suddenly awarded good fortune and treasure; other Dises attend upon families and even upon tribes. There are also the sweet elf-maids who have care of babes unborn in the fair realms of Urd, and find them kindly mothers in the world of men; and there are maids who conduct the souls of the dead to Hela's glittering plain.

Now in Hela is the lower-world Thingstead of the gods, where the souls of the dead are judged, and rewards and punishments are meted out by Odin. There is but one road thither from Asgard for all the gods save Thor, and that is over the curved bridge Bif-rost, "the rainbow", which has its foundation beyond the edge of the world of men. The southern span reaches to the fount of Urd in the realms of green verdure that never. know decay.

[p. 16]

Bif-rost is built of air and water, and is protected by red fire flaming on its edge. Frost giants and mountain giants ever seek to capture the bridge, so that they may ascend to Asgard and overcome the gods; but its sentinel, Heimdal, is constantly on guard against them.

The gods set Heimdal, son of the waves, to protect the bridge forever against the enemy. He is clad in silvern armour, and on his head is a burnished helmet with ram's horns. Horsed on his swift steed, Gull-top, he now watches at the highest point of Bif-rost from his fortified citadel, Himinbjorg, "the ward of heaven", where his hall is supplied with precious mead. Anon he crosses over from side to side of the bridge. His sight is so keen that he can see by night as well as by day the length of a hundred leagues, and he listens so keenly that he can hear the grass growing. He sleeps as little and as lightly as a bird. When the giants and monsters come to assail the gods at Ragnarok, Heimdal shall blow a thunderblast on Gjallar-horn which is hidden in the deepest shade of the World-tree. With his great sword he shall combat with the Evil One in the Last Battle.

Heimdal is loved both by gods and by men, and he is also called Gullintani because his teeth are of gold. There was a time when he went unto Midgard as a child; he grew up to be a teacher among men, and was named Scef.

Every day the horses of the gods thunder over Bif-rost as they descend to and return from the lower-world Thingstead. Thor, the thunder god, cannot travel thus because the fire of his thunder chariot might set the bridge aflame and destroy it. He must needs wade across the four great girdling rivers in the underworld to reach Hela's glittering plains.

 

Click to enlarge
ODIN
 From the statue by B. E. Fogelberg

 

[p. 17]

When the gods come unto Hela they leap from their horses and take their seats in the Thingstead. The dead are then brought before them.

A weary way and long these dead men and women have travelled. Down the valley of thorns they came, and those who were given hel-shoes in their graves, because they had shown mercy to others while they lived, suffered indeed little; but the feet of the wicked were torn and bleeding. Then they crossed a river full of weapons. The just walked over on boards, but the unjust waded, and were sorely wounded and covered with scars, so that their bodies dripped blood.

To the Thingstead come men and women in full attire, with the jewels and ornaments which those who loved them placed on their bodies ere they were laid in grave-chambers. Warriors carry their weapons, and all are clad so that they may be recommended to the gods as the well-beloved among men. But silent are the dead, save the happy ones under whose tongues were placed, ere yet they were laid in their graves, magic runes, so that they might make answer when accused, and give reasons to justify their deeds. But the Hamingjes can also speak for the dead, and those who have not Hamingjes to speak for them are known to have done evil and to be deserted by their Dises in sorrow and wrath. Those who are justified pass to the eternal realms of Hela, where joy prevails, because they have lived upright lives, and have been honourable and full of pity and have helped others; because they were brave and feared not to die; and also because they worshipped the gods and gave offerings in the temples.

But those who are condemned are sent to Nifel-hel, the region of torture. They are judged to be unworthy if they injured others by falsehoods or wicked deeds, if

[p. 18]

they were adulterers, or murderers, or despoilers of graves, or cowards, or were traitors, and profaners of the temples.

Those who are to share eternal joy are given to drink from the horn of Urd, which imparts to them enduring strength. In it are mixed the three meads from the wells which sustain Ygdrasil, the World-ash. But the doomed are given a draught of burning venom which changes them to monsters. Their tongues are then for ever bereft of speech and they can moan only.

The happy dead disport themselves on the green plains of Hela, where they meet lost friends and ancestors from the earliest years of the world. And many beauteous ways they travel, and wonderful tales they hear. The children are cared for in the realm of Mimer, "memory", where joy is theirs forever and their food is honey-dew.

The doomed are fettered and are driven towards Nifel-hel by black elves, who carry thorny rods with which they lash those who falter or seek to turn back. Their first punishment is received when they must needs pass through the regions of eternal bliss, and behold with grief unutterable the joy of the blessed. Then they cross the rivers which girdle Hela, and climb towards the dark mountains of Nifel-hel. The wolf dog barks at them in the shadowy valley where it guards the borders of Hela, and there is blood on its breast. And as they climb tortuous paths and tread the narrow path on the edge of dizzy precipices they hear the barking of the terrible watchdogs at Nifel-hel's gates. The dreaded dragon, Nidhog, hovers near them, and ferocious birds of prey sit on the rocks.

Then they enter the Na-gates and die the second death. Punishment is given in the nine realms of torture according to the sins that were committed. Some

[p. 19]

are seized by the dragon and some by the birds of prey, according to their deserts. Others are tempted for ever by illusions of sinful things they sought in life, and there are those who are torn to pieces by the great wolf.

In the Venom-dale is a river called Slid, and it is full of daggers and sharp spears. Through it must wade the perjurers and murderers and adulterers, who are continually suffering new and fierce wounds. Others sit together on benches of iron, while venom drips on them, within a hall which is full of stench unbearable. Traitors are hung on trees, and cowards are drowned in pools of foulness. Eternal night broods over all.

Naglefar, the "ship of death", lies in the Gulf of Black Grief, in the outer regions of Nifel-hel, made fast to a dark island with chains that shall not sever until Ragnarok, "the dusk of the gods". It is constructed of the parings of dead men's nails--the wicked men, hated by their kind because of their evil deeds, whose bodies were cleansed not at life's end, and whose nails were not pared ere they were laid in grave-chambers. When Naglefar breaks loose the avenging hosts shall sail in it to battle against the gods.

The warriors who are slain in battle, or drowned at sea, are borne to Valhal in Asgard by the maids of Urd, who are called Valkyries. They are horsed on swift steeds, and first they pass to Hela, where the gods give judgment and reject the unworthy. Then they are carried by the Valkyries over Bif-rost, and the hoofs of their steeds resound in Asgard. In great Valhal the heroes feast with Odin in eternal triumph and happiness.

Now these are the divisions of the Universe. In the midst is the earth, Midgard, which is encircled by the ocean. On high, and above all else, is Asgard, and below it is the realm of white elves, who flit between the

[p. 20]

branches of the great World-tree. Then Vana-heim, the home of the Vana-gods, is in the air and in the sea; and in the depths of the western sea is the hall of Aeger, god of Ocean. Alf-heim, the home of elves, is to the east. In the lower world, below Nifel-heim, are the Nifel-hel regions of torture, and under Midgard are the Hela realms of Mimer and of Urd. Far below the path of the gods towards Hela's fields of bliss are Surtur's deep dales on the borders of Muspel-heim, where the great giant Surtur, the swarthy sentinel, keeps watch with his flaming sword. Jotun-heim is to the north and the east, beyond the world's edge.

Billing is the elf-guardian of the western heaven, and when the cars of Day and of Night and of the Sun and of the Moon enter the forest of the Varns, "the protectors", they pass through the lower-world realms of Mimer and of Urd towards the gates of Delling, the elf of dawn, in the east. When Nat reaches Hela, where she must rest, darkness falls around her, and the blessed are given sleep, and light comes again with Dagr, as Nat covers the earth above with shadow and deep slumber.

  

The Descent of the Gods

. . . the Gods arose,
 And took their horses, and set forth to ride
 O'er the bridge Bifrost, where is Heimdall's watch,
 To the ash Ygdrasil, and Ida's plain;
 Thor came on foot, the rest on horseback rode.
 And they found Mimir sitting by his fount
 Of wisdom, which beneath the ash-tree springs;
 And saw the Nornies watering the roots
 Of that world-shadowing tree with honey-dew.
 There came the Gods, and sate them down on stones.
             --From "Balder Dead", by Matthew Arnold.

 

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 21]

  

CHAPTER III

  

The Deeds of Odin

The Brooding God--Mimer's Well--Draught of Wisdom--The Eye Sacrifice--Revolt of Ivalde--Murder of Moon--god--Combat with Hyuki--The Stolen Song--Mead--Odin seeks to Recapture it--Descent to Surtur's Deep Dales--The Giant Suttung--Odin's Bridegroom--Guise--"The Champion Drinker"--Marriage with Gunlad--Ivalde's Fate--Odin's Escape--"The Man in the Moon"--Hyuki is Slagfin and Hengest--Odin's Apparel--His Ravens and Wolf Dogs--Odin the First Poet--Saga--Secret Runes--Thor and other Gods--Odin's Wives.

ODIN was the chief ruler of the gods. He was tall and old, and his aspect was wise and reverend. White was his beard and long, and he seemed ever to brood deeply over the mysteries of life and death. He had but one eye, because the other he sacrificed so that he might be dowered with great wisdom. Indeed he had In his youth drunk deeply of the magic mead of Mimer's well.

Every morning grave Mimer drank a draught with the Gjallar-horn, and Odin when he was yet young had deep desire to receive the wisdom and strength which the egg-white mead alone can give. He entreated Mimer to give him a draught, and the price he paid was an eye, which was cast into the well. From that hour when he drained Gjallar-horn he became worthy to rule over gods and men. 'Twas thus he sang in after-time of the powers which the mead imparted to him:

Then began I to bloom,
 To be wise, [p. 22]
 To grow and to thrive;
 Word came to me
 From word,
 Deed came to me
 From deed.

Thus Odin taught to all men that in youth there must needs be self-sacrifice of great account so that wisdom and power may be obtained.

From the moon-car in heaven did Odin also drink of the song-mead which was in the pitcher that Hyuki and Bil had carried from the secret well on the mountain, and Mani, the moon-god, captured. But wroth was Vidfinner at his loss, and he mourned more for the mead than for his children. Vidfinner is also called Ivalde, the sworn watchman of Hvergelmer and the Rivers Elivagar, and another of his names is Svigdur, "the champion drinker". There came a day when he broke his oath of fealty to the gods and fled from his post. Then raging heavenwards he attacked the moon-god, whom he slew and burned. His son Hyuki fought against him without avail, and suffered a fierce wound--as a maker of poems has sung--"clean to the thigh bone". For this dread crime Ivalde-Svigdur was condemned, but he fled towards Surtur's deep dales and unto the dwelling of Suttung, son of Surtur, the giant sentinel of Muspelheim. For Surtur and his clan were at enmity with Mimer and the Vana-gods, and also with the gods of Asgard since the creation of Asgard and the dividing of the worlds. To Suttung Ivalde gave the previous skaldic mead, and for reward he was promised for wife Gunlad, the giant's daughter.

Odin, seeing all that happened as he sat in his high throne, resolved to recapture the mead by cunning. So he set out to visit the hall of Suttung, "the mead wolf".

[p. 23]

[paragraph continues] Now the realm of Surtur is difficult to reach, and full of peril for the gods. It lies in the dark underworld which is lower than and beyond Hela. Suttung's hall is within a mountain to which, in a deep abyss, there is but one entry, and it is guarded by a fierce dwarf sentinel.

But Odin secured the confidence of the dwarf, who promised to aid him so that his enterprise might be crowned with success. Heimdal, the sentinel of Bif-rost, also gave his service. His other name is Rati, "the traveller", and he bored through the mountain a narrow tunnel through which Odin might escape in eagle-guise. Thus, having completed his designs, Odin went towards the door of the dwelling of the great fire-giant Suttung, who is also called Fjalar.

A great feast was held within, and the evil frost-giants were as guests there to welcome Svigdur, the wooer of the giant--maid Gunlad. Odin assumed the form of Svigdur, and like him he spoke also, lest he should by uttering words of wisdom and weight be suspected and put to death. Thus he prevailed against the sons of Surtur with their own methods, for they were given to creating illusions and travelling forth in disguise to work evil and destruction.

A high seat of gold awaited the expected wedding-guest, and when Odin entered in the form of Svigdur, "the champion drinker", he was welcomed with ardour. And well he played the part, for he was given to drink of the nectar of the giants, and partook to the full, so that he was made drunk. Yet he observed great caution, that he might not be discovered.

As he sat at the feast, Gunlad came forward and gave him a draught of the stolen mead. Then was the marriage celebrated with solemnity and in state. The holy ring

[p. 24]

was placed upon the finger of the giant-maid, and she swore to be faithful to him who wooed her.

Meantime Ivalde-Svigdur, the real lover, reached the door of Suttung's hall, and came to know that Odin was within. He was filled with wrath, and he sought to denounce the high god so that he might be slain by the giants. But the dwarf sentinel accomplished Ivalde-Svigdur's destruction. He created an illusion, and opened a door on the side of the mountain which showed a lighted hall within and the wedding guests as they sat round Suttung's board. Gunlad was at Odin's side. Ivalde-Svigdur leapt towards the vision of the high god of Asgard, and thus dashed himself against the rock. The door was shut behind, and the mountain swallowed him.

Ere the wedding feast was ended Odin had spoken words which caused the giants to suspect him. But he retired with Gunlad to the bridal chamber, and there he found the precious mead which Ivalde-Svigdur had robbed from the moon-god. Then Gunlad came to know that her lover was Odin, but she helped him to make his escape in eagle-guise. So Odin flew through the tunnel which Heimdal-Rati had made, and reached Asgard in safety with the precious mead.

In the morning the giants went towards the bridal chamber, remembering the words that their guest had spoken, and when they found he had escaped they called him Bolverkin, "the evildoer".

But although Odin conferred great good upon gods and men by capturing the mead, the consequences of the evil he wrought towards that end were doomed to bring disaster in after-time, when Surtur, issuing forth to avenge the wrong done to Gunlad, set the world aflame. For good cannot follow evil, even although it is accomplished for the sake of good.

 

Click to enlarge
THOR AND THE GIANTS
 From the painting by M. E. Winge

 

[p. 25]

Odin's joy was great when he returned in triumph to Asgard, but he spoke words of pity for the giant-maid whom he had betrayed, and who wept because he left her.

Ivalde-Svigdur, who perished in the mountain, was refused an abode among the blessed dead in Hela's glittering plains. Him the gods condemned to dwell forever in the moon. There he suffers eternal punishment for his evildoings, for he is ever drunk with the stolen mead, which is venom to him, and is ever beaten with the rod of thorns by the god he slew and to whom life was again given. Ivalde's son, Hyuki, is revered among men. Another name he bears is Slagfin, and by Saxon warriors he is called Hengest. He is also Gelder, and his symbol is the gelding. Among skee-runners he is the chief upon land and on the sea.

Many names have the gods, and for Odin there are nine-and-forty. And the reason is, as skalds have told, that people speaking different tongues must needs call the gods by different names, while the gods have also been given names according to their various attributes and the great deeds they have done.

Thus Odin was called All-father, like the Mighty One who was at "time's first dawn", because he was father of the gods; and Val-father, the father of the brave who dwell in Valhal in high Asgard.

When Odin sat in his high golden throne, he wore a cloak which was striped with many colours of sunset splendour and summer radiance. Its hood was blue as is the sky, and speckled with grey like clouds. His hat was blue also, and its broad brims curved downward like the heavens. When he left Asgard to travel over the worlds he wore a burnished helmet, and sometimes he went among men wearing a hat which was tilted to conceal the hollow of his lost eye.

[p. 26]

As Odin sat brooding and listening in Asgard two ravens perched on his shoulder. Their names are Hugin, which is "reflection", and Munin, which means "memory". When day dawned Odin sent them forth, and they returned at eve to whisper in his ears all the doings of men. Thus was he called Rafnagud, the "raven-god". He had also two wolf dogs, and they are named Gere, "the greedy", and Freke, "the voracious". These Odin fed with the food which was placed before him at the feast of heroes, for he ate not and for nourishment drank nectar.

When Odin drank of the song-mead he composed poems which for sweetness and grandeur have never been surpassed. He was the first poet, and knew well the magic of the mead. For the source of it was secret, and was discovered only by Ivalde, the watchman of the primeval fount from which life first came and by which life is ever sustained. Then was it carried to the beauteous car of the moon, and from thence to the regions of fire. There it was won by love mixed with wrong, and when the high god who descended to the deeps drank of it, he soared as an eagle to heaven, which he filled with song. From heaven has song descended upon earth, and in song are all the sufferings which were begotten over the mead.

Odin is also the friend and companion of the goddess Saga, whose dwelling in Asgard is Sokvabek, "the deep stream". Precious thoughts well up from the fountain source and flow along as words of gold. They tell of things that were, and Odin ponders. Day after day and night after night the high god sits with the goddess listening to the flowing stream, which grows deeper and wider as it wends its way onward, and their minds are refreshed by the glories of the past.

[p. 27]

Secret runes, which have magical influence, did Odin also invent. For nine whole nights he hung on the high branches of Ygdrasil, pondering and searching out the secrets of the mind and of the Universe. For the power of runes was before the beginning of man. They are mixed with fate, and their potency did Odin discover when he drank from Mimer's well. They have also power over death and the world beyond. Runes there are to ward off strife and care, to charm away sickness and disease, to blunt the foeman's sword, to break fetters that bind, to still the storms, to ward off the attacks of demons, to make the dead to speak, to win the love of a maid, and to turn away love that is not desired. And many more there be also.

When runes are carved in mystic symbols the powers they convey are given to the weapons, or to the men that bear them, for they govern all things and impart power to conquer and power to subdue. He who has a certain desire shall achieve it if he but knows the rune which can compel its fulfilment, for the runes come from Odin, the chief ruler of the Universe, the god most wise. His power and great knowledge are enshrined in them.

Next to Odin the mightiest of the gods was his son Thor, whose mother was Jord, "the earth". In Asgard was built for him a great mansion called Bilskirnir, with five hundred and forty halls and a roof of shining silver. He drave forth in a car which was drawn by two goats. Three precious things were his possessions: the great hammer Mjolnir, which struck fire from the mountains and has slain many frost giants; the belt of prowess, which gave him threefold strength; and his mighty iron gauntlets, which he put on ere he could wield his hammer.

Another of Odin's sons was Balder the Beautiful,

[p. 28]

whose mother was Frigg, queen of goddesses, daughter of Nat and sister of Njord. Fair and comely was Balder, with silver hair that shone like sunshine. He was full of wisdom and was exceedingly mild and had great eloquence. In Asgard and Midgard there was no god more greatly loved than Balder.

Njord of the Vans was in Asgard as hostage to the Asa-gods. He was father of the god Frey and the beautiful Freyja, who was next to Frigg among the goddesses. Honer, Odin's brother, was sent to Vanaheim, where he was made ruler over the Vana-gods. He chose not his part and his judgments were weak.

Great was Tyr, the war-god, who gave valour to warriors and by whom he was invoked.

Brage, god of music and poetry, had for wife Idun, Ivalde's daughter, who was keeper of the apples of immortal youth.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 29]

  

CHAPTER IV

  

How Evil entered Asgard

Odin and his Brothers--Gifts to First Man and Woman--Loke's Fall--"The Mother of Evil"--Plot to capture Freyja--How Asgard's Wall was built--Loke's Evil Counsel--World-disaster averted--Odin's Horse--Rape of Sif's Locks--Loke threatened--Visits to Elf--Smiths--Wonder Works--The Gods appeased--Rivalry of Elf-Smiths--Loke's Wager lost--Demand for his Head--Elf-Smith outwitted--Loke's Plot causes Winter War--Children of Ivalde--Idun and the Swan Maids--Thjasse--Volund and his Brothers--The Giantess Greip--Fenja and Menja--Freyja lured from Asgard.

IF Odin sought after wisdom and loved justice his brother Loke had the desire to do evil and work wrong, and he became the instrument of dissension among gods and men. In the Golden Age, when there was peace and concord in Asgard, he was yet innocent and of good repute. He was fair o countenance and his form was stately, and pleasant indeed were his converse and his ways.

With Odin and Honer, his brethren, he endowed with their various attributes the first man and the first woman. But the gifts of the gods were of unequal account. Odin gave Spirit which yearns for what is good and inspires courage and veracity, and the love of mercy and justice. Honer imparted understanding and memory and will, and by Loke, who is also called Loder, the man and the woman were given the semblance of the gods, and endowed with passions and desires and longings which ever tend to work evil and bring weakness and

[p. 30]

distress. Thus the gifts of Loke are continually at strife with those of Odin and Honer.

But not until the Golden Age was ended did Loke fail and man turn to evil ways. The innocence of gods and men passed from them when from Jotun-heim, as the Skalds have told, came three giant maids, who brought corruption. These three were combined in one form, which was outwardly fair and seemingly good. For the giants had plotted to accomplish the downfall of the gods, and one, whose name was Grep, desired to possess beauteous Freyja, the goddess of Fertility, who sat with her maids beneath the fruitful bough of the World-tree Ygdrasil.

The thrice-born maid whom the giants sent from Jotun-heim was Gulveig-Hoder, whose other name is Aurboda, Hag of Iarnvid and "The Mother of Evil", who assumed the guise of one both fair and young. A maid attendant was she among others to Freyja in the fairest grove of Asgard. She was loved by Loke and became his bride. She fostered his ambition to be chief ruler of the gods, and imparted to him her evil nature and her cunning, while she herself constantly sought to lure Freyja from her secure abode. There came a day when her desire was fulfilled, and war followed war because of her evil doings.

Loke was the chief instrument of her designs. She spread unrest throughout Asgard and set Asa-gods and Vana-gods at enmity, while Loke also plotted with the evil giants to bring ruin to his kindred.

The great wall of Asgard was not yet constructed, and by Loke's secret desire there came before the gods in the guise of a dwarf a Frost-giant who was a cunning artificer. He offered to build a residence so well fortified that it would be ever secure against the attacks of

[p. 31]

the Frost-giants and the giants of the mountains. This vast work he undertook to complete in the space of a single winter.

The gods were willing that the fortification should be made, and enquired of the artificer what reward he sought for his service. His answer was that his demand would be possession of the goddess Freyja, together with the sun and moon. But if the work were not completed in the time allowed him, he would receive no reward whatsoever.

His words were not pleasant to the gods, and they took counsel among themselves. There were those among them who desired to reject his offer, and others who were in sore doubt. Yet all of them desired that the fortification should be built.

Then Loke counselled that the offer which the artificer made should be accepted, provided that he would do the work alone and within the time allotted to him. "For," said Loke, "the dwarf can finish not the building in time, and we shall have it for ourselves without payment of any reward."

So the gods agreed as Loke counselled them, but when their will was made known to the artificer he stipulated that he should be allowed to use his horse, named Svadilfare, in performing the work. By the advice of Loke this condition was granted to the cunning artificer. The bargain was sealed and confirmed by solemn oaths.

The work was then begun without further delay. On the first day of winter the giant in dwarf-guise prepared for the laying of the foundations, and during the night his horse drew the stones towards Asgard. When day broke the gods were amazed at the prodigious size of the boulders which were gathered together, and they perceived that the greater part of the work was performed

[p. 32]

by the great steed Svadilfare. All winter did the heavy work proceed, and rapidly did the great and vast walls rise around the habitation of the gods.

When the summer drew nigh, the work was far advanced, and the gods perceived that the artificer was certain to finish it before his allotted time was completed. The buildings were already so strong and so high as to be impregnable, and when only three days had to pass, before summer came, the gateway alone remained to be completed.

Wroth were the gods because of the disaster which threatened them, and they sat in council together and asked one of another who had given advice that the terms of the artificer should be accepted and that Freyja should be given away to Jotun-heim, and the sun and moon taken out of the heavens. They agreed that it was Loke and no other who had brought this danger with his evil designs. Him they condemned as the worker of evil, and they said they would put him to death if he did not contrive some means to prevent the artificer from finishing the work and receiving the reward which he had demanded.

The gods immediately seized Loke, who was stricken with great fear. He saw that he would be put to death if he did not cause hindrance to the giant, so he swore a solemn oath that, no matter what disaster might befall him, he would prevent the giant from accomplishing the disaster which was threatened.

In the darkness of night Loke went forth to outwit the artificer. When the great steed Svadilfare was being driven towards the last boulders which were to complete the gateway, a mare ran forth from a deep forest and neighed loudly. Svadilfare leapt with excitement and turned to follow, and the artificer sought in vain to hold him in restraint. But the steed broke free and ran after

[p. 33]

the mare, which took flight through the forest, and the great builder made search for him in vain. Thus a whole night was lost, and in the morning the artificer perceived that the work could not be completed in time. He was filled with exceeding great anger, knowing well that a plot had been laid against him. In his wrath he was moved to be revenged, and he assumed his giant form again and rose against the gods. Then it was perceived that he was a fierce and terrible Frost-giant.

Finding themselves deceived, the gods no longer observed their oaths, which had been sworn with one so treacherous. Odin called upon Thor, who seized his great stone hammer and went forth to combat. For him the giant was no match, and the great thunder-god paid him his wages, not with Freyja and the sun and moon, but with death, for the first blow he struck shattered to pieces the great giant's skull. Then the gods seized the body and flung it into the lowest depths of Nifel-hel, the place of sorrow and eternal torture.

The mare which Svadilfare followed brought forth a cloud-grey foal with eight legs. It grew up to be the swiftest steed in the nine worlds, and the name it bore was Sleipner.

To Odin was Sleipner given for his own especial use. On its teeth were graven sacred runes, and it was on the back of Sleipner that Odin ever went forth on his great hunt across the heavens and over the "Milky Way" when the winds were loud and the stars burned in splendour. The great steed he also rode daily to the lower Thingstead of the gods on the bridge which is called Bif-rost.

Thus among men was the riddle propounded: Who are these two who ride forth to the Thingstead? They have in all ten feet, three eyes, and but one tail.

[p. 34]

The answer is Odin and Sleipner, for Odin has but one eye; the horse has eight feet and Odin two; and the horse alone has a tall.

Sleipner is not only Odin's steed of war and of the hunt, he is also the steed on which poets rise to divine heights, as Odin, who is the first and greatest of poets, was raised also.

Now Loke and his wife, although frustrated in their desire to work evil against the gods, were still filled with resolve to achieve their wicked ends. There came a season when a new disaster befel. the dwellers in Asgard, and caused great dissension throughout the worlds. Sif, the harvest goddess, who was Thor's ward, was beauteous to behold, and her beauty and her power were in her rich and plenteous growth of shining golden hair.

Her harvest locks did the fierce Hag in maid's guise desire to possess, and while Sif slept Loke seized a sharp sword and cut them off and took them away.

Then was Thor filled with wrath, as were also Odin and the rest of the gods, for in Sif's locks there was abundance and prosperity.

Loke was again seized, and, fearing he would be put to death, he promised to restore Sif's harvest hair and bring gifts of appeasement to the greater gods. Oaths were laid upon him to fulfil his promise, and Loke departed from Asgard to visit the underworld, where gold and treasures were concealed in abundance. But even while he feared punishment, the desire to work evil did not leave his heart, and he sought, while he fulfilled his promise, to work great and lasting dissension.

To the elf-smiths, who are subject to wise Mimer, did Loke proceed, and their services he besought with cunning and evil intent.

Now there were two families of elves who were

[p. 35]

accomplished artificers and workers in fine metals, and these were the sons of Ivalde and the sons of Sindre, in whose golden halls in Mimer's realm there were great treasures. They lived at peace with the gods, whom they rendered ofttimes great service by providing ornaments and embellishing the palaces of Asgard with their beauteous work.

Loke plotted to work enmity not only between the families of elf-smiths, but also to estrange them against the gods.

First he went to the sons of Ivalde and besought them to make golden locks for the goddess Sif which would grow like other hair. They set to work and accomplished his desire, and they also made at his request a great spear for Odin, which was named Gungner. There was made for Frey, the god of golden sunshine, a wondrous ship, named Skidbladner, which could hold all the warriors of Asgard, and was ever accompanied by soft and favourable winds. Yet, great as the vessel was, it could be folded into small space like a napkin.

The gods were reconciled to Loke when the golden hair of Sif was restored. The spear was given to Odin and the great ship to Frey.

Then Loke went with evil in his heart to the kinsmen of Sindre, and them he challenged to produce works as wondrous and finely executed as those of the sons of Ivalde. Brok, who was Sindre's brother, protested the greater skill of his fellows, and Loke wagered his own head that such treasures as were already made could not be surpassed. The wager was readily accepted. Sindre made a great smithy, and he and his kinsmen set to work. Loke assumed the guise of a great blood-drinking fly, to harass them while at work.

Sindre first put a pigskin into the smithy fire. Then

[p. 36]

he bade Brok to blow the bellows without ceasing until the work was finished. That he did with great activity. But a great fly set itself upon his hand, stinging him sorely and drinking blood. He would have fain ceased his labours because of the fly, but if he did so the charm would be broken and the work rendered utterly without avail. So, suffering as he did, he persisted at the bellows handle, and at length Sindre drew out a wondrous boar with golden bristles, which was a thing to marvel at.

Then Sindre put much precious gold into the furnace, and Brok again blew the bellows. But the great fly attacked his neck, and drew more blood, nor could he smite it or drive it away. At times it seemed as if he must cease to labour, but he prevailed over his sufferings until Sindre drew out a magic ring, which was named Draupner, "the dropper".

A mass of iron did Sindre next place in the furnace, and when Brok began to blow the bellows the great fly became more ferocious than ever, and it stung him between the eyes, so that blood flowed down and nearly blinded him. Brok laboured heavily, and only once did he pause to drive the fly away. Then Sindre drew from the furnace a great hammer, which none save Thor could wield.

"These works, said Sindre, no son of Ivalde can equal."

Brok carried the gifts to Asgard, and Loke went with him.

Then sat the high gods in council to decide whose treasures were of greatest account. They appointed, as judges, Odin and Thor and Frey, and the various works they considered together.

Between the sons of Ivalde and Sindre's kinsmen

[p. 37]

there was ever keen rivalry, and Loke knew well that the clan which was given the award would win the hatred of the other, and that the gods would be despised by those who were not favoured.

Each of the gifts received the praises of the gods. But those of Sindre were to them of greatest account. The ring Daupner was a charm for fruitfulness and fertility; every ninth night eight gold rings of equal size dropped from it. It was a ring that grew to a chain without end. To Odin was it given, and the high god had it with the spear Gungner, which the sons of Ivalde had made. Oaths were sworn on the point of the great spear, which, when Odin throws it, gleams brightly as it falls through the stars. Upon great warriors is conferred the power of Odin's spear.

To Frey was given the golden boar on which to ride over the heavens or over the sea. Faster it could run than any steed save Sleipner, and in thick darkness it shone in splendour. When Frey went forth at morning or evening the rays of the golden bristles gleamed high in the heavens.

But the greatest gift of all was the mighty iron hammer, Mjolner, which was given to Thor. It had but one defect, and that was the shortness of the handle, for Brok had ceased to blow when the fly blinded him momentarily. So with the great gift came the defect which Loke had caused. The hammer had power to return to Thor each time it was thrown.

The sons of Ivalde were deeply incensed against the gods because they awarded chief praise to the kinsmen of Sindre, and they departed vowing fierce vengeance. Thus was the end of Loke achieved.

Brok, who thirsted for revenge, demanded his prize for the hammer, and that was Loke's head, which he had

[p. 38]

wagered. Loke offered to redeem it, but the elf-smith would have naught else.

Now Loke had shoes of swiftness, and could speed swiftly through the air and over the sea. Crying to Brok: "Then take me," he vanished from sight.

But the angered elf-smith appealed to Thor to seize Loke, and that great irresistible god set forth and returned with him.

"Thy head is mine," exclaimed Brok, who prepared to cut it off.

"Thine indeed is the head, answered Loke, "but not the neck." [*1]

Brok appealed to the gods, and they gave judgment that favoured Loke. They told Brok that he might take the head, but the neck he must not injure.

Then was Brok possessed with great wrath, and he demanded to sew the lips from which evil counsel came. Loke's head being his by right of wager, none could gainsay him. He took his knife to pierce the evil god's lips, but it was not of sufficient sharpness. So he cried: "Would I had my brother's awl." When he said that, the awl was immediately beside him, and he took it and sewed up the mouth of Loke, and left him there confused with silence.

In great wrath did Brok leave Asgard. Thus was Loke's end doubly achieved, for Sindre's kinsmen were also incensed against the gods because of the judgment they had given when the wager was claimed.

The sons of Ivalde rose in revolt and leagued themselves with the Frost-giants to wage war against the Asa-gods and bring disaster to Asgard.

Let it be told that twice wedded was Ivalde, the rebel watchman of Hvergelmer and the rivers Elivagar. His

[p. 39]

first wife was Sol, the sun-goddess, and their daughters were Idun, who became wife to Brage, and also the swan maids who sang on the borders of the western realm of Njord. Then had Ivalde for wife the giantess Greip, and they had three sons who were elf-smiths--Thjasse-Volund, Orvandel-Egil, the great archer, and Ide, whose other names are Hyuki, Hengest, and Gelder, "the Gelding".

Greip, the mother of these sons of Ivalde, had afterwards, with marriage to a giant, two sons whose daughters were Fenja and Menja.

So, as has been told, it came about that through Loke's evil workings a winter war was proclaimed against the gods by the sons of Ivalde and the Frost-giants.

At this time too was the goddess Freyja lured secretly from Asgard by Gulveig-Hoder, the Hag in maiden guise, and was caught in ambush by the great giant Beli, father of Grep, who fled with the goddess to Jotun-heim and concealed her in his strong castle. A double disaster thus fell upon the gods.

  

The Dwarfs

Loke sat and thought, till his dark eyes gleam
   With joy at the deed he'd done;
 When Sif looked into the crystal stream,
   Her courage was wellnigh gone.

For never again her soft amber hair
   Shall she braid with her hands of snow;
 From the hateful image she turned in despair,
   And hot tears began to flow.

In a cavern's mouth, like a crafty fox,
   Loke sat 'neath the tall pine's shade,
 When sudden a thundering was heard in the rocks,
   And fearfully trembled the glade.

[p. 40]

Then he knew that the noise good boded him naught,
   He knew that 't was Thor who was coming;
 He changed himself straight to a salmon trout,
   And leaped in a fright in the Glommen.

But Thor changed too, to a huge seagull,
   And the salmon trout seized in his beak;
 He cried: Thou, traitor, I know thee well,
   And dear shalt thou pay thy freak!

Thy caitiff's bones to a meal I'll pound,
   As a millstone crusheth the grain.
 When Loke that naught booted his magic found,
   He took straight his own form again.

And what if thou scatter'st my limbs in air?
   He spake, will it mend thy case?
 Will it gain back for Sif a single hair?
   Thou 'lt still a bald spouse embrace.

But if now thou 'lt pardon my heedless joke,--
   For malice sure meant I none,--
 I swear to thee here, by root, billow and rock,
   By the moss on the Beata-stone,

By Mimer's well, and by Odin's eye,
   And by Mjolmer, greatest of all,
 That straight to the secret caves I'll hie,
   To the dwarfs, my kinsmen small;

And thence for Sif new tresses I'll bring
   Of gold ere the daylight's gone,
 So that she will liken a field in spring,
   With its yellow-flowered garment on.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

Loke promised so well with his glozing tongue
   That the Asas at length let him go,
 And he sank in the earth, the dark rocks among,
   Near the cold-fountain, far below.

[p. 41]

He crept on his belly, as supple as eel,
   The cracks in the hard granite through,
 Till he came where the dwarfs stood hammering steel,
   By the light of a furnace blue.

I trow 't was a goodly sight to see
   The dwarfs, with their aprons on,
 A-hammering and smelting so busily
   Pure gold from the rough brown stone.

Rock crystals from sand and hard flint they made,
   Which, tinged with the rosebud's dye,
 They cast into rubies and carbuncles red,
   And hid them in cracks hard by.

They took them fresh violets all dripping with dew,
   Dwarf women had plucked them, the morn,--
 And stained with their juice the clear sapphires blue,
   King Dan in his crown since hath worn.

Then for emeralds they searched out the brightest green
   Which the young spring meadow wears,
 And dropped round pearls, without flaw or stain,
   From widows' and maidens' tears.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

When Loke to the dwarfs had his errand made known,
   In a trice for the work they were ready;
 Quoth Dvalin: O Lopter, it now shall be shown
   That dwarfs in their friendship are steady.

We both trace our line from the selfsame stock;
   What you ask shall be furnished with speed,
 For it ne'er shall be said that the sons of the rock
   Turned their backs on a kinsman in need.

They took them the skin of a large wild-boar,
   The largest that they could find,
 And the bellows they blew till the furnace 'gan roar,
   And the fire flamed on high for the wind.

[p. 42]

And they struck with their sledge-hammers stroke on stroke,
   That the sparks from the skin flew on high,
 But never a word good or bad spoke Loke,
   Though foul malice lurked in his eye.

The thunderer far distant, with sorrow he thought
   On all he'd engaged to obtain,
 And, as summer-breeze fickle, now anxiously sought
   To render the dwarf's labour vain.

Whilst the bellows plied Brok, and Sindre the hammer,
   And Thor, that the sparks flew on high,
 And the slides of the vaulted cave rang with the clamour,
   Loke changed to a huge forest-fly.

And he sat him all swelling with venom and spite,
   On Brok, the wrist just below;
 But the dwarf's skin was thick, and he recked not the bite,
   Nor once ceased the bellows to blow.

And now, strange to say, from the roaring fire
   Came the golden-haired Gullinburste,
 To serve as a charger the sun-god Frey,
   Sure, of all wild-boars this the first.

They took them pure gold from their secret store.
   The piece 't was but small in size,
 But ere 't had been long n the furnace roar,
   'T was a jewel beyond all prize.

A broad red ring all of wroughten gold,
   As a snake with its tail in its head,
 And a garland of gems did the rim enfold,
   Together with rare art laid.

'T was solid and heavy, and wrought with care,
   Thrice it passed through the white flames' glow;
 A ring to produce, fit for Odin to wear,
   No labour they spared, I trow.

[p. 43]

They worked it and turned it with wondrous skill,
   Till they gave it the virtue rare,
 That each thrice third night from its rim there fell
   Eight rings, as their parent fair.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

Next they laid on the anvil a steel-bar cold,
   They needed nor fire nor file;
 But their sledge-hammers, following, like thunder rolled,
   And Sindre sang runes the while.

When Loke now marked how the steel gat power,
   And how warily out 't was beat
 --'T was to make a new hammer for Ake-Thor,--
   He'd recourse once more to deceit.

In a trice, of a hornet the semblance he took,
   Whilst in cadence fell blow on blow,
 In the leading dwarf's forehead his barbed sting he stuck,
   That the blood in a stream down did flow.

Then the dwarf raised his hand to his brow for the smart,
   Ere the iron well out was beat,
 And they found that the haft by an inch was too short,
   But to alter it then 't was too late.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

His object attained, Loke no longer remained
   'Neath the earth, but straight hied him to Thor,
 Who owned than the hair ne'er, sure, aught more fair
   His eyes had e'er looked on before.

The boar Frey bestrode, and away proudly rode,
   And Thor took the ringlets and hammer;
 To Valhal they hied, where the Asas reside,
   'Mid of tilting and wassail the clamour.

At a full solemn ting, Thor gave Odin the ring,
   And Loke his foul treachery pardoned;
 But the pardon was vain, for his crimes soon again
   Must do penance the arch-sinner hardened.
                                             --Longfellow.

 

Footnotes

^38:1 In like manner was Shylock thwarted when he demanded his pound of flesh.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

  

CHAPTER V

  

The Winter War

The Great Earthquake--Frost--giants swarm South ward--Njord intervenes--Frey in Power of Giants--Asgard's Archer put to Shame--Peacemakers baffled--Vengeance of Thjasse--Volund--"Sword of Victory" forged --Mimer intervenes--Sword captured and Thjasse bound--Coming of Halfdan--Omens at his Birth--The Swords Accursed--Marriage, and Hadding's Birth--Conflicts with Giants--Groa taken Captive--Orvandel--Egil's Trial--The Mythical "William Tell"--Birth of Gudhorm--Groa's Promise to Svipdag--Her Incantations--Ull's Boyhood--Svipdag overcome by Halfdan--Visit to Hela--"Sword of Victory" recaptured--Svipdag's Great Victory--Thor put to Flight--Halfdan's Death.

A GREAT earthquake shook the nine worlds when the winter war was proclaimed. Midgar trembled and the heavens were disturbed. In Asgard the gods heard the dread clamour and the strong walls shivered as with fear. And it was thus that the earthquake was caused. When the sons of Ivalde withdrew their services from the gods, and made compact with their enemies, the terrible Frost-giants, the two giant-maids, Fenja and Menja, seized the handle of the great World-mill and turned it so violently that it went out of order, and disaster was threatened to the Universe. Then southward swarmed the Frost-giants to make war with the gods and their allies.

Now the Vana-god Njord sought to make peace between the gods and the sons of Ivalde, because at that time his son, the sunshine-god, Frey, was with them in northern Alf-heim, where he reigned as a king. He was still but a youth, and the sons of Ivalde had power to do him harm.

[p. 45]

With Njord went Bjorno-Hoder, the fair god Balder's brother, the famous archer, who had not yet grown blind. Forsete, Balder's son, was also an envoy, for, like his father, he was a just judge and settler of disputes. Gifted he was with persuasive speech and manners which could subdue the most stubborn disputants. But they discovered that Frey had been given to Beli, "the howler", the great giant with enormous body who held him in thrall.

Bjorno-Hoder waxed wroth, and he drew his bow to slay Volund-Thjasse and Egil-Orvandel, Ivalde's sons. But Egil-Orvandel was also a great archer, for which he was named Avo. Ere Hoder could shoot, Orvandel's arrow severed his bowstring. Then the god tied the string, and Orvandel's second arrow passed through his fingers without hurting them. Ignoring this dread warning, Balder's brother still persisted, and his third arrow was struck from the bowstring by Orvandel just as he was pulling the string. Thus was Hoder put to shame.

Then the peacemakers turned to take their departure, and Ivalde's sons continued their journey to the north.

Thjasse-Volund, son of Ivalde, was filled with boundless vengeance against the gods, and went to his smithy, where he forged the great Sword of Victory. Never was there such a weapon since the beginning of time. It shone like the sun in heaven, and there was no substance that it would not cleave. More terrible was it than Thor's hammer, which the sons of Sindre had made, for he who wielded the sword could prevail over the Thunder-god. Thjasse-Volund was resolved to subdue the gods and conquer Asgard. He also made a ring which multiplied till it became a chain to bind the wind.

But grave Mimer-Nidhad, who is also called Narve, "the binder", came to know of the dread sword which

[p. 46]

his rebellious subject had constructed, and he still remained the faithful friend of the gods. He knew well the power possessed by the sword, and feared the disaster which it would cause. So he went to Wolfdales, in Nifel-heim, where Thjasse-Volund had built his, great smithy, and seized the elf-smith, whom he bound with chains. Then The Binder took with him the sword, and also the magic ring from among seven hundred other rings, which it had produced. These he bore unto river-girdled Hela, where he concealed them in his deep cave, heaped with treasure, over which his son was guard. There the sword and the ring were kept until they were recaptured by The Shining One, who prevailed over Thor and became a god in Asgard--Svipdag the Brave, the hero of heroes. But ere that day came many great battles were fought, and mighty warriors perished in their pride.

The great hero who fought against the giants and Ivalde's sons in the winter war was Halfdan, son of Thor, who by tellers of old tales has also been called Mannus.

At his birth there were dread omens which foretold his glory and his doom. Eagles screeched, the clamour of thunder was heard, and the shadow of Thor fell over the house. Norns came and twisted the threads of fate. Of gold they made the warp of the web and fastened it under the moon; the ends were hid in the east and the west. One fateful thread was drawn northward towards Jotun-heim, the giants' home, and Urd decreed that it should hold there forever.

Hungry ravens cawed one to another, and welcomed the wolf-eyed child who would cause them to thrive with blood and the flesh of slaughtered men. They rejoiced that the battle-feast would soon be spread for them.

Halfdan's mother heard the ravens' song and dreaded

[p. 47]

his fate. Two swords there were in her home and they were accursed. She buried them deep in the earth, so that the child, when he grew strong, would not find them. But Halfdan soon displayed his warrior strength. When yet a youth he wrestled with a giant-bear and slew it.

Then came a day when Halfdan found a hidden sword, and in a conflict he slew with it his half-brother, nor did he know it was he. Thus was the sword accursed indeed.

Halfdan had knowledge from his father of sacred runes, and he knew the speech of birds, which gave him advantage over his enemies, for he was warned when danger was at hand.

When he grew years of knowledge and strength, he went forth to seek his fortunes. One day he met Signe-Alveig, which means "nourishing drink", and her he loved and married. She was the fair swan-maiden whose sister Groa was wed to Egil-Orvandel, son of Ivalde, and their son was Hadding. But although Halfdan lived for long at peace with Ivalde's clan, he fought against them when they leagued themselves with the Frost-giants to combat with the gods and their allies.

A strenuous campaign did Thor's son wage against the Frost-giants on the borders of Midgard, which they sought to possess and put under thrall. The giant Froste was their leader, and with him was Fjalar-Suttung, the fire-giant from Surtur's deep dales. Their march southward Halfdan stayed, and to the bleak north he drave them in confusion. A great battle he fought at Svarin's mound, where he slew Sigbrygg, the sire of his wife and Groa, her sister. Groa he took captive, and he put shame upon her, and with her he took her son Svipdag.

With Halfdan on his triumphant march northward

[p. 48]

went Odin's victorious Valkyries, and nightly the heavens flamed with their splendour, by men called "The Northern Lights".

On the borders of Jotun-heim Halfdan overcame Orvandel-Egil, the great archer, whose house he surrounded in the night.

Then it came about that Halfdan caused Orvandel to make trial of his skill, for hearing he had boasted that he could with the first arrow from his bow hit a small apple placed upon a stick at a great distance, he ordered Svipdag to stand with an apple upon his head. [*1] Then he commanded Orvandel to perform the deed of which he had boasted on penalty of his life, but promised him his freedom if he achieved success.

Svipdag was led forth. To him his sire spoke words of encouragement and good counsel, so that he might bear the trial with courage and unflinchingly, and also lest he should move and thus cause the arrow to miss its mark. Svipdag he made to stand with his back turned so that he might not behold the drawing of the bow.

Three arrows did Orvandel take from his quiver. Then one he aimed at the apple upon his son's head. Careful aim he took and shot it from the bow, and he clove the apple in twain nor harmed his son.

Then did Halfdan ask him why he had taken three arrows from his quiver, and Orvandel-Egil bade him know that it was his purpose, had his son fallen, to slay the man who had compelled the sore trial of skill.

But the risk was not avenged upon Halfdan until the, day of Svipdag's triumph.

In sorrow did Groa pass weary days with Halfdan, to whom she bore a son who was named Gudhorm. Then was Groa rejected with deeper shame. When she, with

 

 

Click to enlarge
A VALKYRIE
 From the sculpture by Sinding
 Photographed by Vilhelm Tryde

 

[p. 49]

her son, Svipdag, returned to Orvandel, she was heartbroken and had come nigh to life's end. Svipdag she called to her side and told him she must soon die with the sorrow she bore for the death of her sire and the shame that Halfdan had put upon her. Then she told him that he must needs endure great troubles and much strife, and be ofttimes in death-shadowing peril. "If mine aid you need at any time," she said, "come to my grave chamber and invoke my spirit, and I shall rise to help you." Soon after she spake thus Groa died, and Svipdag wept for her.

Then Orvandel took for wife the beauteous Sith. Their son was Ull, and he grew up to be a strong young warrior like his half-brother.

Svipdag was overcome with desire to be avenged upon Halfdan, and sought to wage war against him. But Sith prevailed upon him to promise that he would go towards the mountains of Jotun-heim, and rescue the goddess Freyja and the god Frey from the giant who kept them imprisoned in his strong castle.

But Svipdag deemed Sith to be moved with cunning intentions, and he feared that if he went forth upon such an enterprise he would never return. He had need of counsel and of help, and in the darkness of night he went to the stone grave-chamber of his mother and called upon her.

"Awake," he cried, "as thou didst promise me, and come to me, O mother, in my sore straits!"

The spirit of Groa rose out of Hela, where she heard her son's voice calling upon her, and from the grave-chamber she spoke. She told him that he must indeed go on a long journey and meet many perils ere yet he would find Freyja, but she bade him remember that his Norn of fate would be his guide.

[p. 50]

Then sang she incantations over Svipdag to protect him from danger and to heal his wounds, to give him courage and set him free from prisons. She also sang incantations to protect him against raging rivers he must needs cross, and against ocean's perils and the perils of vast and high mountains over which he must climb.

Nine incantations did Groa utter, and the last gave him security to traverse Nifel-hel and enter Mimer's grove.

Whereupon Groa's voice was silent, and her spirit returned to the Underworld.

Satisfied he would be indeed safe from all danger, Svipdag went northward towards the battleground of the giants. It was his desire to first avenge his grandsire's death and his mother's shame ere yet he would search to find Freyja. So he set himself to lead a giant host against the army of Halfdan, and a dread conflict was fought.

Svipdag was in the midst of the battle, and with Halfdan he waged a duel, but he was overcome and taken prisoner. Then made the giants hurried flight towards the north.

Deep was Halfdan's admiration for the prowess of the young hero, and he offered him his friendship if he would become his ally and help him to continue the campaign against the giants with whom Ivalde's sons were in league. But Svipdag scorned his friendship with defiance, and Halfdan in his wrath caused him to be bound to a tree in the midst of a thick forest, so that he might become the prey of wild beasts.

Groa's son, when he was alone, bethought him of the incantations which his mother had uttered, and one he repeated till the chains that bound him flew away and he was set free. Hither and thither he wandered disconsolately,

[p. 51]

nor giant nor foeman could he see, nor could he discover which way he should go.

Then came he to the moon-god ere he rose on his path through the heavens, and by him was Svipdag told where he would find the Sword of Victory which Thjasse-Volund had forged.

"In Mimer's cave," the moon-god said, "it is concealed, and thou must needs overcome the Keeper of Hela's gate to obtain it."

Towards the trackless regions that lead by Hvergelmer's mountain did Svipdag then journey, and over the caves in which giants guard their accursed hoards of treasure. Intense and bitter cold prevailed as he traversed over frostbound ways and wreaths of blocking snow. Now he had need to climb great precipices, and ofttimes he found himself on dizzy mountain ridges, while dread chasms yawned below him. Through many places of horror and peril did Svipdag traverse until he reached the borders of Hela. There he beheld a fair land that gleamed before him, full of flowers of rich fragrance.

He crossed a dark valley, and a hel-hound pursued him, barking loudly. Then came he to the River of Blades, which was spanned by a bridge of gold, and beyond there was a stone door in Hela's wall, guarded by a strong watchman. With him Svipdag fought and was victorious, and he entered the land of spirits where dwells Mimer and the regenerating race unborn.

Protected by the enchantment of Groa, Svipdag went towards the cave in which the treasures of Mimer are concealed, nor did he let his shadow fall upon it lest Mimer's son Mimingus, who kept watch, should take fear and shrink back into the mountain.

Mimingus lay asleep, and Svipdag overcame him and

[p. 52]

bound him where he lay. He took from the wall the glittering Sword of Victory and the great Arm-ring which Thjasse-Volund had forged, and then hastened to return by the way he had come. So traversing again the mountains of snow and misty blackness, and escaping the dread perils about him, Svipdag returned with his treasures from the Underworld.

Then without delay did the vengeance-seeking son of Groa open a new campaign against Halfdan. In Asgard it was known that he had secured the dreaded sword which Thjasse-Volund had made so that he might overcome the gods. Mighty Thor seized his iron hammer and went forth to help his son.

Great was the battle which was waged. Svipdag mowed down his enemies before him, and Halfdan was sorely wounded by an arrow shot from the bow of Orvandel-Egil. Then did Thor press into the midst of the fray, fighting fiercely against the giants, who fell before him until he came against Svipdag. But the hammer which Sindre had made was of no avail against, the young hero, for with the Sword of Victory it was struck by The Shining One and severed from the handle.

When Thor was repulsed he fled from the field, and Halfdan went with him.

Thus did victory come to Svipdag, and thus was the judgment of the gods defied, for they had placed the workmanship of Sindre's kinsman above that of the sons of Ivalde.

Halfdan died of his wounds, and Thor made haste to Asgard, where the gods awaited the coming of Svipdag with the Sword of Victory, which had been forged so that they might be utterly overcome and Asgard laid waste.

Footnotes

^48:1 Saga version of William Tell myth.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 53]

  

CHAPTER VI

  

Triumph of Love

Freyja and Frey in Captivity--Svipdag's Promise--Food of Wisdom--Voyage to Jotun-heim--Beli, "The Howler"--The Brothers Grep--God and Goddess under Enchantments--Svipdag and Ull in Giant's Castle--Freyja Rescued--The Shame of Frey--Freyja deserted--Her Wanderings--How the Spell was broken--Return to Asgard--Idun is lost--Loke and the Eagle--His Promise--The Angered Gods--Idun rescued--Thjasse--Volund slain--Svipdag climbs Bif-rost--The Wolf Dogs on Watch--Odin's Warnings--Glimpse of Asgard's Beauties--Lovers meet--The Sword of Victory--Gods and Elves reconciled.

WHEN Svipdag had triumphed over Halfdan he returned to Sith, remembering the promise he had made to rescue Freyja and Frey from the castle of the giant who held them in captivity. Then he prepared to set out with Ull, his stepbrother, towards the giants' country--cold and darksome Jotun-heim. But ere he went, Sith made for the twain the food of wisdom with the fat of three serpents, so that they might be rendered able to perform their long and perilous journey. Of the magic food did Svipdag secure the better portion for himself.

They had need to cross a great magic sea on which dread tempests roared and whirlpools and treacherous currents were an ever-present danger. When far from shore the storm-giant came against him, but Svipdag overcame him in combat. Protected by the incantations of Groa did Svipdag with Ull make the voyage in safety, until they reached a harbour nigh to the bleak castle of

[p. 54]

Beli, "the howler", in which Freyja and Frey were imprisoned.

Three sons of the giant met them on the strand. Each of them had Grep for name, and one, who was a skald, desired to have Freyja for his bride. With Svipdag and Ull he entered into angry dispute, and sought to prevail upon them to return from whence they came. But this they scorned to do, and in the end the giants retreated from the strand.

Then went Svipdag and Ull towards the castle to seek for Freyja and Frey. The giants were filled with anger, and sought to affright the young heroes by howling like beasts and bellowing like the storm-god. The clamour they made was indeed fearsome, and none but brave hearts could have ventured to make entry to that place of horror.

Within the court Frey and Freyja came to meet them. and they were surrounded by giant attendants. Svipdag greeted Freyja with a kiss, and she knew that she would become his bride.

But enchantments had been put upon her and upon Frey by the giants. They had been given to drink the potion of forgetfulness, so that they had but vague memory of the past, while deep discontent and haunting misery were their dower. Frey had deep shame upon him, and he sought nor flight nor expected happiness any more. In dark despair he lived within the strong castle of Beli.

Freyja was pale and sorrow stricken. In her heart was keen loathing, which tortured her, against the Grep who would fain be her favoured suitor. Her golden locks were twisted hard above her forehead, for Beli had thus punished her when he took her captive. In vain she had endeavoured to comb them and win back her

[p. 55]

extreme beauty, but the spell that was put upon her she could not break. Her eyes were vacant and sad. She rejoiced not that Svipdag and Ull had come to rescue her, for her heart was cold and passionless.

Svipdag and Ull entered the wide hall of the castle amidst the bestial howlings of the dread giants. A great fire burned there because of the bitter cold that prevailed.

With the giants they sat at feast, and Frey was on a high seat with pale, unhappy face, while the giants sang loudly and drank deeply about him.

Now deeply were these fierce furies incensed against Svipdag and Ull, whom they sought to overcome and put to death. In sharp dispute they engaged. At length, the Grep who wooed Freyja flung himself upon Svipdag, but Ull cut him down with his sword and slew him. Then many fought against Egil's sons, but they were driven back.

In the end the heroes prevailed upon Freyja to flee with them, but on Frey they could not prevail, for so deeply did he feel his shame that he could not again appear, he said, before the gods in Asgard.

To Svipdag was Freyja cold and indifferent, nor did she ever raise her eyes to look at him or open her lips to speak. When they had crossed the magic sea, they set out to climb the great mountains towards Orvandel's home, where Sith awaited them; but Freyja showed neither joy nor gratitude at her escape from the giants.

Then was the heart of Svipdag filled with anger, and he left Freyja to wander alone. She went towards a desolate land which was the abode of giantesses, and was found by one, who took her for a slave to tend her goats. But Svipdag repented, and when his anger passed away he went again in search of Freyja, for his heart was moved with deep tenderness towards her.

[p. 56]

From the giantess he rescued her, and they went together on their way. But that great Hag followed quickly, and swift was the flight of the lovers, running on skees. Nearer and more near came the monster, but suddenly the sun rose over the mountains, and she was turned into a great boulder at the sea's edge.

In Freyja's heart there was yet no gratitude, because of the spells that were upon her. Nor answer would she make when Svipdag spoke, nor would she gaze in his eyes to reward him. One brief look was all he desired, and yet she stared upon the ground disconsolate and silent.

Again did Svipdag wax wroth and leave her to wander alone; and she went down among the rocks. Then took she the guise of a bird and flew over the mountains and over the river that separates that wild country from the land in which Svipdag had his dwelling. She reached the house of Orvandel. To Sith, who recognized her not, she said that she was a poor woman who had no home, and she was received with welcome.

But Svipdag knew her and claimed her for his bride, and a wedding feast was set, and the marriage oath sworn in solemnity and state. Yet was Freyja cold and passionless. To the bridal chamber they went, and in her hand Freyja held a candle. She stood motionless before Svipdag until the candle burned low; and when the flame stung her hand, Svipdag spoke words of warning. But Freyja felt not the pain because of the greater pain within her heart.

Then was the spell broken by fire, and she raised her face and looked with eyes of love upon him who had rescued her. Thus had Svipdag his exceeding great reward.

 

Click to enlarge
FREYJA
 From the painting by N. J. O. Blommer

 

[p. 57]

But Freyja vanished from before him, and in falcon-guise she soared to Asgard, undefiled and pure, and was received with rejoicing by the gods. Then did Svipdag take his Sword of Victory and set forth towards Asgard to win Freyja.

But a sorrow no greater than when Freyja was lured away had fallen upon Asgard because the goddess Idun was lost. For it was she who had in her keeping the golden apples of eternal youth. In her fast-shut casket she kept them, and for each one she drew forth another took its place. From the apples did the gods receive immortality, and when Idun was taken away they began to grow old. Well they knew that both giants and trolls had much desire to rob the golden apples from Asgard. So they were sore troubled, fearing that disaster would fall speedily upon them. On evil Loke did suspicion fall, and when Odin challenged him, for Idun had last been seen in company with him, he confessed that he had delivered her to Thjasse-Volund, her brother, who had forged the Sword of Victory so that the gods might be overcome.

'Twas thus it fell that Idun was taken from Asgard. One day there went forth together on a journey Odin and Honer and Loke. It was their desire to visit the country of Ivalde and his sons, beside Hvergelmer and the rivers Evilagar, so as to cause the conflict to have end. Thjasse-Volund, who had escaped from the bonds of Mimer in the guise of an eagle, had knowledge of their coming and waited for them. In a valley of oaks the gods rested. There they saw grazing a herd of bears, and one they caught on which to feast, for they hungered and were weary. The bear they slew, and when a fire was kindled they roasted it for their feast. Near by lay a magic rod which Thjasse-Volund had forged with intent

[p. 58]

to wreak his vengeance upon the gods, and especially Loke.

Then a great eagle came towards them, and the gods knew it was Thjasse-Volund who had dominion there.

Hard was the bear to carve, for Ivalde's son had put enchantments upon it, and of this had Odin full knowledge. So he addressed Thjasse and said: "Why hast thou done this, thou maker of ornaments in eagle guise?"

Thjasse said that he desired his share. Odin had not, however, any knowledge of the evil intent of the eagle, and consented that he should divide the meal with them. Whereupon Thjasse flew down and sought to take so large a share that Loke, in his wrath, seized the magic rod to strike at him. When he did that he was in the eagle's power. He could not unclasp his hands from the rod, and the other end was fixed in the claws of the eagle, which flew high, carrying Loke with him. In vain did he seek to be released, and over the oak trees was he dragged and sorely beaten until he was near to being torn to pieces. Loke was heavy and the eagle sank to the ground. Then Loke offered Thjasse any ransom he would demand if he would but let him escape, for he was compelled to plead for his life.

Thjasse demanded his sister Idun, who had been taken away by Loke when the sons of Ivalde were the willing servants of the gods. Loke promised to deliver her to him secretly, and was then released by his dread captor. The gods returned to Asgard together, and evil Loke fulfilled his promise, nor gave Odin knowledge of his doings.

Thus it came that when he made confession of his deed the gods were moved to anger against him, and threatened to put him to death. But Loke made vows

 

Click to enlarge
IDUN AND THE APPLES
 From the painting by J. Doyle Penrose, R.H.A. By permission of the artist

 

[p. 59]

to restore Idun to Asgard, and flew forth towards the dominion of Thjasse-Volund in the bird-guise of Freyja.

The loss of Idun had dread effect in Midgard as in Asgard. Cold winds blew from the north. The power of the Frost-giants increased, and they swarmed southward in great hosts. Halfdan, they knew, was slain, and that the gods had loss of power because that Idun had been taken away. Icy arrows were shot over the earth, killing man and beast and each thing that grew. The heavens were disturbed. Nearer sun and moon crept the giant wolves. From Urd's fountain was slowly departing the power to give warmth to the World-tree Ygdrasil. Out of Jotun-heim. rose songs of rejoicing and vengeance that were heard in Asgard, and the gods, growing old, feared that the end of all things was drawing very nigh. To Mimer's grove were sent swift messengers, so that from the Norris might be received knowledge of the world's fate and that of the gods.

So did gods and men suffer because Idun, the goddess of regeneration, was taken away. The death-cold storm-spears were turned against gods and men. The murder-frost held Midgard with iron grasp.

Idun was found by Loke in Thjasse's dwelling, and he put enchantments upon her and she became a nut. Then he flew with her in his claws towards Asgard. But ere he set off, Loke, the tempter, made known to Thjasse what he had done, and challenged him to follow. In eagle-guise angry Thjasse pursued the god. So swiftly did he fly that he came very nigh to Loke ere yet he had reached the safety of Asgard. Then he flew midst the vafer-flames in the kindling vapour cloud, and fell scorched within the walls. Thor seized his hammer, which Sindre had again forged, and slew him. Thus did Thjasse-Volund, who had shaped the Sword of Victory,

[p. 60]

fall in his shame and perish because of Loke's evil doings.

Meanwhile in Asgard did Freyja await the coming of Svipdag, whom she loved; and him the gods awaited also, because he carried the Sword of Victory.

Svipdag's heart was filled with longing for Freyja, nor could he sleep or rest until he found her. The protection of Groa's incantations was still upon him, and it was Urd's will that he should reach Asgard. So he went again on a perilous journey. Unto Hela he went, over bleak tremendous mountains and through storms and blinding mist, until he reached the foundations of Bif-rost. Heimdal, the shining sentinel, beheld him as he stepped upon the Bridge of the Gods with the gleaming Sword of Victory girdled by his side. But no warning did he sound, for it was the will of Odin that Freyja's lover should stand before the gate of Asgard. So Svipdag ascended until he beheld the ramparts of the celestial city. There he perceived Odin nor knew who he was.

Roughly did the god receive his greetings. "This", he said, "is no place for beggars; return by the moist ways whence you came."

But Svipdag remonstrated, and claimed hospitality, being a weary traveller, and Odin made answer again that he could not enter, although less harshly, for the noble bearing of the youth gave pleasure to his eyes.

"From here, cried Svipdag, "I cannot turn my eyes away because of its exceeding great beauty. Here would I find happiness and peace."

"Who art thou?" Odin asked.

"My name," said Svipdag, "is Windcold, and I am the son of Springcold, whose sire was Very-cold."

Now Svipdag had caught a radiant glimpse of Asgard's beauties. He saw its halls of glittering gold, and especially

[p. 61]

the Hall of Gladness, which is the dwelling of Freyja, and is nigh to the gate. He also beheld Freyja, whom he loved, sitting on the flower-decked Rock of Joy, which gives health to those who seek it with prayer. She was surrounded by her maids--Eil, the healer; Hlif, the protectress; Bjort, the shining; Blid, the blithe; and Frid, the fair--they had power to give healing to men and women who called upon them from Midgard and offered up sacrifices. Freyja was silent and in deep thought. Like a graven statue she sat in virgin beauty, blue-eyed with golden hair--she who has care of lovelorn maidens and mothers and their babes. She wore her gleaming necklace which the elf-smiths had made with sparkling jewels of the sky and bright spring-flowers, for the fair goddess was "The Lover of Ornaments".

Freyja sat beneath the branches of Ygdrasil, and these Svipdag beheld with wonder. He saw its magical fruit, and in the branches sat the cock Goldcomb, with feathers of gleaming gold.

Svipdag turned his eyes upon Asgard's wondrous gate, and saw before it the two great wolf-dogs which kept watch by night and by day, for when one slept the other was awake. They had power to kill giants and put to flight through the air the flying trolls that came against Asgard in the darkness.

"Can a stranger enter?" the young hero asked of Odin.

"No stranger can come within," the god made answer, "unless he brings with him the Sword of Victory."

"How can the dogs be passed?" asked Svipdag.

Odin made reply that no one could pass the dogs unless he could give them to eat of the flesh upon the legs of Goldcomb.

When Svipdag asked how the cock which sat on the

[p. 62]

[paragraph continues] World-tree could be killed, Odin said that there was but one sword with which it could be slain, and it had been kept in Hela's cave, nor could it be obtained from the watchman unless he were given the ankle bones of Goldcomb.

"Can no man enter the city and go unto Freyja?" the hero asked.

"No man can enter," was Odin's answer, "save Svipdag."

"Then open the gates," the hero cried, "for I am he. Svipdag has come to seek for Freyja."

Then he crossed the river unscathed by vafer-flame, for the gates of Asgard flew open. The dogs fawned to him and bayed joyous welcome.

From the rock on which she sat hastened Freyja, and when she knew that it was indeed Svipdag who had come, she cried: "Welcome, my lover! Now is my great desire fulfilled. Long have I waited, sitting on the rock, looking for you by day and by night. All my desires are indeed fulfilled because you are once again by my side."

'Twas thus that Svipdag entered Asgard, bearing with him the Sword of Victory which had been forged to bring ruin to the gods. Love had triumphed over hate, and the designs of Loke were thwarted, for Svipdag had Freyja for his wife and the sons of Ivalde were reconciled to the gods.

Then was Ull brought to Asgard, and Sith also. The eyes of Thjasse-Volund were placed in heaven to shine as stars, and Orvandel, who was dead, was also raised among the star-heroes.

Meanwhile Njord had journeyed to Jotun-heim, where he rescued from the giant's castle his son Frey. In his wrath did Frey kill Beli, "the howler", with a stag's horn

[p. 63]

which he plucked from the wall when the spells that bound him were taken off.

To Frey was given by Svipdag the Sword of Victory, and the joy of peace fell upon Asgard when he returned.

But still the Hag abode among the gods in the guise of a maid who sat at Freyja's feet. It was fated that she would cause yet another and greater war in Asgard and in Midgard ere her power would be overcome.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 64]

  

CHAPTER VII

  

The Lost Sword of Victory

The Wrath of Skade--The Demand for Vengeance--Challenge to the Gods--Loke's Cunning Device--Thjasse--Volund a Star--Hero--Skade chooses a Husband--Marriage with Njord--The Vision of Gerd--Frey's Love--Madness--Skirner's Mission--Visit to Gymer's Castle--Gerd's Disdain--Bridal Gifts scorned--Threats of Torture--Horrors of Nifel--hel--Frey accepted--The Price of Gerd--Gymer receives the Sword of Victory--How Surtur will be avenged.

WHEN Skade, the proud and powerful daughter of Thjasse-Volund, came to know that her father had been slain by the gods, she put on her armour of chain mail and her shining helmet, and she seized her great spear and poisoned arrows to avenge his death. Then, hastening to Asgard, she stood without, challenging a god to combat. Bold was she and beautiful, and serenely fearless in her wrath.

The gods took counsel together, and deemed that her cause was just. Thus it came that they spoke words of peace unto her, and, indeed, they desired not to slay one so fair. But she scorned their entreaties, and, raising her spear, demanded the life of him who had slain her father.

Then went cunning Loke without and set to dancing before her, while a goat danced with him, whereat she was amused. He danced long, and, when he had ceased, he bowed before her and besought her for his bride, the

 

Click to enlarge
FREY
 From the design by Sir E. Burne-Jones
 Photograph by Frederich Hollyer

 

[p. 65]

while the goat did bleat mournfully. Skade was moved to laughter, and her wrath passed away.

Nat rode forth, and shadows fell upon the heavens and the stars came forth. Then was Skade besought to enter Asgard. To her came Odin, and, pointing to the sky, he said:

"Behold! thy father's eyes are made bright stars, [*1] which shall ever look down upon thee. . . . Amidst the gods thou mayest now dwell, and one thou canst choose to be thy husband. But, when this thou shalt do, thine eyes must be blindfolded, so that his feet only may be beheld by thee."

On the assembled gods she gazed with wonder and delight. Her eyes fell on Balder the Beautiful, and him she loved. In her heart she vowed he would be her choice.

When her eyes were veiled, she beheld a foot that was beautiful, and she deemed it was Balder's. Her arms went out, and, crying: "Thee I wed," she snatched aside the veil, and lo! it was Njord who stood before her.

Stately and fair was Njord, the summer sea-god, who stilled the tempests of Aeger and the blast of Gymer, the storm-giant of the bitter east. But the heart of Skade took no delight in Njord.

Yet was the Vana-god her choice, and with him was she wed in pomp and state in Asgard. Together they departed to Noatun, where Skade wearied of the sea and the cries of birds on the cliffs, which bereft her of sleep. Deep was her sorrow that she dwelt no longer in the forest of Thrym-heim, and she yearned for the thundering waterfall, the high mountains, and the wide plains where

[p. 66]

she was wont to follow the chase. And the love she bore to Balder was ever gnawing her heart.

Then sought Frey a bride, and with love of her he was possessed to madness.

One day he ascended the golden throne of Odin and looked over the worlds, seeing all things, and that was the day of his sorrow. Wondering, he gazed east and west, and to the south he gazed. Then northward towards the land of giants he turned his eyes, and there shone before him a light of great radiance that filled with beauty the heavens and the air and the sea. A maiden, fairer than ever he beheld before, had opened the door of her dwelling. Divinely tall was she, and her arms gleamed like silver. For a moment he saw her, his heart leaping with love, and then she vanished, whereat his soul was stricken with deep sadness. So was he punished for sitting in Odin's throne.

Homeward went Frey, nor speak would he, nor would he eat, or drink, so great was his love for the giant-maid, whose name was Gerd, the daughter of Gymer. Much did the gods marvel because of his silence and his deep sighs. But none could find reason for the madness of Frey. To him came his father Njord, and Skade also, and as they found him so they left him, in melancholy and possessed with secret sorrow. Then spake Njord to Svipdag, who, in Asgard, was named Skirner, "the shining one", and entreated him to discover what caused his son to suffer, and to find a remedy whereby he would be restored to gladness.

As reluctant was Skirner to go unto Frey as he was when Sith besought him to rescue Freyja from the giant Beli. Yet when he found Frey sitting alone in silence, and stricken with keen longing for her whom he loved, he spoke to him boldly and with confidence.

[p. 67]

"Together", he said, "we have had adventures in other days, and faithful should we now be one to another. Nor should there be any secret between us. Speak, O Frey, and tell me why you grieve alone and refuse to eat and to drink."

Frey answered him: "How can I disclose, fond friend, the secret of my sorrow. Bright shines the sun-goddess over heaven, but cheerless to me are her rays."

But Skirner pressed him to confide his sorrow, and Frey told of his love for beautiful Gerd, the giant-maid. But his love, he said, was foredoomed to sorrow, for neither god nor elf would permit that they should dwell together.

Then went Skirner to the gods and revealed the secret of Frey's silence and despair. Well they knew that if Gerd were not taken to him the god of sunshine would pine and die, so to Skirner they made known their will that he should haste to Gymer's abode and win his fair daughter for Frey.

Then was Frey less sad, and he gave Skirner the Sword of Victory to be his defence, and from Odin he received Sleipner to ride through fire and over the heavens. The bridal gifts he bore when he set forth were the magic ring Draupner and eleven apples of immortal youth from Idun's precious casket. A magic rod which subdues took he also with him.

Over raging sea and bleak mountains rode Skirner, over chasms and the mountain caves of fierce giants, until he came to Gymer's Castle, which was protected by a moat of fire. Fierce bloodhounds guarded the entrance gate.

On a mound sat a shepherd alone, and him Skirner addressed, beseeching how he could lull the fearsome

[p. 68]

hounds that kept constant watch, so that he might reach the giant-maid.

"Whence come ye?" asked the shepherd; "for surely you are doomed to die. You may ride by night or by day, but never can you win nigh to Gerd."

Skirner had no fear. "Our fates," he said, "are spun when we are born. Our doom we can never escape."

Now was the voice of Skirner heard by Gerd, who was within, and she besought her maid-servant to discover who it was that spoke so boldly before the castle.

Then Skirner spurred his horse, which rode over the hounds and the fiery moat, and the castle was shaken to the foundations when the door was reached.

The maid-servant told Gerd that a warrior stood without and demanded to be admitted to her.

"Then haste, cried Gerd, and take him within, and mix for him the sweet and ancient mead, for I fear that he who murdered Bell, my brother, is come at length."

Skirner entered and stood before the giant-maid whom Frey loved so well, and she spake to him and said: "Who art thou-an elf, or the son of an Asa-god, or one of the wise Vans? Daring, indeed, art thou, to come alone unto this our strong abode."

"Neither elf, nor god, nor Van am I," Skirner made answer. "I am a messenger from the god Frey, who loves thee. From him I bring the ring Draupner as a gift, for he seeks thee for his bride."

Then was Gerd's heart filled with disdain, and the bridal gift she refused to take. "While life remains in me," she said, "Frey I shall not wed."

Skirner next made offer of the golden ring Draupner, but that she disdained also.

[p. 69]

"Of thy ring I have no need," she told him, "because my sire hath great treasure of jewels and of gold."

When she spake thus the heart of Skirner was filled with anger, and he drew forth the shining Sword of Victory.

"Behold this blade!" he cried; "with it I can slay thee if Frey is rejected."

Proudly did Gerd arise. "By force nor threat," said she, "will I ever be led. My strong sire Gymer is armed and ready to punish thee for thy boldness."

Then Skirner said wrathfully: "With this blade I shall slay thy sire, the old giant Gymer, if he should dare to oppose me. And thee I can conquer with this magic wand, which shall subdue thy heart. If I must needs do so, no happiness will ever again come nigh thee. For thee it will remove to the regions of Nifel-hel, where nor god nor man can ever behold thee in beauty again."

Silent and pale sat Gerd as Skirner told her of the fate which would be hers if she continued to refuse to become the bride of Frey.

The place in Nifel-hel to which she must go, he said, was a region of torture where dwell the spirits of the giants who were ground in the World-mill. Power to love she would not have, nor tenderness or sympathy. Alone she must live, or else as the fruitless bride of a monstrous three-headed giant. Gladness and enjoyment would be banished from her heart. Staring eyes would ever watch her coldly and with more hatred than do the Frost-giants regard Heimdal, the sentinel of Bif-rost, or do the Trolls the wolf-dogs of Odin. Nor would the demons ever leave her at peace. Evil witches would bow her to the rocks. Morn, who gives "agony of soul", would fill her being. There in the place of torment prepared for her dwell the demons of sickness,

[p. 70]

who would increase her sorrow. Never would she be free from the torture of Tope (madness) and Ope (hysteria), and no rest would she know by night or by day. For food she would have loathsome meat, and venom for drink. Each morning would she crawl painfully to the mountain top and behold Hela in glory and in beauty, and ever would she seek in vain to reach its glittering plains of bliss and delight.

"Such, O Gerd, must be thy fate," cried Skirner, "if Frey by thee is disdained."

Then prepared he to strike her with the magic rod which subdues; but Gerd besought him to hear her.

"Fulfil not thy threat," she pleaded, "and drink of this sweet and ancient mead. Never dreamed I that I should love a god of the Vans."

But Skirner would not be appeased until she gave to him a message to Frey. Whereat she promised that after the space of nine nights she would consent to become the bride of the Vana-god if the Sword of Victory were given to her sire.

Pleasant were her words to Skirner, and hastening without he leapt upon his horse and returned with all speed to Asgard. There did Frey await him with impatience, but the lovelorn Vana-god was filled with sadness when he came to know that he must needs wait the space of nine nights ere he would be by Gerd received.

"Long is one night without her," he cried; "longer are two nights--how can I endure to wait for nine? Longer has this half night of waiting seemed to me than a month of greatest bliss."

Slowly for Frey passed the days and nights that followed. Then at the appointed time he went to Gerd, who became his bride.

Unto Gymer he gave for his daughter the Sword of

[p. 71]

[paragraph continues] Victory, which had been forged to bring disaster upon the gods. And in this manner was Asgard deprived of the fruit of the triumph which Freyja had brought thither when Svipdag's wrath was turned aside and his love for her caused peace to be made between gods and elves.

Long had the giants sought to possess the Sword of Victory, and especially the wife of Gymer, Gulveig-Hoder, the dreaded Hag of Iarnvid, who had still her dwelling in Asgard, where she ever strove to work evil.

For with the Sword of Victory will Surtur be armed when he issues forth to avenge the wrong done to Gunlad by Odin.

Thus did Loke taunt Frey. "Treasure gave you to Gymer with which to buy his daughter, and the Sword of Victory also. Lo! when the sons of Surtur come over Ironwood, in sore distress you shall indeed be, for then you shall know not, O unhappy one, with what weapon to fight."

Footnotes

^65:1 The Ivalde family is associated with star worship. Ivalde is Vate, or Wate, of "Watling Street", the old English name of the Milky Way. Thjasse is connected with Sirius, and Orvandel with Orion. "Watling Street" was also applied to one of the Roman military roads extending from near Dover by London to North Wales.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 72]

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

Fall of Asgard

Vengeance of the Gods--Burning of the Hag--War of the Gods--Skade leaves Njord--Mimer is slain--The Vans before Asgard--The Strategy of Njord--How Sleipner was captured--A Spy in Asgard--Odin's Gate burst Open--Invaders Victorious--Flight of Asa--Gods--The War in Midgard--The Sons of Halfdan--Odin rescues Hadding--Loke's Evil Designs--Giants in Conflict--Defeat of Hadding--How the Dead spoke--A Dread Curse--Forest Peril--The Great Hand--Death of Giant Maid--Heimdal protects Hadding.

THE gods marvelled greatly at the disasters which had befallen them, and they sat in council together to discover how Freyja had been lured from Asgard, and who had plotted to work this evil.

Suspicion fell upon Loke's wife, Aurboda-Gulveig-Hoder, the Hag of Ironwood, who dwelt among the gods in the guise of a maid-attendant to Freyja. Wife she was also to Gymer, who had become possessed of the Sword of Victory, and her son was Beli, "the howler", whom Frey had slain. So well did she act her part, while she schemed to work evil, that among the maids none seemed fairer or more faithful. Many missions did she perform for Freyja. Once, indeed, she was sent to confer divine favour upon mortals. A king and queen had long been married, and they had no children.

Prayers they offered up to Freyja, and sacrifices made they that an heir to the kingdom might be theirs. In compassion were they heard, and Aurboda was sent

[p. 73]

earthwards by Freyja in the guise of a crow, bearing with her the fruit of fertility from the branches of Ygdrasil. When the queen partook of it, her desire was fulfilled, and in due season an heir was born, whereat there was great rejoicing in the kingdom.

Thus Aurboda [*1] had fair repute in Asgard despite her evil character--she who was mother of the wolves that pursue  and moon; she who was Hag of Eastern Winds which bear the burden of her fearsome song and drive fair vessels into the very jaws of Aegir, the storm-god of western ocean.

When the gods came to know she was indeed the Mother of Evil, and had lured Freyja from her secure abode, they were moved with great wrath and with horror against her. They found, too, that it was dread Aurboda who had filled the air with witchcraft and wrought evil spells that enchanted both gods and men. Black sorcery did she practise to stir up the evil passions with which Loke had endowed human kind.

Thor sprang up in the High Thingstead of the gods and went forth hastily to find her. By him was she seized and struck down. Then the gods burned her as punishment for her witchcraft. A great pyre they reared in Valhal, and they spitted her body with their spears, holding it over the flames until it was consumed. But she came to life again. Thrice they burned her and thrice was she restored, for evil is hard to destroy. The third time they flung her ashes away, but her heart, which is the seat of life, was but half-burned, and Loke found it and swallowed it. Thereafter he partook in still greater measure of the evil character of the Hag, who, however, came to life the third time in Ironwood, where she must ever dwell despite the vengeance of the gods and their

[p. 74]

wrathful desire to destroy her. But Asgard she could never again enter.

Now the Hag was the mother of Gerd, the giant maid whom Frey the Vana-god had married. As kinswoman of one of their clan she was under the protection of the Vana-gods, although, like the Asa-gods, they had fear and hatred of her witchcraft. They therefore began to dispute with the Asa-clan because the Hag had been burned. Long and loud the quarrel waged, but suddenly it was brought to an end by Odin, who flung his spear into their midst to signify that the war of words must end and the war of arms ensue.

Thus was the breach between the gods accomplished by the fearsome Hag.

On earth, too, was a conflict begun between the tribes of men. Thus came to be waged, as skalds have sung, "the first great war in the world". Whereat the primeval cold heart of "the old one in the Ironwood" was made glad. With her rejoiced Egther, "the sword-guardian", who is also named Gymer, and is shepherd of her foul herds. On the Day of Vengeance, when Surtur prepares to issue forth, Egther shall be visited by Fjalar-Suttung, in the guise of the red cock of Hela, to obtain from him the Sword of Victory with which to slay the gods.

Now when the Vans became hostile to the Asa-gods, they issued forth from Asgard. With them went Njord. Skade, his wife, refused to dwell any more with him when she found she had no longer need to fear the Asa-gods. She wearied of the western seashore, for she loved Thrym-heim, the domain of Thjasse-Volund, her father, with its serene mountains and wide plains and forests of oak. For nine days and nine nights would Njord go with her to the mountains, and then for a time would she

[p. 75]

dwell with him beside the loud-voiced sea. Njord hated Thrym-heim as she did Noatun, and with heavy heart he sang:

I am weary of the mountains,
   The barren plains and lone,
 And dismal chasms of the winds
   Where fettered demons groan;
 I am weary of the forests
   And the wolves that howl by night,
 For I love the singing of the swans
   Upon the ocean bright,
 The flash of oars on boundless seas
   And billows plunging white.

In the kingdom of Njord did Skade sing:

O never mine eyes are closed in sleep
   On my lonesome couch by the sea,
 For the clamour the restless seagulls keep
   Is weary and strange to me.
 I pine for my mountains free, and the woods,
   For the snow-clad plains and the chase;
 And I hate the cold-lipped shore that broods
   In the shifting sea's embrace.

So Skade parted with Njord and went towards her ancient home, from which she never returned. When the star-eyes of Thjasse-Volund are gleaming bright in heaven, and winds are abroad, she runs on her skees adown steep mountain slopes; and with her arrows and her spear she hunts the bear and the wolf in dim forests and over snow-white plains.

Mighty Njord was leader of the Vans in their war against the Asa-gods. And to the Vans was it given to triumph. In sore plight were Odin and his strong warriors, for the Sword of Victory was no longer theirs, and the hammer of Thor had been broken. Yet with

[p. 76]

indomitable courage did Thor and brave Tyr and all the gods of Odin's clan defend Asgard. Loke usurped Honer, for he desired to rule over the Vana-gods.

Mimer, in the Underworld, was ever faithful unto Odin. So the Vana-gods slew him, and to Odin they sent his head, and the great Asa-god embalmed it. Then sang he sacred runes, so that in after time Odin spake with Mimer's head, and heard words of wisdom from it, and received guidance as of old. Honer was sent unto Mimer's realm, where he spoke without confidence or clear knowledge, but he had not chosen his part.

Asgard fell, and by cunning strategy was it taken. Unscathed by the vafer-flames did the Vans cross its fearsome river, for Njord burst open the mighty gate with his great battleaxe and caused it to fall. So did the Vans achieve gigantic triumph.

It was thus that the gods were overcome. Before Asgard their foes assembled, and skirmishings there were when Odin's warriors issued forth. On a silent evening the gate was lowered, so that it bridged the river, and a god rode forth upon Sleipner. But in ambush was he taken by Njord, and he leapt from his horse and hastened back to Asgard, crossing the bridge, which was hastily raised again. But Sleipner was captured, whereat there was sorrow and deep foreboding in Asgard.

Next morning the gods found Odin's horse outside the gate, and they rejoiced and took it within. The robes of Njord they saw also in the river, and what they thought to be his dead body, so they deemed themselves secure.

But Njord was already in Asgard. He had gone to the river, horsed on Sleipner, in the darkness of night. There he slew his attendant and wrapped his own kingly robes about him, throwing the body into the dread waters.

[p. 77]

[paragraph continues] Whereupon he crossed over on Sleipner, unscathed by the vafer-flames, scaled the great wall, and concealed himself within the High Thingstead of the gods.

When he came to know of the gods' plans, and perceived that he had naught to fear, he crept forth and struck the gate with his battleaxe. Across the river it fell like a bridge, and over it surged the conquering Vana-gods. Thus did they become possessed of Asgard, the celestial city.

Njord was chief of heroes, and with him fought Frey and Ull, the warlike son of Sith, and Svipdag, Freyja's husband. Frigg espoused the cause of the Vana-gods, her kinsmen, and remained in Asgard. [*1]

Odin made swift escape on the back of Sleipner, and Thor yoked his goats, and in his thundering car departed with those who remained faithful to his sire. Thus were the Asa-gods bereft of their power, and thus became the Vana-gods the world-rulers in Asgard. Ull was chosen as the chief, and to him did mortals offer up prayers and sacrifices.

Then did wicked men, by reason of great offerings which they made, seek to win Hela's secure abode.

While the war was waged about Asgard there were mighty conflicts in Midgard, for Halfdan's tribe sought to be avenged on the tribe of Svipdag. But ere the tale of the battles be told it must needs be known how the war upon earth came to be.

When Halfdan was wounded unto death, in the great fight in which Svipdag overcame Thor with the Sword of Victory, his forces were driven hither and thither. He had two sons--Hadding, whose mother was Signe-Alveig, and Gudhorm, whose mother was Groa. They were in

[p. 78]

great peril when Halfdan died, and Thor carried them unto Jotun-heim. Gudhorm he gave to the giant Halfe, and Hadding to the giant Vagnhofde, so that they might be cared for until they became great warriors.

When the Vans conquered Asgard, Loke sought to win their favour. He perceived that they were scorned by Hadding's tribe, whom Saxons called "the Heardings", and he laid snares against Hadding. But there came to Hadding one day a tall old man with one eye, who rode a great horse. He lifted Halfdan's son into his saddle, and round the lad he wrapped his cloak. Then he set off with him. So swiftly did the horse travel, and yet so smoothly, that the lad was curious to know whither they were going. There was a small hole in the horseman's mantle, and when Hadding peered through he saw the wide ocean far beneath and the clouds about him. Fear filled his heart and he trembled, and the rider bade him to look not forth again, For it was Odin who had rescued Hadding, and he bore him to the place of refuge which the gods had selected when they were driven out of Asgard.

Odin trained Halfdan's soil to become a great leader of men. Over him he sang magical incantations which had power to free him from fetters and chains. He also gave him to drink of the Splendid Draught, which was called "Leifner's Flames". Its virtue was such that it imparted to Hadding strength beyond that of all men, and bravery that was unequalled. Then did Odin warn him that he would soon have need to use his powers against his enemies.

Hadding returned on Odin's horse, as he had come, to the home of the giant Vagnhofde. But soon he fell into Loke's snare. The evil god seized him and chained him in a forest, as Svipdag had been chained by Halfdan,

[p. 79]

so that he might become the prey of wild beasts. Guards were set over him to prevent his escape. But when these allies of Loke kept watch, Halfdan sang an incantation which Odin had taught him, and they fell into a magic sleep. A great wolf came towards him to tear his body to pieces, and he sang the incantation which makes free, and his chains and fetters fell from him. Then he attacked the wolf and killed it, and its heart he did eat. With the might and ferocity of the wolf was Hadding then endowed, and the guards he slew, and went upon his way.

He returned to the giants' home, and prepared to depart so that he might raise his tribe to battle against the tribe of Svipdag. Now Hardgrep, the giant's daughter, loved him and besought him not to leave her. She had power to change her shape. Now she had stature which reached to the stars, and anon she was of human size. In vain did she remonstrate with Hadding because he scorned her love and sought to follow arms, thirsting for throats.

But although at length she gained his love as a comely maid, he had still resolve to be gone. So she attired herself as a male warrior and went with him.

Then did Svipdag come from Asgard, and he sought to make peace with the sons of Halfdan. To both he offered kingdoms, and his half-brother Gudhorm, son of Groa, he made ruler over the Danes. But Hadding refused his favours, and with anger and fierce scorn he vowed that he would avenge his father's death and take no favour from the hands of his enemy. Until his life's purpose was fulfilled he vowed to cut neither hair nor beard, and long were both and very fair. It was thus that he was called Hadding, "the hairy"

His eastern tribe of Swedes did the young warrior

[p. 80]

raise to battle against Svipdag's tribe and their allies, and war he declared against his brother Gudhorm, King of the Danes. Between the two brothers did Loke work much evil. As a blind man he went to Hadding with words his brother uttered, and with Gudhorm he was Bikke, a leader of his army.

So the brothers fought one against another. To Gudhorm's aid went Halfe, the giant who had nourished him, and to Hadding's went Vagnhofde. Svipdag's Scandian tribe fought with the Danes.

On the night before the battle the opposing armies beheld the great hairless giants contending in mid-air, the starlight gleaming on their bald, horrible heads. Monstrous were the efforts of these foul gigantic warriors. When the dread conflict was ended, victory was with Halfe.

On the morrow did Loke set in cunning battle array the forces of Gudhorm, which triumphed on the field as Halfe had in mid-air.

The eastern Swedes were scattered, and Hadding became a fugitive in the woods. With him was Hardgrep, the giant's daughter, who was a constant protection to him. Great hardships did they endure together, and they were ofttimes in peril.

But her aid he was doomed to lose. One night they entered a lonely dwelling to seek hospitality, and there they found that the master of the house was lying dead. His funeral rites were being performed. Now, it was Hardgrep's desire to peer into the future, and she took a piece of wood and on it engraved magic runes, which she caused Hadding to place under the dead man's tongue, so that he might speak.

Angry, indeed, was the spirit thus compelled to make utterance. Nor did it reveal what was sought, but cursed

[p. 81]

the worker of the spell. Terrible was the voice that spoke and said: "Cursed be the one who dragged me back from the Underworld! Let her perish by the demon who called a spirit out of bale!"

Then fled from the house Hadding and Hardgrep and sought refuge in the deep forest. Over the narrow path of a grove they made a shelter with branches of trees and concealed themselves there. In the middle of the night a rustling was heard in their secret dwelling, and a Great Black Hand was perceived to move about, groping with iron fingers for its prey.

Hadding was stricken with terror, and he awakened Hardgrep and besought her to rescue him. Swiftly rose the giant-maid, and she assumed great stature to defend her lover. With strength of her kind she clutched the Great Hand round the wrist, and bade Hadding strike it with his sword. Many blows did he give, seeking to hew it off, and his blade rang noisily against the hard flesh.

Blood flowed from the wounds he made, but more venom than blood came forth.

Then suddenly was Hardgrep caught by the Hand, which clutched her in terrible embrace. Into her flesh sank the sharp claws, and her bones were crushed, and she sank in death in the sheltered dwelling. Whereat the Great Hand vanished.

Hadding was now alone and in great peril, for demons compassed him about in the dark forest.

But Odin, in his compassion, sent forth Lyfir, "the shining one", who was Heimdal in human guise, to protect the warrior in his loneliness. Him did Hadding meet as a rover, and a bond of friendship they made together by sprinkling one another's feet with their blood.

Soon again did Hadding appear in the east, leading his hosts to battle.

Footnotes

^73:1 Also Angerboda.

^77:1 Hence the Heimskringla story of Odin going a long journey, and the wooing of Frigg by his brothers, who thought he would never return.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 82]

  

CHAPTER IX

  

The Gods Reconciled

Svipdag leaves Asgard--Hadding's Strategy--Fleet sunk by Odin--Fate of Svipdag--Freyja's Sorrowful Quest--The Sea-Dragon--Slain by Hadding--The Curse of Freyja--Loke and Heimdal's Ocean Fight--Hadding's Peril--The Gods and the Last Battle--Death of Svipdag's Son--His Faithful Queen--Giants threaten Asgard--Odin's Warning--Thor wins Ull's Favour--Asa-Gods return to Asgard--The Decrees of Odin--The Seven Sleepers--St. Swithin's-Day Myth.

SVIPDAG descended out of Asgard and urged his tribe to help the Danes in their campaign against Hadding. Ing was he called by his people. They were ruled over by his son, Asmund, who had chosen to live among men.

The fame of Hadding had already gone forth because of mighty deeds he had done. He had conquered King Hadvanus, although the city in which he was besieged was protected by strong battlements. The cunning warrior desired the speedy surrender of his foemen. He caused birds that nested within to be caught, and to their feathers slow-burning lights were attached, so that when they flew over the battlements they set the roofs aflame. The people hastened to quench the great fires that raged about them; soldiers left the fortresses, and the guards ran from the gates. Then did Hadding make sudden and fierce assault and capture the town. Not until he gave payment of much gold was the stricken king ransomed and saved from death.

A great fleet sailed eastward with Svipdag's warriors.

[p. 83]

[paragraph continues] In one ship, the name of which was Gnod, went three thousand men. But Odin sank it, and all on board perished in the waves.

'There are some who tell that Svipdag was drowned with his warriors, and there are others who hold that he was punished by enchantments, for by reason of Groa's incantations the sea could not harm him, and none there were who had power over him save the Asa-gods. Indeed he had reason to fear them greatly, for they were stirred with wrath against him because he would not permit the war to have end. He was Odur, the one "endowed with spirit".

It is told that enchantments were put upon Svipdag by the Asa-gods, and that he was transformed into a great sea-dragon which dwelt beneath a grey rock guarding much treasure.

The heart of Freyja was sad because that Svipdag came not nigh to her with loving words and shining face. Deeply she yearned for him in Asgard, wondering what evil had befallen The Shining One.

Then came she to know that he had suffered because of Odin's wrath, and forth she went to search for him. Tears fell from her eyes, and they became drops of pure gold, and those that showered into the sea were changed to amber.

Through Midgard she went searching for Svipdag, and she roamed over hills and plains and over rivers and lakes enquiring of whom she met if her lost one had gone this way or that. And without ceasing she wept, so that her tears of gold may be found in all lands, and her tears of amber on the shores of wide seas. Faithful was she to Svipdag, and ever did she sorrow as she went because she found him not.

At length she came to the shore of the sea where her

[p. 84]

husband sorrowed also in dragon-guise. Horrible was he to behold and of haggard seeming.

She was neither repulsed nor was her love turned cold, for the eyes of the dragon were still the eyes of Svipdag, without change or lack of beauty.

Then endeavoured she to comfort him, and wept more tears of gold. Great indeed did the dragon's treasure become, for great was the sorrow of Freyja. But break the spell she could not, for who can remove the curse of Odin?

Long she stayed nigh to Svipdag, nor sought to return unto Asgard. And when she entered the sea to comfort him her great necklace glittered through the waves, and in darkness fire flashed from it. Beneath the grey stone she left the necklace on the day when lasting sorrow was her dower.

There came on that day to bathe in the sea Hadding, the vengeful son of Halfdan. But he wondered because his body was scorched with great heat and the waves boiled all around. Then suddenly he beheld the dragon coming against him. With haste he seized his sword and made fierce attack. Great was the might of Hadding, and by Odin was he given power to prevail. With many strong blows he slew the monster, and he bade his men to carry it to his camp.

Now, as he went thither, a lady came towards him. She was of such great beauty that he was made silent before her. Golden was her hair, and gleaming and blue were her eyes as the radiant, sun-kissed sea. But Hadding knew not that it was the goddess Freyja who stood before him.

When she beheld the dragon she was stirred to divine wrath. Hadding she cursed upon sea and upon land. "Suffer shalt thou," she cried, "the vengeance of

 

Click to enlarge
FREYJA AND THE NECKLACE
 From the painting by J. Doyle Penrose, R.H.A. By permission of the artist

 

[p. 85]

the gods in Asgard. On battlefield and empty plain shall their wrath attend thee. On seas eternal tempests shall thee follow. Wherever thou dost wander thou shalt be accursed. Bitter cold shall follow thee to thy dwelling; at its fire thou shalt be oppressed. Thy flocks shall die. All men shall shun thee, for through the world thou shalt go as foul and as hated as is the plague. Such is the wrath of the gods against thee, for with sacrilegious hands thou hast slain a dweller in Asgard who was enchanted in a form that was not his own. O slayer of the god I loved! when thou art cast into the deep the wrath of demons shall fall upon thee. Ever will you be under our curse until with prayers and sacrifice to the Vana-gods our wrath is appeased."

All things that Freyja said came to pass. Stricken was Hadding by a tempest and cast into the raging sea. Despised was he by strangers when he was washed ashore, and shunned was he as if he were plague-smitten and foul. Many disasters, indeed, fell upon him, until he offered up dusky men in sacrifice to the god Frey. Then was the wrath of the Vana-gods melted and the curse removed.

Each year did Hadding ever afterwards give Frey great offerings, as did also his sons and their sons for generations.

Now Loke had watched the conflict between Hadding and the dragon while yet afar off. When he perceived that Svipdag was slain, he hastened to secure the treasure, and especially the necklace of Freyja, from below the grey rock. In seal guise did he enter the sea, and he saw gleaming through the dark waters the jewels of the divine Lover of Ornaments. But Heimdal, the keen-eyed, followed him, and in seal guise was he also. Thus did Loke and he meet in the sea's dim depths. By their

[p. 86]

eyes did each know the other, and fiercely they fought on the grey rock to be possessed of the jewels.

Heimdal, son of the waves, was victorious. He drave off Loke, and possessed himself of Freyja's necklace, which he kept secure until he returned to Asgard with the Asa-gods.

Then came the day of great battle between Hadding and the tribes that were combined against him. Ere it began, he slew Henry, son of Asmund, son of Svipdag. Then was Asmund filled with great wrath, and he vowed to slay the warrior who had killed his sire and his son also.

But Odin was with Hadding, and the great god caused his favoured warrior to marshal his army in wedge shape, so as to pierce and scatter the foe. For long years after did the descendants of Hadding enter battle in this manner.

Now when the conflict was at its height, Hadding was sore pressed because of the strength of Asmund's arm which was made greater by his exceeding great wrath and desire for vengeance. Odin perceived his peril, and hastened from the battle to bring him aid.

The Vana-gods gave help to Asmund, and over Hadding's army there passed a fierce rainstorm and wreaths of mist that caused confusion. Then came Thor on a black thundercloud which drave back the rain-clouds over the hills, and the sun broke forth in clear splendour.

Hadding's wedge-shaped army pressed forward, until Asmund was nigh to his enemy, whose death he sought above all else. Then did Hadding call upon the Asa-gods in his sore need. Asmund had flung his shield over his back, and with both hands grasping the hilt, he wielded his great sword so fiercely that he mowed down

[p. 87]

his enemies before him. Nigh to Hadding came he indeed, when Odin returned on his horse Sleipner, bearing with him the giant Vagnhofde. By Hadding's side was the giant placed in the guise of a warrior bearing a crooked sword.

When Asmund saw the weapon which the giant wielded he cried: "Thou mayest fight with a crooked sword, but my short sword and my javelin shall be thy doom this day. And thou, Hadding, holding thy shield against me, art foul with crimes. Thy bold lance shall I bear down, and thee shall I cover with shame."

But the giant engaged Asmund, and Hadding flung his lance, which pierced Asmund's body so that he fell dying of his fierce wound. Yet was he not without strength to strike a last blow, for he grasped his javelin and flung it at Hadding, whose foot he pierced. Then died Asmund unrevenged, but ever afterwards did the slayer of his sire and his son limp with the wound he gave him in his last hour.

When Asmund fell, Hadding became victorious, and his foemen he drave in confusion from the field.

The body of Asmund was buried with pomp and state. Bitter was the grief of his queen Gunnhild, who desired not to live after him. With Asmund's sword she slew herself, and with him was she laid in the tomb. She loved him more than life, and with her arms around his body was she laid to rest in his tomb. The whole tribe mourned them, sorrowing greatly for many days.

Now the Frost-giants and the giants of the mountains plotted together to conquer Asgard, and in Surtur's deep dales and in Iarnvid there was promise and offer of help. Weak were the Vana-gods to resist the disaster which impended, nor did they know a-tight of the evil plans of their dread foes. But to Odin came full knowledge in

[p. 88]

his exile. Well he knew that disaster irretrievable would befall both gods and mortals if the high celestial city fell before the giants.

Sleipner he mounted, and towards Asgard sped he, bearing the tidings of dread import. Then it was that the Vana-gods knew they had exceeding great need of his wise and constant counsel. Deeply moved were they towards the leader they had dethroned and driven into exile, because he had forewarned them of the giants' plans.

To Thor went Ull, who sat in Odin's throne, and together they conferred. With eloquent words did the Thunder-god fill the heart of Ull with friendship towards the Asa-gods, so that he returned to Asgard to plead their cause. Nor long did he speak when the Vana-gods sent speedily unto Odin to beseech him to become once again their great chief ruler.

So were the Asas and Vans reconciled, but on the day of Ragnarok, when Suttung comes forth to wreak vengeance, the wise Vans shall depart from Asgard.

Soon after Odin had returned to sit supreme again upon his throne, the giants made vain attempt to overcome the gods, but great punishment was meted out to them for their presumption. Many were slain, and those that survived were driven back to Jotun-heim. Then peace unbroken reigned in Asgard. In Midgard, too, was peace restored, and men laid down their arms, weary with fighting.

Odin then, remembering the evil wrought by the Hag of Iarnvid, issued decrees which condemned magic and the practice of black sorcery. The great sacrifices made by evil men did he also condemn, and he made known that not only by the quantity of offerings would the gods be appeased or the wicked recommended before the

[p. 89]

[paragraph continues] Thingstead of the Lower World. Those of his chosen warriors who were borne by the Valkyries to his place of exile were brought unto Asgard to share the joys of Valhal.

So ended the first great war in the world. But the dread effects of Loke's evil had not yet their end.

When Mimer was slain, the fount of wisdom was without a watchman, and Ygdrasil, the World-tree, ceased to draw sustenance therefrom so that it began to wither. Many leaves faded, and its branches knew swift decay.

The seven sons of Mimer, who were guardians of the seven months of change, [*1] fell into deep stupor in their golden hall, which was heaped with great treasure. Clad in splendid robes, they lay upon the floor wrapped in magic sleep. Sindre-Dvalin was there in the midst; his brothers were about him. Mortals who have penetrated Hela and reached Mimer's realm have beheld them lying asleep beside their treasure, but they feared to enter; for if anyone touched the robes, or sought to be possessed of the gold, his hand and his arm would wither.

The Seven Sleepers shall awake not, as mortals have been told, until Ragnarok, "the Dusk of the Gods". When Heimdal blows a thunder blast from Gjallarhorn on the day of the Last Battle, the sons of Mimer shall start from sleep. They shall then arm themselves and issue forth. On the wall have mortals beheld suspended and bright, seven long swords which none save the sons of Mimer can wield.

Footnotes

^89:1 These are St. Swithin's mythical predecessors. The ancient belief was that if it rained on "the day of the Seven Sleepers" there would be rain for seven weeks thereafter.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 90]

  

CHAPTER X

  

Loke's Evil Progeny

Ironwood Brood--The Midgard-Serpent, Hel, and the Wolf--Odin's Acts of Vengeance--The Binding of Fenrer--Its Silk-like Chain--The Gulf of Black Grief--Its Island--How Tyr lost his Hand--Wolf-River Von--The Great Watchdog--Loke's Taunts--His Doom foretold--Human Sacrifices--The Runes of Tyr--Warriors' Sword Charm--Commander of the Valkyries.

Now by divination did Odin come to know that in Ironwood the Hag, Angerboda (Gulveig-Hoder) was rearing the dread progeny of Loke with purpose to bring disaster to the gods. Three monster children there were-Fenrer, the wolf; Jormungand, the Midgard serpent; and Hel. From these the Trolls are sprung.

Together the gods took counsel, and a Vala revealed dimly the fate that would be theirs if these monsters were not overcome, for the wolf, it was foretold, would slay Odin, Thor would fall in combat with the serpent, and Hel would come with the hosts of destruction against the gods and men.

So it was deemed of great import that the foul children of Loke and Angerboda should be brought to Asgard, and by Odin was Hermod sent to Ironwood to take them captive. That he did right speedily, bringing them one by one.

When Odin beheld the foul serpent, which was yet young, but of great length and very fierce, he seized it in his wrath and flung it far over the walls of Asgard.

[p. 91]

[paragraph continues] Yet by reason of its terrible weight it did not pass beyond the world's edge, but fell into the depths of Ocean, where in after-days it grew and grew until it encircled the world of men. There on the sea bottom it lies, holding its tail in its mouth. When it shakes itself the waves rise in great fury and surge high upon the world's shores.

Next came Hel, and foul was she of aspect, for one-half of her body was of hue like to raw flesh, while the other was livid and horrible. In wrath did Odin seize her also, and he flung her afar. Beyond the edge of Ocean she went, falling through space, until she reached the black depths of Nifel-hel. There in the realms of torture became she a queen.

High are the walls and strongly barred the gates of her habitation, which is named Hel-heim and also Elvidner, the Place of Storm. The doomed have terror of her fearsome countenance, and of the place where she sits. About her are her servants, who do her will. Delay is her man servant and Slowness her maid servant; Hunger waits at her table, and her knife is Starvation. The threshold of Hel's home is Precipice, her bed is Care, while Burning Anguish forms the hangings of her apartment.

Unto Elvidner, as it hath been told, went the doomed ere they were committed to the realms of torture. By Hel were their punishments ordered according to the judgments passed upon them. And especially to her came trembling, warmen who died without valour and were unworthy, as did also those who were traitors in the hour of trial.

Now when the wolf Fenrer was brought to Odin, he sought not to destroy it. Indeed it was reared by the gods in Asgard; but when it grew large, it became

[p. 92]

so fierce that none save brave Tyr had courage to feed it. The day fell when Odin perceived that the wolf must needs be overcome, or else it would devour him. So prodigiously did it increase that there was terror in Asgard.

Then the gods caused to be made an iron chain which was named Leding. Tyr bore it to Fenrer, who knew well its purpose. Without resistance was it bound, and when that was done the gods were well pleased. Then rose Fenrer to struggle with the chain, which it snapped right speedily. So the wolf again went free, and grew more ferocious than ever.

Another chain, which was named Dromi, was thereafterwards made by the artisans of the gods. It had double the strength of Leding. Then went Tyr to the fierce wolf, and constrained it to be bound.

"If this chain by thee is burst," Tyr said, "then will thy mighty strength be proved indeed."

Well did the wolf know that the second chain was more powerful than the first, and that it could not easily be snapped. But much had Fenrer grown in bulk and in strength after Leding was broken. So the monster lay down, and, although somewhat afraid, allowed Tyr to fetter its legs. . . . The gods stood nigh and deemed the wolf secure forever. . . . They saw it rise and struggle fiercely without avail. Then it rolled upon the ground in monstrous strife, until at length the chain burst asunder and Fenrer was again free. More fierce than ever, and more terrible did the wolf become.

Thus had origin the proverb that men use in dire straits when they know that wondrous efforts must needs be made: "I must now get loose from Leding, and burst free out of Dromi".

In despair were the gods when they saw Fenrer

[p. 93]

again at liberty, and they feared he would never be bound.

Then did Odin give to Hermod his horse Sleipner, and him did the wise god send unto the Underworld, so that he might prevail upon the dark artisans of the gods to fashion the cord Gleipner, "the devourer".

Readily indeed did the cunning workers give Odin their service. Soft as silk was the cord they made, and light as air. When it was cast down it made no noise. Of six things was it made:

A mountain's root,
 A bear's sinews,
 The breath of fish,
 A cat's footfall,
 A woman's beard,
 The spittle of birds.

"Of all these things thou mayest not have heard before," a skald has said, "yet a mountain hath no roots, fish breathe not, and cats make no noise when they run. Women have no beards, as thou hast seen.

Soft and smooth was the cord indeed but yet of exceeding great strength. Hermod bore it to Asgard with great speed, and by Odin was he thanked for his service.

Then did the gods challenge Fenrer to a supreme trial of strength. To the depths of Nifel-hel they went, and to the Gulf Amsvartner, which means "black grief". In the gulf is an island, and on the island a misty grove, with trees shaped from jets of water sent forth by boiling springs.

To the island did the gods take Fenrer, and they showed him there the cord Gleipner. Each of them in turn tried its strength but could not snap it.

[p. 94]

"None but thee, O Fenrer, can break cord," Odin said.

The wolf answered: "Methinks no great fame can come to me from breaking such a cord, so light and slender does it seem."

Then with fierce eyes it spake thus: "If the cord is made with magic cunning, although it seems slender, never shall I permit it to bind my feet."

The gods answered, and said: "Surely Fenrer can burst asunder a cord both silken and light, when it hath already severed chains of iron."

The wolf made no answer, watching them sullenly with fiery eyes.

"If thou canst break this cord," Odin said, "then shall the gods know that they have no cause to fear thee, and then may well set thee at liberty."

The wolf answered sullenly, and said: "Much I fear that if I am fettered, and cannot free myself, thou shalt not haste to unloose me. Loath indeed am I to be bound with this cord. But I am not without courage. Know now that I shall give consent to be bound if a god but place his hand in my mouth, as a sure undertaking that ye practise no deceit towards me."

At one another the gods looked in silence. No choice had they between two evils, and they knew that the wolf must needs be bound.

Then stepped forth brave Tyr, the valiant god without fear, and between the fierce jaws of the monster wolf he placed his strong right hand. Thereupon the gods bound Fenrer with the soft silk-like cord of magic power. Securely they tied him; his legs they fettered so that he could not rise.

Holding Tyr's right hand in its jaws, the wolf then began to struggle with purpose to break free from the

[p. 95]

magic bonds. Great wrath possessed its heart because its efforts were vain. No loop could be displaced, nor knot unloosed. On its back and on its side it struggled in vain, for the more it sought to be free, the tighter became the cords. Blood streamed from Tyr's hand, and in the end Fenrer gnawed it off at the wrist.

When the gods perceived that the wolf was bound indeed, all of them save Tyr shook with great laughter.

A gallow-chain, named Gelgja, was then fixed to the cord, and the gods drew it through a black rock named Gjoll, which was sunk deep in the earth. The other end of the cord they tied to Thviti, a great boulder, which was buried still deeper. The wolf was then so well secured that it could not move. Yet it snapped its jaws, endeavouring to sever chains and cord; and, perceiving this, the gods thrust in its evil mouth a great sword. It pierced the under jaw up to the very hilt, and the point touched the monster's palate.

Then did the wolf's struggles come to an end, and horribly did it howl. Foam streamed from its mouth, and a roaring cascade began to fall, which ever after fed the great and turbulent River Von.

To guard the island of the Gulf of Black Grief the gods bound there, nigh to Loke's monster son, the great watchdog Garm, which is greater than Hate-Managarm, the moon devourer, so that it might bark with loud alarm if Fenrer broke free. There, too, beside the fettered wolf, was Loke bound in after days.

Now when Loke fell to dispute with Tyr he said: "Thy two hands thou canst not use, since thy right one was taken from thee by the wolf."

To him did Tyr make answer: "A hand I lack, but thou, O Loke, dost lack a good reputation. That is indeed a great defect. But the wolf fares not well.

[p. 96]

[paragraph continues] On the island of the Gulf of Black Grief it shall pine, in fetters until the world's end."

Loke was angered and spoke bitterly. "Thy wife", he said, "loves me."

Frey cried: "Silence, thou mischief maker! I see Fenrer, thy offspring, lying fettered at the source of Von, where it shall remain until the gods perish and all things have end. If thy tongue is not silent, then shalt thou be bound also."

It was then that Loke taunted Frey for giving unto the giant Gymer the Sword of Victory as a gift for Gerd.

Wroth was Bygver, who served Frey, when he heard the words that Loke uttered. He it was who ground the barley for those who give honour to his master, the god of harvests.

"Were I the honoured Frey," he said unto Loke, "I would grind thee finer than sand, thou evil crow! I would crush thee limb by limb."

But Loke turned, with wrinkling lips and cold disdain, and said: "What child is this? What parasite starts up before me? Ever in Frey's hearing he clatters from under the millstone."

"My name is Bygver," the servant answered, "and by gods and men am I called nimble."

Loke answered: "Be silent, Bygver! never couldst thou divide fairly food between men. Ugly indeed is thy slave wife Beyla, who is ever filthy with dust and dirt."

Valiant was Tyr, whose sire was Odin and whose mother was a beauteous giantess of the deep. Brave men honoured him, and by Saxons was he called Saxnot. With Odin did heroes name him ere they entered battle, and when they were victorious they offered up to Tyr burnt sacrifices of war prisoners. On earth his temple

[p. 97]

symbol was the sun-flashing sword which he wielded, and on the swords of warriors were his runes graven. Thus hath a skald sung:

The runes of Tyr give victory--
 And these we needs must lilt
 When on the guard a sword we rist,
 Or on the blazing hilt.
 When we the magic words engrave,
 Twice name we Tyr, the wise, the brave.

Tyr was commander of Odin's wish maidens, the Valkyries, who bore to Valhal the sword-slain battle warriors.

With great Thor did Tyr go forth when he contended against the giant Hymer and the Midgard serpent. Of that great enterprise the story must now be told.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 98]

  

CHAPTER XI

  

Thor's Great Fishing

The Ocean Storm-god--His Hall--The Brewing Kettle--Ran and her Net--Her Nine Daughters--Thor and Tyr seek Hymer's Kettle--The Friendly Giantess--The Fisher of Whales--A Great Feast--Giant marvels at Thor--The Midgard Serpent--A Dread Conflict--Hymer's Terror--How Thor was baffled--The Broken Goblet--Hymer's Kettle captured--Flight of Thor and Tyr--A Running Battle--Mead for the Feast.

AeGIR, the Ocean Storm-god, had long heard of the fame and wisdom of Odin and his Asa clan, and there fell a day when he went to visit them. Thus it came that vows of lasting friendship were sworn between them. The gods were in due season invited to a harvest-end feast in the dwelling of the storm-god in the midst of the Western Sea, and thither they journeyed together. It was from Aegir's hall that Thor and Tyr set forth to do valiant deeds in the realm of the giant Hymer.

The kingdom of Aegir is beyond Noatun, the safe ship haven of the god Njord, which ever had peace save when it was visited by Skade, "the stormy one". A fierce and aged giant is Aegir, with long and foam-white beard, and black is his helmet. When he rises in the midst of Ocean, cold-hearted and turbulent, he shatters fair vessels in his wrath. Many ships has Angerboda, Hag of Ironwood, driven by her wild easterly winds into the very jaws of Aegir.

In Aegir's hall gold is used for fire, and his brewing kettles seethe and boll like stormy seas. His wife is

[p. 99]

[paragraph continues] Ran, the fair traitress. She is possessed of a great net, in which she catches seafarers when their ships are broken. So are men "drowned to Ran". At the sea bottom is her home, which gleams phosphorescent and golden; its roof is of silver and sun-gemmed azure. Nigh is it unto the House of Death. Eager is Ran to make captives, and those who would win her favour must needs, when they are drawn down to her, take with them offerings of gold, for she loves treasure, and her hoard is great. To those whom she receives without anger she offers a seat and a bed.

Nine giant maids are the chief daughters of Ran, and these are the mothers of Heimdal, the shining sentinel of beauteous Bif-rost. In gowns of blue they go forth. They have foam-white veils, and their locks are pale as sea froth. The sea maidens are ever at Aegir's command, and by him are they sent abroad to be ship-tossing billows. Great rocks they love to scatter and throw down, and the shoreland they devour.

These giant maids at the beginning ground Ymer's body on the World-mill. And ever do they turn the great mill at the sea bottom. Angeyja and Eyrgjafa grind mould; Jarnsaxa is the crusher of the iron which comes from clay and the sea; Imder, Gjalp, and Greip are fire maids, for from the World-mill is fire sparked forth, and there is fire in the sea; Eistla, Eyrgjafa, and Ulfrun are also at work like the others. The sire of Gjalp and Greip was Geirrod, the fire-giant.

Now when Aegir went to Asgard he was received by Odin and the other gods with pomp and in state. Together they drank mead, ancient and sweet, in spacious Valhal, which was adorned with burnished shields and made bright by shining swords. High sat the gods in their doom seats, and in full grandeur. By Bragi's side

[p. 100]

was Aegir, and the sweet-voiced divine poet sang of Idun and her apples of immortal youth, and of Thjasse's death, and of how Odin took from Suttung's dwelling the skaldic-mead which Ivalde had stolen. Pleasant were the tales to Aegir, and the gods, as we have told, he besought to visit him in his Ocean kingdom.

Thither at autumn equinox went Odin and his Asa clan to drink mead and hear ancient tales and the singing of skalds. But of mead there was not sufficient, because Aegir was in need of a brewing kettle large enough to give due hospitality to the gods. He besought Thor to fetch the greatest kettle in the nine worlds; but nor Asa nor Vana-gods knew where it could be found until Tyr spake and said:

"Hymer, the dog-headed, my foster-father, hath the great kettle, which is exceedingly strong and a mile in depth. His dwelling is beyond the Rivers Elivagar, nigh to the borders of Nifel-heim."

"Thinkest thou that the kettle can be captured?" asked Thor.

"Yes," Tyr answered, "by stratagem it may be procured."

Then took Thor and Tyr the guise of young men, and they set forth in the thunder-god's chariot drawn by the two goats Tanngnjoster and Tanngrisner over ocean and through air. Nearly all day did they travel thus until they came unto the dwelling of Orvandel-Egil. There did Thor leave the horn-strong goats and his sublime car.

Across Elivagar they went, and past the vast fishing ground of Hymer, where he is wont to catch whales on great hooks. Then a great distance journeyed the gods on foot towards Hymer's dwelling through dense mountain woods and past dismal rocky caverns where dwell the fierce giants and monsters of Hymer's clan.

[p. 101]

When they came to their journey's end, they entered the king giant's great stronghold, and there Tyr saw his grandmother--a giantess with numerous heads, who was fierce and awesome to behold. But his mother, who had great beauty, brought them mead to drink. When they were refreshed and strong again, she bade them hide behind a great post at the gable end, and beneath the Kettles of Hymer; because, as she warned them, the giant was wont to give ill treatment to strangers who came nigh to his dwelling.

At nightfall Thor and Tyr heard a mighty shout which was raised by the giant's servants. Whereat Hymer entered, carrying the whales he had caught. His long beard was white with hoar frost.

"Welcome art thou, indeed, O Hymer," his wife said. "My son, for whom I have long waited, has come to thy hall, and with him is one who is. an enemy of the giants and a friend of men. Behind yonder gable post have they with cunning concealed themselves."

Hymer was ill-pleased, and he turned fiercely towards the post, which suddenly went to pieces before his piercing gaze. Thereat the beam above it broke, and the Kettles fell down. Seven of them were thus broken, but one was so large and so strong that it was left whole, although it sank deep in the floor.

Forth then came Tyr and Thor. The giant had no pleasure in receiving them, but he bade them be seated at his table.

A great feast did he cause to be prepared. Three oxen were slain and roasted, and placed before the giant and the gods. Two of these did Thor eat, for he sought great strength. If the giant was angry before, he was still more angry when the meal was ended, for it was his purpose to slay his guests, as was his wont, if they failed

[p. 102]

to eat an equal share with him; but in this he was indeed thwarted.

Extravagant is our fare," Hymer growled n his displeasure; "on the morrow we must eat of fish."

Then to bed went they all, and sound was their sleep throughout the night.

At dawn Thor rose, and from the window he perceived that the giant was making ready his boat to go fishing. Hastily did the Asa-god dress himself. He placed his great hammer in his belt. He went towards the shore, and then he besought the giant to allow him to row with him in the great boat.

Hymer looked down upon him with contempt, and said: "Too small and frail art thou to be of help to me; besides, I row so far and stay at sea so long, that thou wouldst be chilled to death."

Thor answered: "I shall row as far as thou hast need of me, as far from land as is thy desire. Nor am I certain which of us twain would wish to return first."

The thunder-god was filled with wrath against the ice-giant because of his presumption, and was minded to strike him down with his hammer; but he remembered that he had need of all his strength elsewhere, and must not do aught to lessen it.

"What bait hast thou for me?" asked Thor.

Hymer answered with surly voice: "If thou wouldst fish, find thine own bait."

That Thor did with impatience. He hastened towards the giant's herd of great cattle, and seizing the largest bull, named Himinbrjoter, which signified "sky-cleaver", he snatched off its head and carried it towards the shore. Hymer watched him and received him in silence, and together they entered the boat and put to sea.

[p. 103]

Both then seized the great billow-raising oars. At the bow rowed Hymer, and Thor was aft. So strongly did the Asa-god pull that the boat went through the water with great swiftness, whereat the giant was amazed. Endeavour as he might, putting forth his utmost strength, Hymer could not pull with half the strength of the Asa-god, who was still in youthful guise.

The giant at length grew weary, and when they reached the grounds where he was wont to catch flat fish, he bade his companion cease rowing. But that Thor refused to do.

"We have not yet," he said, "gone far enough to sea.

Soon they came to the grounds where whales are caught, and again the giant bade Thor to take rest, but he would not consent to do so.

"We must needs, Thor said, go much farther yet."

Farther and farther out to sea they rowed with exceeding great speed. Then was the cold heart of Hymer filled with sharp alarm.

"If we stop not now," he cried, "we shall be in danger of the dread Midgard serpent."

But Thor refused to pause, and rowed stronger and faster than before. Not once nor twice did Hymer, resting wearily on his oars, remonstrate with him, but in vain. Far out to sea the boat still sped, and rapid and strong were the oarsweeps of Thor. Nor did he pause until they were a great distance from land.

Then began the fishing. Hymer baited his hooks, and cast his line in the deep waters. Ere long he caught two great whales, and hauled them aboard. His eyes were bright with pleasure, and he turned towards Thor and challenged him to do as well.

[p. 104]

Then did the great thunder-god get ready his fishing tackle, which was of great strength. An immense hook he baited with the head of Hymer's bull. Into the deep waters he flung his line, which, as it splashed, raised big billows, and he ran it out until the bait was dragged along the floor of the ocean.

Now right below the giant's boat lay the Midgard serpent, all slimy and horrible, on the sea bottom, with its mouth clutching the tail of its world-encircling body. When that great monster beheld the bait it was deceived, not perceiving that Thor's hook was within. Greedily it seized the bull's head and sought to devour it. Then did the great hook sink deep into its throat and stick there. Tortured was the serpent with terrible agony, and it began to writhe violently to be free; but its struggle was without avail. So the line it tugged fiercely to draw angler and boat beneath the waves.

But greater than the serpent's was the strength of Thor. With both hands the god grasped the line, and against the side of the boat he placed his feet and began to pull, twisting the line round the oar pins as he did so, and now and again making it fast. Violently rocked the boat, and the waves rose high, as the great Midgard serpent struggled with the thunder-god.

But Thor put forth his entire divine strength and he grew in stature as he pulled the line. At length his feet went through the boat's side, as it tilted over, and they reached to the ocean floor. Harder and harder he pulled, and unwillingly the serpent, stung with fierce pain, was hauled through the deep, until its monstrous head came in sight.

Awesome was the spectacle to Hymer, nor can words picture it. With fierce wrath did the thunder-god dart fiery looks at the serpent, while the great monster tossed

 

Click to enlarge
THOR
 From the statue by B. E. Fogelberg

 

[p. 105]

on high its terrible head and spouted floods of venom upon him.

Hymer trembled with fear; his face was white as mountain snow. Scarce could he look upon the ferocious serpent, for ghastly it was, and bearded and venom-spotted. Great waves washed over the gunwale, and the giant feared that the boat would be swamped.

Still Thor struggled with the fierce monster until he dragged its head close to the edge of the boat. Then, twisting the line round the oar pin, he seized his great hammer and struck a mighty blow on the serpent's head.

The mountains shook with thunder, the caves howled loud, the ocean trembled with violence, and the whole world shrank together, but the Midgard serpent was not yet killed.

Thor prepared to strike another great blow, but Hymer in his fear cut the line, whereat the writhing monster sank back into the deep. The waves tossed high and the boat plunged with them.

Angrily Thor turned upon Hymer, and with his great right fist struck him a resounding blow. Headlong plunged the giant into the sea, but speedily and in great fear he scrambled back again into the boat. Yet if his fear of the serpent was great, no less was his fear of Thor.

Then set they to row back, and the boat went speedily. Thor spake not; he sat in sullen silence. Deep indeed was his wrath because he had slain not the serpent which ever threatened the gods in Asgard.

When the shore was reached the giant leapt out. Proudly he flung the two whales over his shoulder. But Thor carried the great boat, and went with it to the giant's stronghold.

They entered the castle. They sat down with Tyr

[p. 106]

beside them. Ill at ease was the giant because of Thor's great deeds, and him did he challenge to perform another feat of strength. He brought forth a goblet, and asked him to break it. Without rising from his seat, Thor flung it violently against a post, which was shattered in pieces; but the goblet remained whole, and it was brought back to the giant, who smiled well content.

Then Tyr's mother, whispering to Thor, bade him fling the goblet at Hymer's forehead, which was harder than aught else there. Thor did that right speedily. He seized the goblet, and struck the giant with it midway between his eyes. Nor broken was the giant's head, although the goblet fell shivered into small pieces on the table before him.

"A great treasure have I lost," Hymer cried. "Hot was the drink that came from my strong goblet."

The giant's heart was filled with anger against Thor, and him he would fain put to shame. So he challenged the Asa-god once again.

"One feat of strength remains for thee yet to do, thou boastful one," cried Hymer. "Seize yonder great kettle and carry it forth from my dwelling."

Tyr rose eagerly and ran to lift the kettle, which the gods waited for in Aegir's hall; but in vain did he try to lift it. Twice he made endeavour without avail.

Then did Thor seize the kettle. He grasped it at the edge and shook it violently. Then he began to lift it. So heavy was it, and so great was the strength of Thor, that his feet went through the floor.

Hymer watched him with angry eyes, fearing he would take with him the great treasure. That was what Thor did, for he lifted the kettle first upon his shoulder and then upon his head, while the rings fell round his feet.

Then he darted outside, and Tyr went with him.

[p. 107]

[paragraph continues] Nor did they stay to await the giant, but right speedily they hastened on their way. Thor took also with him Hymer's great boat.

A great distance did the gods journey through the wooded mountain recesses, and then behind them there rose a great clamour. Hymer was hastening in pursuit. From the rocky caverns his foul and strange-headed clan were issuing forth, and following fast as well. They bellowed like winter tempests, and from hill to hill cliff their voices rang. Trees groaned and were bowed down, and the earth shook.

Thor looked back, and when he beheld the host pursuing him he put down the boat and the kettle, and seized his hammer, Mjolner. That murderous weapon did he fling against the giants, and they were mowed down by it as oat straw is by a scythe. Not until he had slain all those who fled not did Thor swing high the boat and the kettle upon his shoulders, and with Tyr again pursue his way.

Elivagar they could not have crossed in safety had they not had Hymer's boat, for the waves ran high because of the violent writhings of the Midgard serpent as it lay wounded by hook and hammer on the rumbling floor of Ocean.

In due time did Thor reach the hall of Aegir with the great kettle of Hymer. Then was brewed sufficient ale for the feast of harvest-end, and host and guests were made merry.

But Thor rejoiced most because of the blow he had struck the great Midgard serpent. For thus was he avenged upon it for causing his shame in the dwelling of the giant Utgard-Loke, who had so cunningly deceived him. Of that, his most strange adventure, the tale must next be told.

[p. 108]

  

Thor's Fishing

On the dark bottom of the great salt lake
 Imprisoned lay the giant snake,
 With naught his sullen sleep to break.

Huge whales disported amorous o'er his neck;
 Little their sports the worm did reck,
 Nor his dark, vengeful thoughts would check.

To move his iron fins he has no power,
 Nor yet to harm the trembling shore,
 With scaly rings he is covered o'er.

His head he seeks 'mid coral rocks to hide,
 Nor e'er hath man his eye espied,
 Nor could its deadly glare abide.

His eyelids half in drowsy stupor close,
 But short and troubled his repose,
 As his quick heavy breathing shows.

Muscles and crabs, and all the shelly race,
 In spacious banks still crowd for place,
 A grisly beard, around his face.

When Midgard's worm his fetters strives to break,
 Riseth the sea, the mountains quake;
 The fiends in Naastrand merry make.

Rejoicing flames from Hecla's caldron flash,
 Huge molten stones with deafening crash
 Fly out,--its scathed sides fire-streams wash.

The affrighted sons of Ask do feel the shock,
 As the worm doth lie and rock,
 And sullen waiteth Ragnarok.

To his foul craving maw naught e'er came ill;
 It never he doth cease to fill;
 Nath' more his hungry pain can still.

[p. 109]

Upward by chance he turns his sleepy eye,
 And, over him suspended nigh,
 The gory head he doth espy.

The serpent taken with his own deceit,
 Suspecting naught the daring cheat,
 Ravenous gulps down the bait.

His leathern jaws the barbed steel compress,
 His ponderous head must leave the abyss;
 Dire was Jormungander's hiss.

In giant coils he writhes his length about,
 Poisonous streams he speweth out,
 But his struggles help him naught.

The mighty Thor knoweth no peer in fight,
 The loathsome worm, his strength despite,
 Now o'ermatched must yield the fight.

His grisly head Thor heaveth o'er the tide,
 No mortal eye the sight may bide,
 The scared waves haste i' th' sands to hide.

As when accursed Naastrand yawns and burns,
 His impious throat 'gainst heaven he turns
 And with his tail the ocean spurns.

The parched sky droops, darkness enwraps the sun;
 Now the matchless strength is shown
 Of the god whom warriors own.

Around his loins he draws his girdle tight,
 His eye with triumph flashes bright,
 The frail boat splits aneath his weight;

The frail boat splits,--but on the ocean's ground
 Thor again hath footing found;
 Within his arms the worm is bound.

[p. 110]

Hymer, who in the strife no part had took,
 But like a trembling aspen shook,
 Rouseth him to avert the stroke.

In the last night, the vala hath decreed
 Thor, in Odin's utmost need,
 To the worm shall bow the head.

Thus, in sunk voice, the craven giant spoke,
 Whilst from his belt a knife he took,
 Forged by dwarfs aneath the rock.

Upon the magic belt straight 'gan to file;
 Thor in bitter scorn to smile;
 Mjolner swang in air the while.

In the worm's front full two-score leagues it fell;
 From Gimle to the realms of hell
 Echoed Jormungander's yell.

The ocean yawned; Thor's lightnings rent the sky;
 Through the storm, the great sun's eye
 Looked out on the fight from high.

Bif-rost i' th' east shone forth in brightest green
 On its top, in snow-white sheen,
 Heimdal at his post was seen.

On the charmed belt the dagger hath no power;
 The star of Jotun-heim 'gan to lour;
 But now, in Asgard's evil hour,

When all his efforts foiled tall Hymer saw,
 Wading to the serpent's maw,
 On the kedge he 'gan to saw.

The sun dismayed, hastened in clouds to hide,
 Heimdal turned his head aside;
 Thor was humbled in his pride.

[p. 111]

The knife prevails, far down beneath the main,
 The serpent, spent with toil and pain,
 To the bottom sank again.

The giant fled, his head 'mid rocks to save,
 Fearfully the god did rave,
 With his lightnings tore the wave.

To madness stung, to think his conquest vain,
 His ire no longer could contain,
 Dared the worm to rise again.

His radiant form to its full height he drew,
 And Mjolner through the billows blue
 Swifter than the fire-bolt flew.

Hoped, yet, the worm had fallen beneath the stroke,
 But the wily child of Loke
 Waits her turn of Ragnarok.

 

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 112]

  

CHAPTER XII

  

The City of Enchantments

Loke flatters the Thunder-god--The Feast of Goats--Loke's Evil Design--Journey in Jotun-heim--Terror of the Night--The Great Giant Skrymer--How Thor was thwarted--The Three Blows with Mjolner--Utgard-Loke's Castle--The Giant's Challenge--Loke and Thjalfe are beaten--Thor and the Drinking Horn--The Great Cat--Thor wrestles with the Hag--He is put to Shame--Utgard--Loke's Revelation--The Ocean, the Midgard Serpent, and Old Age--Wrath of the Thunder-god.

THE Frost-giants were sending forth from Jotun-heim ice-cold blasts which blighted Midgard's fields and arrested all growth. Thor, the friend of man, was made Wroth thereat, and he caused his swift goats to be yoked to his sublime chariot, for he was resolved to punish the Jotuns for their presumption and evil workings. To him came Loke and made flattering address, praising the thunder-god for his valour and good intentions. Thor took Loke with him because he had knowledge of the northern wastes they must needs traverse.

All day they journeyed from Asgard, and at nightfall they came to the dwelling of Orvandel-Egil on the batiks of Elivagar, and fronting the mountains that fortalice icebound Jotun-heim. The fare which Orvandel set before them was meagre because of the plunder accomplished by the giants, so Thor slew his two goats, and when they were skinned he placed their flesh in a kettle.

The feast that was thus prepared was abundant, and

[p. 113]

[paragraph continues] Thor invited Orvandel and his family to eat with Loke and himself, requesting them to throw each flesh-stripped bone into the skins of the goats.

It was Loke's desire to stir up enmity between Thor and Orvandel, who were fast friends, because at the house of the skilful archer did the thunder-god ever rest on his journeyings to and from Jotun-heim. The Evil One made Orvandel's son, Thjalfe, the instrument of his designs. To him Loke whispered at the feast that the marrow of the bones was of exceeding sweetness, and he constrained upon the lad to break open the thigh bone of a goat's hind leg.

Next morning Thor arose and took his hammer, Mjolner, which he waved over the skins filled with loose bones. Then did the great animals spring to life again, but one limped because a hind leg was broken. Thor was moved to immense wrath, and with black brows, and with knuckles that grew white as he clutched the handle of his hammer, he turned upon Orvandel, who was stricken with much fear. The house shook because of Thor's anger. But the evil designs of Loke were put to naught, for Thor consented to take for ransom-servants, Orvandel's son, Thjalfe, the swift runner, and his beauteous daughter, Roskva, the vivacious, and his love for them made stronger the bond of friendship between the thunder-god and Orvandel.

Leaving his chariot and goats behind, Thor went on his journey with Loke and Thjalfe and Roskva. Soon they came to a great mountain forest, and through its immense depths they wandered until night came on. Fleet-footed Thjalfe carried Thor's meat sack, but it was wellnigh empty because it was difficult to hunt the deer in that confusing forest.

In the darkness they all sought a dwelling in which

[p. 114]

to rest, and ere long they found one, The door was exceedingly large, for it opened up the whole side of the house. Within there was a vast hall. Beyond were five long rooms like to mountain caves; but they entered them not. In the outer hall they prepared their couches and lay down to sleep.

In the middle of the night a great earthquake made the forest tremble, so that the house shook with much violence.

Then Thor arose and sought for his affrighted servants a place of greater safety. So they entered together the widest of the cave chambers in the vast house. Thor stood at the door on guard, with his great hammer in his hand, ready to strike down any fierce giant who would dare to enter. The others crept to the farthest end of the chamber, and, trembling greatly, again sought their couches.

Then was heard a rumbling and a roaring that continued long and then ceased awhile, but began again, It was a night of blackness and great terror.

At early dawn Thor went forth, for the clamour had not yet ended. He walked through the forest and found that a great giant lay sleeping on the ground. He snored as loudly as roars the outer sea, and his breath burst forth like wild gusts of tempest. Then did the Asa-gods realize from whence came the clamour which had filled the night with terror.

Around his waist Thor tightened his magic belt so that his great strength was increased, but as he grasped his hammer to strike, the mighty giant awoke, and rose hastily to his feet. High above Thor he towered, so that the thunder-god was filled with amaze at his great bulk and forgot to wield his hammer.

"What is thy name, O giant?" Thor asked.

[p. 115]

"My name is Skrymer," was his answer, and he said: "Thine I need not ask, for I perceive thou art Asa-Thor."

Then the giant looked about him, and sneered: "But what hast thou done with my glove?"

Skrymer stretched forth his hand, and in the midst of the trees he found his glove and picked it up. Then with amazement did Thor perceive that it was the great dwelling in which, with his companions, he had found shelter for the night. The broad cave chamber into which they had crept was the thumb of the giant's glove.

Skrymer besought Thor to take him for his travelling companion through that vast country, and when the Asa-god gave his consent, the giant opened his meat sack and began to munch his morning feast. Thor and his companions did likewise in a place apart.

Now when they had finished their meals and were satisfied, Skrymer said they should put their food together. Thor was willing that such should be done, and the giant thrust all the provisions into his own meat sack, which he threw over his back.

All day long they travelled eastward with great speed, because of the rapid pace of the giant, and when darkness began to fall they rested under the branches of a vast and lofty oak tree. Skrymer said he was weary and must needs sleep, so he flung his meat sack to Thor, and bade him feast with his companions. But Thor found that the sack was bound so securely that he could not untie it. Each knot defied him; not one could he unloose; and struggle as he might, he was unable to slacken any portion of the cord.

Great wrath possessed the Asa-god because of the deceit which had been practised upon him; so, casting

[p. 116]

the sack from him, he sprang up and seized his hammer. He went swiftly towards the giant as he lay snoring heavily, and on his skull struck a mighty blow.

Skrymer awoke, and, rubbing his eyes, asked if a leaf had fallen down from the great oak. On Thor he gazed, and asked him if he had eaten his supper, and was ready for sleep.

Thor made answer gruffly that he was about to lie down, and went towards another tree. But there be found that it was not possible to get sleep, for Skrymer snored so loudly that the woods were shaken with tempest clamour.

Angrily rose the Asa-god, and hastening towards the giant he swung his great hammer and struck him flat on the forehead. So great was the blow that Mjolner sank down to the heft.

Skrymer awoke suddenly and growled: "What hath happened now to disturb my slumber? Did an acorn fall down from the branches? Is that thee, Thor, standing nigh me? How fares it with thee?"

"I have just awakened," was Thor's answer, as he turned, wondering greatly, and again lay down beneath his oak. But he sought not to sleep. He was resolved to be avenged on the giant for his deceit, and because his own rest was broken. As Thor lay there he was convinced that if he dealt but one more blow on the giant's skull he would kill him. So he remained watching and waiting until Skrymer would again fall to sleep. Ere dawn broke his opportunity came, for the giant's loud snoring once more made fearsome clamour in the forest.

Thor arose and tightened his strength-giving belt. His iron gloves he put upon his hands, and seized his mighty hammer. Then he went towards the giant and

[p. 117]

struck so great a blow that Mjolner was buried in one of his temples.

Skrymer sat up, rubbing his eyes. Then he stroked his chin in vacant wonder, and, seeing Thor beside him, said--"Do birds sit above me in the oak branches? Methinks that some moss from a bird's nest fell upon my forehead as I awoke. . . . So thou art also awake, O Thor. . . . The dawn has broken, and it is time to set forth upon your way, for a long journey lies before thee ere thou shalt reach the castle which is called Utgard (outer-ward). Whispers I have heard between thee and thy companions that ye regard me as one of no mean stature, but larger men shalt thou find when thou dost reach Utgard. . . . Wilt thou take from me good advice? When thou comest to Utgard, do not boast overmuch. The courtiers of Utgard-Loke, will not permit of boasting from such insignificant beings as are thou and thy companions. . . . If my advice is not pleasant to thee, O Thor, thou hadst better turn back; and, indeed, that is what thou shouldst do. . . . But if thou wouldst go farther, thy way lies eastward; mine is to the north, towards yonder high mountains. Fare thee well!"

When he had spoken thus, Skrymer flung his meat sack over his shoulder and vanished amidst the trees. Nor was it ever known whether or not Thor desired to meet with him again.

Thor and Loke went eastward upon their way, and with them went Thjalfe and Roskva. They journeyed until midday, when they came to a city in the midst of which was a great ice castle. So lofty were its towers that Thor and those with him had need to bend back their heads to survey it aright. They saw no one nigh to the castle, and its ponderous gate was shut and

[p. 118]

securely locked. In vain did Thor attempt to open it; but being anxious to gain admittance he crept between the bars. The others followed him. They then perceived that the palace door was wide open, and they entered together.

Round the hall many giants of immense stature were seated upon benches. No word was spoken nor greeting given, but Thor and his companions went past, and entering a wide room they stood before King Utgard-Loke in his high throne, and to him they made obeisance. A cold look gave the monarch, nor did he return their salutations. After a long pause he spake with a voice of keen scorn, saying:

"It would be wearisome to have tidings of your long journey. If I be not mistaken the greatest of the striplings who stand before me is the Asa-god Thor."

Upon Thor he gazed intently, and then addressing him, said: "It may be that thou art stronger than thou dost seem. What feats art thou able to perform? Thou must know that no one can remain here who cannot perform deeds which excel those of all other living beings."

Wroth was Thor and made no answer. But Loke spoke and said: "I know a great feat, and am ready to perform it. I can eat quicker than anyone else, and I am now an-hungered and ready to give proof of that against him who may be chosen to contend with me."

"If thou shalt do as thou sayest," Utgard-Loke said, "thou shalt perform a great feat indeed. Let us have trial of it without delay."

The king ordered Loge, one of his men, to come forward to compete with Asa-Loke.

A great trough of meat was prepared, and the two were seated-Loke at one end and Loge at the other.

[p. 119]

[paragraph continues] Then they began to eat with great speed, nor did they falter until they met at the middle. To neither seemed the victory, until it was found that Loge had consumed the bones as well as the flesh, and the trough also, while Loke had eaten but the flesh. So the Asa-god was accounted beaten.

Utgard-Loke then addressed Thjalfe, and asked him what feat he was able to perform, and the young man answered that he was a swift runner. He offered to run a race with anyone whom the monarch would select.

"If thou dost win," Utgard-Loke said, "thou shalt indeed perform a wondrous feat. But come without, for thine opponent awaiteth thee."

The king left his throne, and together they all went to a fine racecourse that lay nigh to the castle walls.

A dwarf named Huge was called forth by Utgard-Loke. Thrice did he run with Thjalfe. At the first contest the dwarf ran so fast that he met the other as he turned back.

"Thou canst run well," the king said to Thjalfe, "but thou must needs be more nimble-legged if thou art to win this contest, for there is no swifter runner than Huge."

At the second trial Thjalfe went speedier, but he was a bowshot space behind the dwarf when that swift runner made pause.

"Indeed thou must needs have greater speed if thou wouldst win the race," said the king to Orvandel's son; "but another chance awaiteth thee. The third trial shall decide the contest."

Again the race was started; but if Thjalfe went swiftly there was more speed in the dwarf, for he reached the goal ere yet his opponent was halfway.

So was Thjalfe vanquished and put to shame.

[p. 120]

Together they all returned to the hall, and the king, turning to Thor, asked him if he could perform any wonderful feats that day. The Asa-god made prompt answer and said: "I shall hold a drinking contest with anyone thou mayest select."

"First," said the king, "thy power must be tested."

To this condition Thor gave his ready consent.

Then came a cupbearer carrying an immense drinking horn, which he gave unto the Asa-god.

"He who trespasseth the laws of this place when at feast," the king said, "must needs drink from that horn. He who is a good drinker can empty it at a single draught. Some men, however, must make two attempts, but it is only the weakest who cannot exhaust it at the third trial."

Now Thor was tortured with exceeding great thirst after his long journey, and at first he deemed the horn not to be too large, although it had great length indeed. To his mouth he raised it, and drank deep, until his thirst was quenched; and he continued drinking until he was forced to cease and lower the horn. With great wonder he then perceived that the liquor seemed not to have diminished at all.

"Thou hast drunken well," the king said, "yet there is naught of which boast can be made. Had I been told that Thor would drink no more when in thirst I would not have believed it. But perhaps it is thy resolve to surpass thyself when thou shalt take the second draught."

Again did the Asa-god raise the horn with firm resolve to empty it. Ill-pleased was he with himself because he deemed he had drunk less than before. But that was not so, for when he had done his utmost the horn could be carried without spilling.

"Thou dost spare thyself indeed," the king exclaimed;

[p. 121]

[paragraph continues] "but if thou art resolved to empty the horn thou must pull with greater strength at thy third trial. If more skill at this feat is not shown by thee, methinks," the king added with scorn, "thou shalt be accounted a lesser man here than thou seemest to be among the gods in Asgard."

Angry was Thor because of the words which Utgard-Loke spake, and a third time he seized the horn and put forth all his power to empty it; but long and deep as he drank, be seemed not to exhaust it any.

He laid it down, and then he perceived that the liquor was slightly lower than before.

"No further trial shall I make," he said, as he thrust the horn back to the cupbearer.

"Ha! thou'rt of less strength than we deemed thee to be," exclaimed Utgard-Loke, smiling grimly at the thwarted Asa-god. "Yet, mayhap, thou wouldst try another feat to prove thy power, although I am assured that thou shalt have no better success."

But Thor was ready for any other trial. "I shall contend with whom thou wilt," he said. "Although I have failed with the horn, yet can I assure thee that the draughts which I have taken would not be counted meagre in Asgard."

"There is a trivial game which we play betimes," the king said, "but I would not have asked thee to perform it, because among us here it is only an exercise for children. Yet as thou art, it seems, not of so great power as we deemed heretofore, thou hadst better try it. The game is merely to lift my cat from the floor."

As he spake, a big grey cat leapt forward and sat before the throne. Thor at once went towards it, and grasped it firmly, placing his hands under its body. Then he attempted to lift the cat, but it bent its great

[p. 122]

back, and although he put forth all his strength Thor could lift but one paw from the floor.

Knowing well that he could not do better, he made no farther attempt.

"Thou hast failed, as I foresaw thou wouldst," the king said. "The cat is too large for Thor, who is weakly and small compared with the men of my race.

"Say what thou wilt," cried Thor, whose wrath was great because of the shame put upon him, "but I now challenge anyone here to wrestle with me whom ye call weakly and small."

Utgard-Loke looked calmly about him, and answered with chilling voice: "I see no one nigh me who would not deem it an unworthy thing to wrestle with Thor. . . . But let the old woman, my nurse, whose name is Elle, be called, and if Thor would perforce wrestle, let him try his strength against hers. Many a stronger man than he hath Elle thrown down."

Then came into the hall an aged woman, who was toothless and heavily wrinkled. Her back was bent, and she walked slowly. Utgard-Loke bade her wrestle with Thor.

There is little to tell. The firmer Thor clutched her the mightier she became; the stronger his grip, the more securely did she stand. The struggle was long and violent, and although Thor realized ere long that he could. not overcome the Hag, his endeavour was to prevent her from casting him down. Yet was he at length unable to keep his footing, and he was brought to his knee.

Then did Utgard-Loke bid the wrestlers to cease, and walking forward he placed himself between them. To Thor he said: "Thou canst not ask now to wrestle with

[p. 123]

anyone else in the hall, for the hour is late and darkness is falling."

Nor did he seem to be eager that Thor should have further trial of skill.

At dawn of next day Thor and his companions arose and prepared to take their departure from the castle. Food and drink in plenty were placed before them, and they made hearty feast. Then went they to take leave of the king, and Utgard-Loke walked with them until they were without the gate of the city. Ere they bade one another farewell, the king asked Thor if he was satisfied with his journey and the results thereof, and whether there were any others among the Asa-gods who were stronger than he.

"I cannot deny," Thor said, "that great shame has been put upon me. But what pains me most is that thou shouldst call me a man of little account."

"Be not mistaken," the king said, "for we hold thee in greater account than thou dost deem. Now must the truth be told, seeing thou art no longer in the city which, if my will shall prevail, thou must never enter again. This I swear: if I had known that thy strength was so mighty thou shouldst never have been allowed to come through the castle gate. Nigh, indeed, didst thou bring me unto a great disaster.

"Thou mayest now know," the king continued, "that I have all along deceived thee greatly with my illusions."

Thor stared with much amaze at Utgard-Loke, who spake thus:

"First, it was I whom thou didst meet with in the forest. My meat sack thou couldst not unloose because I had bound it securely with a rope of iron, and thou couldst not discover how the cunning knots were devised.

"Thrice thou didst strike me with thy great hammer.

[p. 124]

[paragraph continues] From any of these blows of thine I would have received speedy death, but thee I deceived by creating an illusion and placing betwixt thee and me a great rocky mountain, which thou didst cleave with thy blows. On thy way back thou shalt see it, and the three broad valleys thou didst make, for thrice thou didst cut it asunder.

"In my palace I did also deceive thee with illusions. Asa-Loke, like hunger, devoured speedily all that was placed before him; but his opponent Loge, who is Fire, consumed not only the food, but the bones also, and the trough.

"Huge the dwarf, with whom Thjalfe ran, is Thought. Swift indeed must the runner be who is more speedy than Thought.

"Then came thine own feats, O mighty Thor. When thou didst attempt to drain the horn, thou didst perform a feat so wonderful, that if I had not beheld it with mine own eyes I should ne'er have believed it to be possible. For the horn was long, and one end reached out to the sea, which thou didst not perceive, and the sea filled it. When thou dost come to the shore thou shalt realize how much thou hast made the sea to shrink, for thy great draughts have caused what men shall henceforward call the ebb.

"No less marvellous was thy struggle with the great cat. Much fear possessed us when we saw thee lift but a single paw from the floor, because the cat was no other than the Midgard serpent, which encircles the earth. So high didst thou lift him that his head reached unto heaven.

"Great indeed was thy feat also when thou didst contend against the old woman, my nurse. No man ever before prevailed so wrestling, nor shall any man ever again do as thou hast done, for Elle is Old Age,

[p. 125]

and sooner or later she lays low all who await her coming.

Still was Thor silent, for he was filled with great wonder by reason of the things of which Utgard-Loke spake to him.

"Now, O Thor," the king said, "we are about to part. This must I say unto you. It were better that we two should never again meet; but if thou shouldst come against me any more I must needs defend myself with illusions as I have already done, so that thou shalt never seem to thyself to prevail."

When the king spake thus he vanished from before the eyes of Thor and his companions.

Then was the thunder-god moved to great wrath, because he had been deceived, and seizing his mighty hammer he turned towards the city again to wreak his vengeance upon Utgard-Loke and his people. But he found that city and castle had vanished, and he beheld nothing save a broad level plain.

So with his companions Thor then went gloomily on his way, and pondering over what had happened he resolved to combat with the Midgard serpent from Hymer's boat. And of this adventure the tale has been told, but of how Thor lost his great hammer and the strange adventure that ensued, the story follows.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 126]

  

CHAPTER XIII

  

Thor in Peril

The Theft of Mjolner--Loke's Mission--Thrym demands Freyja--The Wrath of the Goddess--Thor disguised--Giant Bridegroom's Amaze--A Hungry Bride--The Hammer recovered --Vengeance of Thor--Loke in Geirrod's Castle--Plot to capture Thor--Grid intervenes--Vidar the Silent--Crossing Elivagar--The High Flood--Giant Maid is punished--Geirrod's Flaming Javelin--Thunder-god's Victory

Now there was a king of giants whose name was Thrym, and he desired to have Freyja, the beauteous Asa-goddess, for his bride. A deep plot he laid, nor did the gods become aware of it until a grievous misfortune befell Thor. He was returning with Loke from Jotun-heim, and together they lay down to sleep. In great wrath was the thunder-god when he awoke because he could find not his hammer, Mjolner. He grasped his red beard and shook it, and fear crept over him as he searched around and about, because without his hammer he was powerless to contend against the giants.

When the other awoke, Thor spoke to him, saying: "Listen to me, and I shall tell thee what is known not in heaven nor upon earth--Mjolner is stolen!"

Speedily they took flight towards high Asgard, and to the dwelling of Freyja went they. Thor spake abruptly, and said: "Wilt thou lend thy falcon-guise to me, for my hammer hath been stolen, and I would fain find it."'

"Gladly shall I give it thee, O Thor," Freyja

[p. 127]

answered, "even although it were made of silver; yea, if it were of fine gold thou wouldst have it without delay."

To Loke gave Thor the falcon-guise, and he flew speedily from Asgard to the northern coasts of distant Jotun-heim. Nor did he pause or stay until he reached a high mountain on which sat Thrym, king of giants, twisting bands of gold for his dogs, and anon smoothing the gold mane of his horse.

When he beheld Loke in falcon-guise he said: "How fare the gods, and how fare the elves? Why dost thou come alone unto these shores?"

Loke answered: "Ill fares it with gods and ill fares it with the elves. Hast thou hidden the hammer of Thor? "'

Thrym. answered boldly and with gladness: "I have indeed done so. Nine miles below the ground have I buried Mjolner. Nor shall it ever be recovered or returned unto Thor until I am given the goddess Freyja for my bride."

Having spoken thus he smoothed leisurely the golden mane of his fleet-footed steed, and Loke flew back towards Asgard.

Thor awaited him on the battlements, and when the falcon drew nigh he cried: "Hast thou indeed performed thy mission, O Loke? Tell me what thou knowest ere thou dost descend. What is spoken by one who sits is often of small worth. He who reclines is prone to utter what is untrue."

Loke answered and said: "I have discovered all that needs be known. Thy hammer hath been stolen by Thrym, King of Jotuns, and he hath buried it nine miles down below the mountains. Nor will he deliver it to thee again until Freyja is given him to be his bride."

[p. 128]

Then Thor and Loke went unto Freyja and told her what the giant had said. Impatient, indeed, was the thunder-god, for he feared that if it became known to the Frost-giants that his hammer was lost they would fall upon Asgard and overcome the gods.

"Right speedily thou must don thy bridal attire, O Freyja," Thor exclaimed, "and together shall we hasten unto Jotun-heim."

Freyja was filled with anger, and as she raged she broke her flashing necklace that gave her great beauty. "A love-sick maid, indeed, I would be," she exclaimed, "ere I would hasten to King Thrym."

To the high Thingstead of Asgard went Thor, and the gods assembled there to hold counsel one with another and decide how the hammer should be recovered. To the hall Vingolf went the goddesses, to consult regarding the fate of Freyja.

In the Thingstead, Heimdal, the wise Van, the shining god, spake with foreknowledge and cunning, and thus he advised: "Let Thor be dressed in the bridal robes of Freyja, and let him also don her sparkling necklace, which gives its wearer great beauty. In a woman's dress let Thor go forth, with keys jingling at his waist. His hair must be pleated, and on his breast must be fixed great brooches."

But Thor made protest, and declared that the gods would mock him if he were attired in woman's dress. Ill-pleased was he with Heimdal's words. "Be silent, Thor," Loke exclaimed; "thou knowest well that if thy hammer is found not the Frost-giants will come speedily hither and build over Asgard a dome of ice."

The other gods spake likewise, and Thor consented to be attired as a bride. When this was done, Loke was dressed, at his own desire, as a maid attendant, and

[p. 129]

together they went forth from Asgard in Thor's sublime car. The mountains thundered and fire swept from the heavens over Midgard as Thor journeyed to Jotun-heim.

Thrym was sitting on the mountain top, and to the Jotuns about him he spoke, when he beheld Thor in female-guise coming nigh, saying: "Arise, O giants! let the feast be spread, for Freyja comes hither to be my bride."

Then were driven before him into his yard his red cows with golden horns, and his great black oxen.

"I have great wealth indeed," the king exclaimed; "all that I desire is mine. I lack naught save Freyja."

The feast was made ready, and at the board sat Thor, whom Thrym deemed to be Freyja, and Loke, who was "maid attendant".

Thor had great hunger, and he ate an ox, eight salmon, and all the sweets which had been made ready for the giantesses. Then he drank three great barrels of ancient mead.

Wondering, Thrym sat and watched him. Then he cried: "Hath anyone ever beheld a bride so hungry? Never have I known a maid who ate as Freyja hath eaten, or a woman who ever drank so great a quantity of mead."

Loke, the cunning one, fearing that Thor would be discovered, said: "For eight days hath Freyja fasted, so greatly did she long to come unto Jotun-heim."

Thrym was well pleased to hear what Loke said, and he rose and went towards Thor. He lifted the veil he wore and sought to kiss, but he shrank back suddenly. Indeed he retreated to the hall end, where he cried: "Why are the eyes of Freyja so bright and so fierce? They seem to glow like hot embers."

Then spake cunning Loke again, and said: "Alas!

[p. 130]

[paragraph continues] O Thrym, for eight nights Freyja hath slept not, for she longed to be here with thee in Jotun-heim. Thus are her eyes a-fire."

Thrym's sister then entered, and she went towards Thor humbly and with due respect, and asked to be given golden bridal rings from his fingers.

"Thou shalt gift them to me," she said, "if thou desirest to have my friendship and my love."

But naught did she receive from the angry and impatient god of thunder.

Thrym then desired that the wedding ceremony should be held, but Loke asked that as proof of his friendship, and to complete the bargain the giant had made, Thor's hammer should be laid upon the maiden's lap.

Then did Thrym order that Mjolner be lifted from its hiding place deep in the bowels of the earth.

In Thor's heart there was great laughter when Thrym spoke thus, yet was his mind solemn, and he waited anxiously until Mjolner was laid upon his knees.

A servant came forward with it, and Thor clutched the handle right eagerly. Then he tore off the bridal veil from his face and the woman's dress from about his knees, and sprang upon King Thrym, whom he killed with a single blow. Around the feasting board he went, slaying the guests, nor one would he permit to escape from the hall, so fierce was he with long-restrained wrath.

Thrym's sister, who had begged from Thor the bridal rings, he slew with the others. A blow she received from the hammer instead of golden treasure.

Cunning Loke watched with pleasure the devastation accomplished by the fierce thunder-god as he raged round the hall and through the castle, wreaking his fierce vengeance on the whole clan of Thrym.

[p. 131]

Then together hastened they to where the goats were bound at the home of Orvandel, nor did they pause to rest. Across the heavens was speedily driven the black sublime car. Swiftly o'er mountain and sea it went, blotting out the sparkling stars. Mountains thundered and the wide ocean trembled with fear as the car rolled on. The earth was filled with fire.

Thus did Thor return in triumph unto Asgard, because Mjolner was recovered and the King of Mountain Giants was slain.

But although Loke had served Thor well when his hammer was stolen by Thrym, there came a time when he brought the god of thunder nigh to great misfortune. It was in the days ere the winter war was waged between the Asa-gods and the sons of Ivalde, and the cunning artisans were yet friendly with the dwellers in Asgard.

Loke had gone forth in the falcon-guise of Freyja to pry round Jotun-heim, and especially the castle of King Geirrod, whose daughter he desired for a bride. He flew towards a window, and sat in it while he listened to the words that were being spoken, and surveyed the guests who were there. A servant beheld him with curious eyes, and perceived that he was not a real falcon. So, making cautious approach, he seized Loke and brought him before the king. The eyes of the falcon were still the cunning eyes of Loke, and he was recognized by Geirrod, who demanded ransom ere he would release him. In vain did Loke endeavour to escape. He flapped his wings, he pecked with his beak, but the servant held his claws securely.

Silent was he before Geirrod, and no answer would he make when he was addressed. So to punish him the giant locked him in a chest, in which he was kept for three months. Then was Loke taken forth, and ready

[p. 132]

indeed was he to speak. To Geirrod he confessed who he was, and the giant constrained him to promise, by swearing a binding oath, that he would bring Thor to Jotun-heim and unto that strong castle without his hammer or his belt or his iron gloves. For greatly sought the giant to have the thunder-god in his power.

Loke then flew back to Asgard, and with great cunning he addressed Thor, so that he secured his consent to visit the castle of Geirrod without taking with him his hammer and gloves and his strong belt. For Loke assured Thor that the castle stood on a green and level plain, and that they were invited to attend together a feast of friends.

Thor set forth, and Loke went with him. All day they travelled on their way until they came to the borders of Elivagar in Alf-heim, where dwelt the sons of Ivalde.

There dwelt also in that realm and in the midst of a deep wood a giantess who was friendly towards the gods. Her name was Grid. She was the mother of Odin's son Vidar, the Silent One, whose strength was so mighty that none save Thor was his equal. A great shoe he had; its sole was hard as iron, for it was formed of the cast-off leather scraps of every shoe that was ever made. This son of Grid was born to avenge his father's death. When Odin is slain at Ragnarok, then shall Vidar combat with the wolf Fenrer and tear its jaws asunder. Nor shall Surtur destroy him with his firebrands, for the wood-god perishes never in Nature's deep solitudes.

Now Grid, mother of Vidar, had power to work magic spells, and she possessed a magic rowan wand which was named Gridarvold. When she beheld Thor going unarmed towards Geirrod's castle, she warned him

[p. 133]

that the giant was as cunning and treacherous as a wolf-dog, and dangerous to meet without weapons. So to Thor she gave her magic staff, her belt of strength, and her iron gloves, and when he set out he took with him the sons of Ivalde. Together they travelled in safety until they came to Vimur, which is the greatest of the rivers Elivagar. The clouds drove heavily above them, and hailstones fell around. Wild and mountainous was the country which Loke had said was green and level. There were swift and treacherous eddies in the swollen waters.

But Thor put on the belt of strength which Grid had given him, and in his hand he took her magic staff. Rapidly did the river rise as he entered it with his men. From the mountains icy torrents poured down with increasing strength, and the sons of Ivalde were soon in great peril. They thrust their spears into the shingle as they tried to ford the river, and the clinking of the steel mingled with the sharp screams of the waters. When they were but halfway across a high wave burst out from a great mountain torrent, and the waters rose to Thor's shoulder. The others were swept down towards him; for, perceiving their peril and desiring to be a protection to them, he had chosen the deepest part through which to wade. Orvandel leapt upon Thor's shoulder, and there stood, bending his bow. Loke and the others clung to the belt of Grid, which was about Thor's body. Towards the bank the thunder-god laboured, and when he came nigh to it he beheld, at the torrent's source a daughter of Geirrod, whose name was Gjalp. It was she who, standing high on the hillside, caused the river to increase so that Thor and his followers might be drowned. The angry god seized a boulder and flung it towards her. Sure was his aim, for it struck her heavily, so that

[p. 134]

her back was broken. Thus was the Hag overcome and the torrent stayed.

Then did Thor seize a rowan-tree branch which overhung the river, and with its aid he pulled himself up the bank. Thus had its origin the ancient proverb: "Thor's salvation, the rowan".

Up the steep mountain did the thunder-god climb with all his men. Against them came the giants who sought to destroy Ygdrasil, "the World-tree". Bravely fought Thor, and the arrows of Orvandel sped fast until the horde of giants were put to flight. Speedily did the heroes follow them. They pressed onward and reached Geirrod's castle amidst the clamour and the howling of the storm-giants and the giants that dwell within the caves of the mountains.

When Thor entered Geirrod's hall the giant king cast at him a red-hot flaming javelin from behind a great pillar of wood. But with Grid's iron gloves Thor caught it, and past Orvandel's head he flung it back, so that it went through the pillar and through Geirrod, who was slain; and it passed through the wall of his castle ere it sank deep into the earth.

Then loudly thundered the din of battle in Geirrod's hall, which was shaken to its foundations. With slings and boulders did the giants contend, but from Thor and his men they received their deathblows.

Thus was Geirrod and his clan overcome in dread conflict; but no less terrible was the battle which Thor waged against Hrungner, the stone-giant, the tale of which now follows.

[p. 135]

  

Thor

I am the god Thor,
 I am the war god,
 I am the Thunderer!
 Here in my Northland,
 My fastness and fortress,
 Reign I forever!

Here amid icebergs
 Rule I the nations;
 This is my hammer,
 Mjolner, the mighty
 Giants and sorcerers
 Cannot withstand it!

These are the gauntlets
 Wherewith I wield it
 And hurl it afar off;
 This is my girdle,
 Whenever I brace it
 Strength is redoubled!

The light thou beholdest
 Stream through the heavens,
 In flashes of crimson,
 Is but my red beard
 Blown by the night-wind,
 Affrighting the nations.

Jove is my brother;
 Mine eyes are the lightning;
 The wheels of my chariot
 Roll in the thunder,
 The blows of my hammer
 Ring in the earthquake!

[p. 136]

Force rules the world still,
 Has ruled it, shall rule it;
 Meekness is weakness,
 Strength is triumphant;
 Over the whole earth
 Still is Thor's-day!
                  --Longfellow

 

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 137]

  

CHAPTER XIV

  

The Great Stone Giant

Odin in Jotunheim--Two Swift Steeds--Race to Asgard--The Boastful Giant--His Challenge to Thor--An Island Duel--The Clay Giant--A Lightning Conflict--Thor is wounded--His Son Magni rescues Him--Groa's Incantation--Story of Orvandel's Rescue--The Spell is broken--Odin as the Ferryman--How he taunted Thor--A Divine Comedy.

THOR was in the east battling against the Trolls when Odin went forth from Asgard towards the dwelling of Hrungner, the great Stone giant of Jotun-heim.

Hrungner watched him coming through the air in splendour and beauty, and he cried: "Who cometh towards me? On his head is a helmet of gleaming gold. He rides over ocean and high upon the air. Swift indeed is his mighty steed."

Ere the giant was silent the ruler of Asgard was nigh to him, and he spake proudly. "In all Jotun-heim," Odin said, "there is not a horse that is Sleipner's equal."

Then twitching the reins, he turned Sleipner back towards Asgard, and he rode swifter than the wind.

"Thy steed is fast indeed," the giant bellowed, but my nimble-footed Goldfax (gold mane) hath greater stride."

As he spake, Hrungner leapt upon his horse's back and set out in swift pursuit of the Asa-god. But although he urged Goldfax to hasten, he could not win nigh unto Odin. Yet would the giant pause not in

[p. 138]

his speedy flight, for his heart was afire with ambition to prevail over the rider of Sleipner. Swiftly indeed he rode, and ere he was aware he found himself entering the gates of Asgard over the gate-bridge which had been set down for Odin.

By the gods was he received with hospitality as he demanded. They took him to the great feasting hall, and there he drank ancient mead and sweet. The bowls from which Thor was wont to refresh himself were placed before him, and Freyja filled them. Each of the bowls the giant emptied in turn at a single draught. Indeed, so much did he drink that the mead surged in his veins and his eyes rolled with redness, for he was made drunk. Then was his tongue unloosened, and he gave forth loud boastings.

"Valhal," he cried, "shall be mine. . . . The warrior's hall must I carry away with me to Jotun-heim."

More mead did Freyja pour out to him, filling the bowls of Thor.

Then Hrungner boasted that he would bring utter ruin to Asgard, and cast down its wall and palaces.

"The gods," he cried, "and all that are within the city shall I slay save Freyja and Sif."

As Freyja filled the bowls he said: "Ha! all the mead in Asgard I must consume this day. None shall I leave for the gods."

Weary grew the gods of the braggart giant and his vain boastings, and Thor they named. . . . Immediately Thor was in their midst. Black were the brows of the thunder-god when he beheld Hrungner; white were his knuckles as he clutched his great hammer.

"Who hath permitted this Jotun," Thor roared, "to drink the mead of Asgard? Why doth Freyja pour it forth to him as if she were honouring a feast of gods?"

[p. 139]

Evil was in Hrungner's eyes as he scowled at Thor, "By Odin's wish am I here," he sneered, "and under his protection I remain."

"When thou dost seek to go forth," Thor growled sullenly, "thou mayest regret the invitation."

"Unarmed have I come," Hrungner protested with sudden alarm, "and of little honour would it be to thee, O Asa-Thor, if thou didst slay me now. If thou wouldst fain put thy valour to proof, thee I dare to contend against me on the borders of my kingdom."

Thor cast at him defiant eyes, and the giant was troubled. "Alas!" he cried; "I have done foolishly to come hither, leaving my stone shield and my flint weapon in Jotun-heim. Were I armed, we might well fight. This shall I say unto thee, O Asa-Thor: I would brand thee as a coward if thou didst seek to slay me undefended. . . . I challenge thee to contend with me in an island duel."

Now never before had Thor been challenged thus. For the island duel (Holmgang) which Hrungner desired was fought by dealing blow for blow, and the Asa-god would have the right to strike first because he was challenged by the other. In the contest each would have a shieldbearer. His consent did Thor give to the giant's terms, and in silence they parted.

Through Jotun-heim the duel challenge was gravely debated by the giants, and keen was their desire that Thor should be worsted, because Hrungner was their strongest and greatest warrior, and they feared that if he fell the thunder-god would do them more injury than heretofore.

On an island on the borders of rocky Grjottungard, where Hrungner had his dwelling, the Jotuns made a giant of clay who was in height nine miles, and three

[p. 140]

in breadth between the shoulders. Him they called Mokker-kalfi (Mist-wader), and they gave him a mare's heart. He was shieldbearer to Thor's enemy.

Now Hrungner had a heart of stone; his head was of stone also. Broad and thick was his stone shield, and in his right hand he grasped his great flint weapon, which he swung over his shoulder. A terrible combatant was Hrungner.

To the island duel did Thor set forth. His shieldbearer was his faithful Thjalfe, son of Orvandel, who ran swiftly to the place of combat. To Hrungner he cried:

"Although thy shield is held in front, thou dost stand unprotected, for Thor cometh to attack thee from the earth beneath."

Then did Hrungner cause his shield to be cast down, Defiantly he stood upon it, while with both hands he grasped his great flint weapon.

In fear and trembling was Mokker-kalfi. His mare's heart quaked within him because Thor was coming, and sweat ran from his body in torrents.

Thunder broke forth and lightning flashed before Hrungner. Then he beheld rushing swiftly towards him the black-browed thunder-god, who swung his hammer to strike. Nor did Hrungner wait till he was nigh. He raised his great flint weapon and flung it with might against Mjolner, which Thor, divining his purpose, hurtled simultaneously. In mid-air the weapons met and flashed forking fire that rent the heavens and covered the ocean with flame. The flint was utterly shattered. On the ground fell a portion, and there to this day are the flint hills, and a great splinter pierced the forehead of the Asa-god, so that he was thrown down.

Meanwhile the sublime hammer smote Hrungner and crushed his skull, and he fell also. The giant's foot

[p. 141]

struck Thor and lay heavily upon his neck, so that he could not rise to his feet.

On the affrighted Mokker-kalfi had Thjalfe flung himself, and him he overcame right speedily. Then ran he to help Thor, but in vain he strove to lift Hrungner's foot from his neck. . . . He named the Asa-gods, and they hastened from Asgard to the place of combat. When they found that Thor was cast down, they put forth their strength to free him, but unable were they to lift the giant's foot.

Then came Thor's son, Magni, whose mother was Jarnsaxa, the iron-crusher of the World-mill. He was but three nights old, but had already exceeding great strength. The giant's foot he seized and flung it from his sire's neck, saying:

"Alas! I should have come sooner. Hrungner's head would I have broken with my fist!"

Thor leapt up, and his arms he threw about his son, embracing him with great love.

"To thee, O Magni," he said, "I shall give Goldfax, Hrungner's great steed."

But Odin was ill-pleased with Thor, and to him he said: "Thou hast done wrong to give unto a Hag's son the speedy horse of the giant. 'Twere better if thou hadst gifted it to thy sire."

In wrath he turned away with the gods of his clan, and went towards Asgard.

Now the day of the great island duel was long ere the time when the sons of Ivalde waged the winter war against the Asa-gods. As Thor returned towards Orvandel's dwelling, his resting place on the borders of Jotun-heim, where he was wont to leave his swift, strong goats and his sublime car, he met with Orvandel, who was in great peril, The elfin archer had gone forth to fight

[p. 142]

against the Frost-giants, but with ill success as it proved, for they pressed nigh to him and sought to take him captive.

Thor rescued his friend speedily, and placed him in the meat basket, which he carried on his shoulders, as he waded through deep Elivagar. Orvandel thrust a toe through a hole, and a spell was put upon it by the giants, so that it was frozen. Then did Thor snap it off and fling it high in the heavens, where it became a bright star, which unto this day is called "Orvandel's Toe". Thus it was that the elfin archer (Avo) became a star hero.

When he parted with Orvandel, Thor yoked his goats, and in his sublime car he hastened towards his dwelling in Thrud-Varg. In grievous pain was he because of the wound which Hrungner had given him. Deep in his forehead was the flint flake embedded. In vain did Sith seek to alleviate his sufferings.

Now gentle Groa, Orvandel's wife, was dwelling in Thor's stronghold, as was her wont when her husband went forth against the Frost-giants. She had the power to work magic spells. She who was the "elf of growth" could make rocks to move, and she had power to arrest the turbulent floods. It was Groa who restored to strength those whom the Frost-giants had wounded, and it was she who gave beauty again to the places which they laid waste.

Unto Thor she came to heal his wound, and take from his forehead the splintered flint which stuck fast there. Incantations she sang over him. First she charmed away the pain which afflicted the god. Then the stone quivered and grew loose.

The heart of Thor leapt within him when he perceived that Groa would give him healing, and he was consumed with desire to reward her, and to gladden her

[p. 143]

heart without delay. So ere she sang further, he spake and she was silenced,

Of Orvandel's peril Thor gave Groa tidings, and of how he had rescued the elf from the power of the Frost-giants who encompassed him about. With joy was Groa's heart filled, but the spell she wrought was broken, and the memory of the magic song passed away. Thus was she unable to take from Thor's forehead the splintered flint, and there it ever remained because of his impatience to give premature reward.

So there was ever after weakness in Thor. Nor must mortal fling across his dwelling a flint weapon, lest the stone in the Asa-god's forehead be shaken, for then he would have suffering, and be moved to wrath against an offender.

Great were the deeds of Thor, which brought security to gods and men, for by him were the giants driven back and their power suppressed. Unto him, therefore, was willing service at all times rendered.

But there fell a day when Odin went forth from Asgard and towards the east. He saw Thor coming out of Jotun-heim, and sought to mock him so that he might have mirth.

Elivagar ran deep, and Odin waited on the opposite shore in the guise of Greybeard, the ferryman. Thor called upon him, but Odin refused to cross, whereat there rose a dispute between them. The valour of Thor did Odin question, and his feats belittle. With scornful laughter, too, did he receive the angry threatenings of the thunder-god.

"Nimble is thy tongue," cried Thor, "but it would help thee little if I waded across to thee. Louder than the wolf thou wouldst howl if I struck at thee with Mjolner."

[p. 144]

"Better wouldst thou be engaged," Odin answered, "if thou didst hasten home; because there is one there whom Sif loves better than thee."

Thor was wroth. "Well dost thou know," he cried, "that thy cruel words sting me. A coward art thou who speakest what is untrue."

Odin answered: "Truly I speak indeed. . . . Thou art tardy in returning. Why art thou lingering on thy way? 'Twere better if thou hadst set forth on thy journey at early morn."

"'Tis thou who delayest me, villain," Thor answered wrothfully.

Odin smiled. "Can one of so little account as I am", he said, "delay the journey of the great Asa-god Thor?"

"Cease thy bantering," cried Thor; "hasten hither with thy boat, and thou shalt have the friendship of the sire of Magni."

"Begone!" cried Odin. "I shall not cross thee."

Then said Thor, with pleading voice: "Show me the ford then, since thou wilt not come over."

Odin wagged his head. "That is easy to refuse," he said. "The way is long. Thou canst go a little way this direction, and a little way in that; then thou canst turn to thy left till thou dost reach No-man's-land. There wilt thou meet thy mother, who shall guide thee unto Odin's land."

"Can I go thither to-day?" Thor asked.

Odin answered: "By sunrise, if thou dost travel quickly, thou mayest get there."

"Mocker," exclaimed Thor, "our talk is ended! Thou hast denied me crossing this day, but by the holy waters of Leipter, I swear that I shall reward thee indeed when next we meet."

[p. 145]

Odin smiled: "Begone!" he cried; "and may demons seize thee."

Then took Thor his departure in great wrath, nor did he ever discover again the ferryman Greybeard who had mocked him and put him to shame.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 146]

  

CHAPTER XV

  

Balder the Beautiful

The Summer Sun-god--Blind Hodur--Nanna the Brave--The Light Battles--A Dread Omen--Balder's Dreams--Frigg's Alarm--World Vows taken--Odin descends to Hela--The Vala invoked--Her Prophecies--Loke's Evil Design--The Mistletoe Arrow of Pain--Balder is killed--Hermod's Mission--The Funeral of the God--Odin whispers--Hermod in Hela--Urd's Decree--World Tears--Hag seals Balder's Fate.

BALDER THE BEAUTIFUL was the most noble and pious of the gods in Asgard. The whitest flower upon earth is called Balder's brow, because the countenance of the god was snow-white and shining. Like fine gold was his hair, and his eyes were radiant and blue. He was well loved by all the gods, save evil Loke, who cunningly devised his death.

Balder, the summer sun-god, was Odin's fairest son; his mother was Frigg, goddess of fruitful earth and sister of Njord. His brother was blind Hodur. On Balder's tongue were runes graven, so that he had great eloquence. He rode a brightly shining horse, and his ships, which men called "billow falcons", were the sunbeams that sailed through the drifting cloudways. For wife he was given Nanna, the moon maid, the brave one who fought with him the light battles. On a bright horse she rode also, and tender was she and very fair.

There came a time when Odin and Balder went forth to journey through a wood. A dread omen forewarned them of disaster, because the leg was sprained of Balder's

[p. 147]

horse--the horse from whose hoofmarks bubbled forth clear wells. Charms were sung over the sun-god by Nanna and by her fair sister Sunna, the sun maid. Frigg also sang, and then Fulla her sister. Odin uttered magic runes to protect him from evil.

But soon after Balder began to languish. The light went from his eyes, care sat on his forehead, and melancholy were his lips. To him came the gods beseeching to know what ailed him, and he told that nightly he dreamed fearsome dreams which boded ill, and revealed to him, alas! that his life was in dire peril.

Now Frigg, who had fore-knowledge of all things save Balder's fate, sent forth her maid-servants to take oaths from all creatures living, from plants and metals, and from stones, not to do any hurt unto the god Balder. To her, in due time, the maidens returned, and she received from them the compacts and vows that were given. All things promised to spare him, save the mistletoe, slender and harmless, from which no vow was asked, for it clung, as was its need, to a strong tree for protection. Then was Frigg's heart filled with comfort, and no longer did she fear the fate of her noble son.

But the heart of Odin was filled with foreboding. He mounted his horse Sleipner, and went over Bif-rost towards the north, and descended unto darksome Nifelhel, where dwelt the spirits of the great giants who were crushed in the World-mill. On the borders of Hela, as he rode speedily, a great and fierce hel-dog came after him. There was blood on its breast, and in the darkness it barked loudly. When it could go no farther, it howled long with gaping jaws.

Over a long green plain went Odin, while the hoofs of Sleipner rang fast and cleat-, until he came to a high

[p. 148]

dwelling, the name of which is Heljar-ran, of which the keeper is Delling, the Red Elf of Dawn. Therein have their Hela-home the fair Asmegir--Lif and Lifthraser and their descendants who shall come at Time's new dawn that shall follow Ragnarok to regenerate the world of men.

To the eastern gate went Odin, where he knew there was the grave of a Vala (prophetess). Dismounting from Sleipner, he chanted over her death chamber strange magic songs. He looked towards the north; he uttered runes; he pronounced a spell, and demanded sure response. Then rose the Vala, and from the grave chamber her ghostly voice spake forth and said:

"What unknown man cometh to disturb my rest? Snow has covered me in its deeps; by cold rains have I been beaten and by many dews made wet. . . . Long indeed have I lain dead."

Odin answered: "My name is Vegtam and my sire was Valtam. Tell me, O Vala," he cried, "for whom are the benches of Delling's hall strewn with rings, and for whom are the rooms decked with fine gold?"

The Vala answered and said: "Here stands for Balder mead prepared, pure drink indeed. Over the cup shields are laid. Impatiently do the Asmegir await him and to make merry . . . . Alas! by compulsion hast thou made me to speak . . . . Now must I be silent."

Odin said: "Silent thou must not be until I know who shall slay Balder--who shall bereave Odin's son of life."

The Vala answered: "Hodur shall send his brother hither, for Balder shall he slay, and Odin's son bereave of life. . . . Alas! by compulsion hast thou made me speak. . . . Now must I be silent."

Odin said: "Silent thou must not be until I know

[p. 149]

who shall avenge the deed on Hodur, who shall raise Balder's slayer on the funeral pyre."

The Vala answered: "A son, Vale, shall Rhind bear in the halls of Winter. He shall not wash his hands nor comb his hair until to the funeral pyre he beareth Balder's foe. Alas! by compulsion hast thou made me to speak. Now must I be silent."

Odin said: "Silent thou shalt not be until I know who are the maidens that sorrow and throw high their veils with grief. Sleep not until thou dost answer."

The Vala spake and said: "Thou art not Vegtam, as I deemed, but Odin, ruler of all."

Odin said: "No Vala art thou, but the mother of three giants."

Then cried the Vala: "Return, O Odin, unto Asgard. Never again shall I be called upon until Loke escapes from bonds and the world-devastating Dusk of the Gods is at hand."

To Asgard did Odin return; but there was no sorrow there nor foreboding, because of the vows which Frigg had taken from all creatures and all things that are, so that no harm might be done unto her fair son. And of this had the gods full proof. Balder they made to stand amidst a rain of javelins that harmed him not. Some flung at him stones, others smote him with their swords; yet was he not injured. Of Balder were they all proud because he was charmed against wounds. To honour him did they make fruitless attack on his fair body.

Evil there war, in the heart of Loke, and in woman's guise he went unto Frigg, who spake and said: "Why do the gods thus assail my fair son Balder?"

Loke answered: "It is in sport they fling at him javelins and stones and strike him with swords, because they know full well that they can do him no hurt."

[p. 150]

Frigg said: "By neither metal, nor wood, nor stone, can he be injured because of the world-vows which I have received."

"Have all things indeed sworn to protect Balder?" Loke asked with downcast eyes.

"All things save the mistletoe," answered Frigg, "and so slender and weak is the mistletoe that from it no vow was demanded."

Then Loke went from Frigg and plucked a mistletoe sprig, which he carried to a cunning elf-smith named Hlebard, whom he robbed of his understanding. With the mistletoe twig the smith shaped a magic arrow--a deadly arrow of pain. . . . Loke made haste with it to Asgard, and he went to the green place where the gods assailed Balder and made merry. He saw blind Hodur standing apart, and to him he went and spake thus:

"Why, O Hodur, dost thou not join the game and cast a missile at Balder also?"

"Alas!" cried Hodur; "am I not blind? I can see not my fair brother, nor have I aught which I can throw."

"Come and do honour unto Balder like the others '

Loke urged him. "I shall give thee an arrow for thy bow, and hold thine arm so that thou mayest know where he stands."

Hodur then took from Loke the magic arrow which the elf-smith had made and placed it in his bow. Then raised he his left arm, while evil Loke took certain aim.

"Thou canst now share in the sport," said the Evil One unto the blind god, and went to a place apart.

The gods beheld Hodur standing with bent bow, and paused in their game. . . . Then did the arrow dart forth. . . . It struck Balder; it pierced his fair body, and he fell dead upon the sward.

[p. 151]

In horror, and frozen with silence, the gods stood around. . . . Where there had been joy and merrymaking, dumb grief prevailed. . . . Alone stood Hodur wondering and in mute amaze.

But ere long angry cries broke forth, and the gods sought to slay Death's blind archer; but the sward on which they stood was consecrated to peace, and unwillingly were their hands withheld.

Then a loud voice cried through Asgard: "Balder is dead! . . . . Balder the Beautiful is dead! . . . ."

Every voice was hushed and every face turned pale because of the disaster which had befallen the gods in that black hour.

Thereafter arose the sound of loud lamentations, and a tempest of grief swept over the Celestial City. Frigg wept in silence and alone. Odin grieved inwardly, and more than the rest he realized the great disaster which Balder's death would bring unto the Asa-gods.

The spirit of Balder descended to the Lower World and crossed the golden bridge over the River Gjoll.

The Asmegir in their gold-decked hall awaited him, for they desired that he should be their ruler until the dawn of the world's new age.

But Frigg would not suffer that Balder should remain in Hela. She went forth when the gods ceased to cry aloud in their sorrow and said:

"Who among thee hath longing to win my gratitude and my love? For such shall be given unto him who rideth to Hela to find Balder. It is my heart's desire, in this my hour of grief, that a great ransom be offered unto Urd, Queen of Death, so that she may permit my fair son to return unto me again."

Forth stepped Heimdal the Young. He was a messenger of the gods and a son of Odin. He spake forth

[p. 152]

and said: "Unto Hela shall I go, O Queen of Asgard, as thou desirest, to find Balder and to offer great ransom unto Urd, so that she may permit him to return unto thee once again."

Then was Sleipner taken forth for Hermod, who leapt nimbly into the saddle. Swift as the wind he went over the gate bridge, and through the air and across the seas he sped and descended unto Nifel-hel towards the north to search for Balder.

The gods bore Balder's body unto the bleak shore of Ocean, where lay his great ship, Hringhorn. On its deck they built a pyre covered with much treasure, and then they sought to launch it.

But that they were unable to do, because the keel stuck fast in the sand and would not be moved seaward. So they sent unto Jotun-heim for the storm-giantess, Hyrrokin, who was Angerboda, that ancient-cold Vala of the east, who sweeps wind-tossed ships into the very jaws of Aeger. On a great wolf she came and the bridle was a writhing snake. She leapt on the beach and with disdain regarded the gods. To four giants were given the keeping of the wolf. Then went she to the ship and thrust it speedily into the sea. Fire blazed from the rollers and the earth shook.

Angry was Thor when he beheld the Hag, and he swung his hammer to strike her down; but him did the gods restrain, for they sought not bloodshed in that hour.

Then was Balder's body carried to the ship and laid upon the pyre, and his steed beside him. Beautiful was he in death. In white robes was Balder clad, and round his head lay a wreath of radiant flowers.

On the shore were gathered the gods and goddesses of Asgard. Odin was there, and he went first. His

 

Click to enlarge
LOKE AND HODUR
 From the sculpture by C. G. Qvarnstrom

 

[p. 153]

ravens hovered over the ship, and his wolf-dogs wailed. Beside him was wise Frigg, who was wont to spin golden cloud-threads from her jewelled wheel. Queen of Asgard was she and goddess of Maternal Love. She was robed in black who was erstwhile attired in cloudy whiteness; on her golden head were the heron plumes of silence; a golden girdle clasped her waist and on her feet were golden shoes. Tall was she and stately and surpassing fair.

Dark-browed Thor was nigh to Odin, and Brage and Tyr also. Njord, black-bearded, and clad in green, strode his stately way. With his golden-bristled boar came Frey, and Heimdal, horsed on Gulltop, shone fair as sunshine. Beauteous Freyja, veiled in tears, rode her chariot drawn by great cats, and fair Idun was there also, and Sith with harvest hair. Loke stood apart with tearless eyes.

The valkyries leaned on their spears. Frigg's maids were nigh the Queen of Asgard, and these were Fulla, her sister, Hlin, who carries to Frigg the prayers of mortals; Gna, the speedy messenger who passes to and fro over the earth, beholding and remembering: Lofn, guardian of lovers, in whose name vows are made; Vjofr, the peacemaker, who unites lovers, and husbands and wives who have quarrelled; Syn, the wise doorkeeper; and Gefjon, guardian of maids who shall never wed.

White elves were assembled on that sad shore to sorrow, and even black elves were there. Many Frost-giants and Mountain-giants gathered around, for there was sadness everywhere because Balder was dead.

But none mourned more than Nanna, Balder's wife. Silent was she; her heart wept, and fire burned in her eyes.

Then Odin mounted the pyre. On Balder's breast

[p. 154]

he laid the gold ring Draupner, and bending low he whispered in Balder's ear. . . .

From that hour have gods and men wondered what said Odin in his son's ear.

When Odin whispered
   In Balder's ear,
 Nor god nor man
   Was nigh to hear.

What Odin whispered,
   Bending low,
 No man knoweth
   Or e'er shall know.

In silence Odin returned to the shore, and then Thor consecrated the pyre with his hammer. A dwarf named Littur, who ran past him, he kicked into the boat, where he was burned with Balder.

So ended the ceremony of grief, and the torch was placed to the pyre. High as heaven leapt the flames, and the faces of the gods were made ruddy in the glow. . . . Nanna cried aloud in grief, and her heart burst within her, and she fell dead upon the cold sea strand.

Seaward swept the burning ship. . . . The whole world sorrowed for Balder. . . .

Meanwhile Hermod made his darksome way through Nifel-hel towards Hela's glittering plains. Nine days and nine nights he rode on Sleipner through misty blackness and in bitter cold over high mountains and along ridges where chasms yawn vast and bottomless. On Hela's borders the terrible wolf dog of the giant Offotes followed him, barking in the black mist. . . . Then Hermod reached the rivers. Over Slid, full of daggers, he went, and over Kormet and Ormet, and the two

[p. 155]

rivers Kerlogar, through which Thor wades when he goes to the Lower Thingstead of the gods. He crossed shining Leipter, by whose holy waters men swear oaths that bind. At length he came to the River Gjoll and its golden bridge.

Modgud, the elf maid who watches the bridge, cried aloud: "Whence cometh thou who hath not yet died?"

Of her did Hermod ask who had crossed before him. Impatient was he to brook delay.

"But five days since," she said, "there passed five troops of warriors who rode over with valkyries, yet made they less noise than thee alone. . . . Whom seekest thou?"

Hermod answered and said: "Balder, my brother, son of Odin and Frigg, do I seek. If thou hast seen him, speak forth and tell me whither he hath gone."

In silence did Modgud point towards the north, whereat Hermod spurred Sleipner and went on. . . . Soon he came to Hela's great stone gate. Strongly barred it was and very high, and guarded by a great armed sentinel. To none was given entry save the dead who are brought to judgment.

Hermod leapt to the ground. He tightened the girths of Sleipner. He remounted again. Then he spurred Odin's horse towards the gate, and with a great bound it leapt over, nor ceased to go onward when it came down. . . . Swiftly rode Hermod until he came to the palace in which Balder dwelt with the Asmegir.

From the saddle he leapt and went within. . . . There in a golden hall he saw Balder seated on a throne of gold. Wan was his face and careworn, for the gloom of death had not yet passed from him. On his brow was a wreath of faded flowers, and on his breast the ring Draupner. He sat listening, as if he still heard the

[p. 156]

voice of Odin whispering in his ear. Before him stood a goblet of mead, which he had touched not. Nanna sat by his side, and her cheeks were pale.

Hermod beheld nigh unto them Urd, the queen of Hela. In cold grandeur she stood, silent and alone. Deathly white was her face, and hard and stern, and she looked downward. On her dark robe gleamed great diamonds and ornaments of fine gold. . . .

To Balder spoke Hermod, and said: "For thee have I been sent hither, O my brother. In Asgard there is deep mourning for thee, and thy queen mother beseecheth thy speedy return."

Sadly did Balder shake his head, and to Nanna he pointed. But she leaned towards him and whispered: "Love is stronger than death, nor can the grave destroy it. . . . With thee, O Balder, shall I ever remain . . . ...

They would have wept, but in Hela there are no tears.

Throughout the night did Hermod hold converse with the twain, and when morning came he besought Urd to release Balder from death's bonds.

With eyes still looking downwards she heard him speak.

"In Asgard," Hermod said, "the gods sorrow for Balder, and on earth is he also mourned. All who have being and all things with life weep for Balder, and beseech thee that he may return again."

Urd made answer coldly: "If all who have being and all things with life weep for Balder and beseech his return, then must he be restored again. . . . But if one eye is without tears, then must he remain in Hela forever."

Hermod bowed himself before Urd in silence, and turned again to Balder and to Nanna, who went with

[p. 157]

him to the door. . . . Ere their sad farewells were spoken, Balder gave Hermod the ring Draupner to carry back unto Odin, for in Hela the ring was without fertility. Her veil Nanna did send unto Frigg, and a bride's gold ring she gave for Fulla.

To Asgard did Hermod make speedy return, bearing the gifts of Balder and of Nanna, and unto gods and goddesses assembled together he made known the stern decree of Hela's queen.

Over all the world did Frigg then send messengers to beseech all who have being and all things with life to weep for Balder, so that he might be restored again. Then did sorrow indeed prevail. The frost of grief was broken, and the sound of weeping was heard like to falling streams. Men wept, as did also every animal, peaceful and wild. Stones had tears, and metals were made wet. On trees and plants and on every grass blade were dewdrops of mourning for Balder.

But as the messengers of Frigg were returning to Asgard, they came to a deep dark cavern in which sat Gulveig-Hoder, the Hag of Ironwood, in the guise of Thok (darkness). Her they besought to weep, so that Balder might return. She spake coldly and said:

"Thok shall weep tears of fire only because Balder is dead. No joy hath he ever given unto me living or dead. . . . Let Hela's queen hold what is her own."

Great was the sorrow in Asgard because that the Hag would weep not and free Balder from death's bonds. Upon Loke was laid the blame, because he never ceased to work evil among the gods. But not afar off was the day of his doom.

[p. 158]

  

The Passing of Balder

I heard a voice, that cried,
 "Balder the Beautiful
 Is dead, is dead!"
 And through the misty air
 Passed like the mournful cry
 Of sunward-sailing cranes.

I saw the pallid corpse
 Of the dead sun
 Borne through the Northern sky.
 Blasts from Nifel-heim
 Lifted the sheeted mists
 Around him as he passed.

And the voice for ever cried,
 "Balder the Beautiful
 Is dead, is dead!"
 And died away
 Through the dreary night,
 In accents of despair.

Balder the Beautiful,
 God of the summer sun,
 Fairest of all the Gods!
 Light from his forehead beamed,
 Runes were upon his tongue,
 As on the warrior's sword.

All things in earth and air
 Bound were by magic spell
 Never to do him harm,
 Even the plants and stones:
 All save the mistletoe,
 The sacred mistletoe!

[p. 159]

Hoder, the blind old god,
 Whose feet are shod with silence,
 Pierced through that gentle breast
 With his sharp spear, by fraud
 Made of the mistletoe,
 The accursed mistletoe!

They laid him in his ship,
 With horse and harness,
 As on a funeral pyre.
 Odin placed
 A ring upon his finger,
 And whispered in his ear.

They launched the burning ship!
 It floated far away
 Over the misty sea,
 Till like the sun it seemed,
 Sinking beneath the waves.
 Balder returned no more!
                                      --Longfellow.

  

The Descent of Odin

Uprose the King of men with speed,
 And saddled strait his coal-black steed;
 Down the yawning steep he rode,
 That leads to Hela's drear abode.
 Him the Dog of Darkness spied,
 His shaggy throat he opened wide,
 While from his jaws, with carnage filled,
 Foam and human gore distilled;

Hoarse he bays with hideous din,
 Eyes that glow, and fangs that grin;
 And long pursues, with fruitless yell,
 The father of the powerful spell. [p. 160]
 Onward still his way he takes,
 (The groaning earth beneath him shakes,)
 Till full before his fearless eyes
 The portals nine of hell arise.

Right against the eastern gate,
 By the moss-grown pile he sate;
 Where long of yore to sleep was laid
 The dust of the prophetic Maid.
 Facing to the northern clime,
 Thrice he traced the runic rhyme;
 Thrice pronounced, in accents dread,
 The thrilling verse that wakes the dead;
 Till from out the hollow ground
 Slowly breathed a sullen sound.

Prophetess

What call unknown, what charms presume,
 To break the quiet of the tomb?
 Who thus afflicts my troubled sprite
 And drags me from the realms of night?
 Long on these mould'ring bones have beat
 The winter's snow, the summer's heat,
 The drenching dews, and driving rain!
 Let me, let me sleep again.
 Who is he, with voice unblest,
 That calls me from the bed of rest?

Odin

A Traveller, to the unknown,
 Is he that calls, a Warrior's son.
 Thou the deeds of light shalt know;
 Tell me what is done below,
 For whom yon glitt'ring board is spread,
 Drest for whom yon golden bed.

[p. 161]

Prophetess

Mantling in the goblet see
 The pure beverage of the bee,
 O'er it hangs the shield of gold;
 'T is the drink of Balder bold;
 Balder's head to death is given.
 Pain can reach the sons of Heaven!
 Unwilling I my lips unclose;
 Leave me, leave me to repose.

Odin

Once again my call obey.
 Prophetess, arise and say,
 What dangers Odin's child await,
 Who the Author of his fate.

Prophetess

In Hoder's hand the Hero's doom;
 His brother sends him to the tomb.
 Now my weary lips I close;
 Leave me, leave me to repose.

Odin

Prophetess, my spell obey,
 Once again arise, and say,
 Who th' Avenger of his guilt.
 By whom shall Hoder's blood be spilt.

Prophetess

In the caverns of the west,
 By Odin's fierce embrace comprest,
 A wondrous Boy shall Rinda bear,
 Who ne'er shall comb his raven hair,
 Nor wash his visage in the stream,
 Nor see the sun's departing beam, [p. 162]
 Till he on Hoder's  shall smile
 Flaming on the fun'ral pile.
 Now my weary lips I close;
 Leave me, leave me to repose.

Odin

Yet a while my call obey.
 Prophetess, awake, and say,
 What Virgins these in speechless woe,
 That bend to earth their solemn brow,
 That their flaxen tresses tear,
 And snowy veils, that float in air.
 Tell me whence their sorrows rose;
 Then I leave thee to repose.

Prophetess

Ha! no Traveller art thou,
 King of Men, I know thee now
 Mightiest of a mighty line--

Odin

No boding Maid of skill divine
 Art thou, nor Prophetess of good;
 But mother of the giant brood!

Prophetess

Hie thee hence, and boast at home,
 That never shall enquirer come
 To break my iron sleep again;
 Till Lok has burst his tenfold chain.
 Never, till substantial Night
 Has reassumed her ancient right;
 Till wrapped in flames, in ruin hurled,
 Sinks the fabric of the world.
                                           Gray

[p. 163]

  

The World's Tears

Odin . . . thus addressed the Gods:
   "Go quickly forth through all the world, and pray
 All living and unliving things to weep
 Balder, if haply he may thus be won."
   When the Gods heard, they straight arose, and took
 Their horses, and rode forth through all the world;
 North, south, east, west, they struck, and roam'd the world,
 Entreating all things to weep Balder's death.
 And all that lived, and all without life, wept.
 And as in winter, when the frost breaks up,
 At winter's end, before the spring begins,
 And a warm west-wind blows, and thaw sets in--
 After an hour a dripping sound is heard
 In all the forests, and the soft-strewn snow
 Under the trees is dibbled thick with holes,
 And from the boughs the snowloads shuffle down;
 And, in fields sloping to the south, dark plots
 Of grass peep out amid surrounding snow,
 And widen, and the peasant's heart is glad--
 So through the world was heard a dripping noise
 Of all things weeping to bring Balder back;
 And there fell joy upon the Gods to hear.
   But Hermod rode with Niord, whom he took
 To show him spits and beaches of the sea
 Far off, where some unwarri'd might fail to weep--
 Niord, the God of storms, whom fishers know;
 Not born in Heaven; he was in Vanheim rear'd,
 With men, but lives a hostage with the Gods;
 He knows each frith, and every rocky creek
 Fringed with dark pines, and sands where seafowl scream--
 They two scour'd every coast, and all things wept.
 And they rode home together, through the wood
 Of Jarnvid, which to east of Midgard lies
 Bordering the giants, where the trees are iron
 There in the wood before a cave they came, [p. 164]
 Where sate, in the cave's mouth, a skinny hag,
 Toothless and old; she gibes the passers by.
 Thok is she called, but now Loke wore her shape;
 She greeted them the first, and laugh'd, and said:--
   "Ye Gods, good lack, is it so dull in Heaven,
 That ye come pleasuring to Thok's iron wood?
 Lovers of change ye are, fastidious sprites.
 Look, as in some boor's yard a sweet-breath'd cow,
 Whose manger is stuffed full of good fresh hay,
 Snuffs at it daintily, and stoops her head
 To chew the straw, her litter, at her feet--
 So ye grow squeamish, Gods, and sniff at Heaven!"
   She spake; but Hermod answer'd her and said:--
 Thok, not for gibes we come, we come for tears.
 Balder is dead, and Hela holds her prey,
 But will restore, if all things give him tears.
 Begrudge not thine! to all was Balder dear."
   Then, with a louder laugh, the hag replied:--
 "Is Balder dead? and do ye come for tears?
 Thok with dry eyes will weep o'er Balder's pyre.
 Weep him all other things, if weep they will--
 I weep him not! let Hela keep her prey."
                  From "Balder Dead", by Matthew Arnold.

 

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 165]

  

CHAPTER XVI

  

The Binding of Loke

Balder's Avenger--Odin woos Rhind--Winter's Cold-hearted Queen--The Coming of Vale--At Valhal's Feast--The Sword-slain Warriors--Hodur is killed--Odin and the Riddle-Giant--The Unanswered Question--Aeger's Feast--Loke reviles the Gods--His Confession and Flight--His Salmon Guise--Caught in his Net--The Evil One is bound--Skade's Revenge--Faithful Sigyn.

As the Vala had foretold, a son was born to Odin, who took vengeance upon Hodur because that he slew Balder. His mother was Rhind, Earth's Winter Queen, whom Odin wooed in the time of ice. Cold-hearted was she, although of great beauty, and long she withheld her love. Her sire was Billing, the Elf of Twilight, whose dwelling was in the west. Guardian was he of the forest of the Varns) whither fled the deities of sun and moon to find safety from the pursuing wolves of Ironwood. Strong-armed were the Varns, and when Sol sank into her golden bed, their chosen warriors, who guarded her, kept watch with burning brands. By day they slept, but when Sol again drave her chariot towards Billing's gate [*1] they lit their torches, which flamed with red fire and gold.

When Odin went unto Billing he revealed his love for Rhind, but the stern maid spurned with scorn the Ruler of Asgard. Displeased with himself was Odin.

[p. 166]

[paragraph continues] Nor, as the skald hath sung, is there "a worse disease to afflict a wise man". Among the reeds sat Odin all alone, awaiting Rhind, yet she would favour him not. Her heart was frozen and cold.

A second time Odin went towards Billing's dwelling. He bore with him a bracelet and rings of fine gold and radiant flower-gems, and these gifts of golden summer he offered to Rhind. But she refused them with bitterness, for her heart was indeed cold. Her lover she despised.

A third time did Odin seek to woo the stern daughter of Billing. He went unto her attired as a young warrior, his helmet on his head and his sword by his side. Stately was he as is a viking who plunders on summer seas. But the warriors of Varn stood nigh unto Rhind. Their torches were in their hands, and she slept. Sun-bright she lay upon her golden couch. . . . At morn when all the household slumbered a hungry wolf-dog guarded her. Odin she again rejected. Contumely she heaped upon him, nor could he hope to gain her love.

At length Odin went unto Rhind in Hag guise. Earth's Winter Queen languished in sickness, and he promised to cure her. Over her then Odin muttered spells, so that she was moved to tempest madness. Then was she bound with ice chains. Thereafter did Odin reveal himself to her. He took off the spell. He released her from ice bonds. Whereupon her heart melted towards him and she became his bride.

Meanwhile in Asgard the gods sought to be avenged on silent-footed Hodur for slaying Balder. But him they could not discover. All day he hid in a deep forest, and in nighttime only was he abroad. A magic shield he bore, and a magic sword, and none would dare go nigh to him when darkness fell. Ever did he move restlessly

[p. 167]

and without sound through the forest, fearing that the avenger would come; ever did he seek to make escape, for of his fate he had full foreknowledge.

There came a day of brightness, and it was the May day of Vale's coming. In the night was he born in full strength, and towards Asgard he went speedily and entered therein. He had the face of a child and a warrior's body. Straight to Valhal strode Vale, and the watchman sought to hold him back, because his hands were unwashed and his hair uncombed. A strong bow he carried and three arrows.

Vale spurned the watchman and entered the warrior's hall. At feast sat Odin and the rest of the gods, and about them were the fearless heroes, the sword-slain warmen whom the valkyries had chosen.

Odin received Vale with pride, and to gods and heroes he announced: "Behold it is Vale, son of Rhind, who shall avenge the death of Balder."

The gods spake one to another and said: "How can this tender youth overcome night-haunting Hodur and escape his magic sword?"

Vale answered them saying: "But one night old am I, yet shall I avenge Balder, my brother."

Then sat Odin's new-born son at the feast. With the sword-slain warriors he shared the joys of Valhal, and ate of the boar Saehrimnir which was devoured daily and became whole again each night.

Odin sate in his high chair. But he partook not of the food, for he had no need of it. His portion he flung to his dogs Gere and Freke, and drank only of the mead which nourished him forever.

For drink the heroes had the mead milk of the goat Heidrun, which ate the leaves of Laerath, the tree which overshadows Valhal.

[p. 168]

When the warriors had feasted with Vale in their midst, they issued forth in vast numbers from Valhal's doors, which numbered five hundred and forty. From each door eight hundred warriors came out, as they shall do at Ragnarok, to combat against the hordes of Surtur.

Thus daily do the warriors go forth as on the morn of Vale's coming. On a great field they fight battles, and one another they cut to pieces. On steeds they ride and the steeds fall. On foot they rush into battle to be slain. [*1] Yet are they ever restored again.

Vale beheld the heroes in conflict. He saw them slay one another. He saw them rising to return unto Valhal.

When night fell, and Sol was laid on her golden couch in Billing's hall, Vale went forth to seek silent-footed Hodur. Through the wood of blackness he went, for he had knowledge of where the blind god was hidden. Then heard he a voice which cried:

"The avenger cometh, O slayer of Balder."

Hodur held high his magic shield. His sword he drew, and went in silence towards the sound of Vale's footsteps.

The bow of Vale was bent. He shot an arrow towards Hodur and it went past him. A second he cast and it struck the magic shield. The third arrow pierced the heart of Hodur and he fell dead.

Thus was the death of Balder avenged by Vale, son of Odin and Rhind, the young May-god with a child's face and the body of a strong warrior.

A pyre was built and the body of Hodur was burned

[p. 169]

thereon. The gods rejoiced that he was dead, but Balder awaited him in Hela. Loke was yet unpunished; his day of doom was drawing nigh.

Ere that time came, Odin went forth from Asgard and journeyed unto Jotun-heim. There he sought the dwelling of the ancient giant, Vafthrudner, to hear from him the secrets of the past. He was the strongest of the giants and the most cunning. He was also a maker of riddles, and those who could answer them not he put to death. His head he wagered that none equalled him in wisdom.

Odin went towards the giant's dwelling in the guise of a mortal named Gangraad.

"Why comest thou hither?" Vafthrudner asked. His sword was in his hand.

Odin answered: "I come hither to know whether thou art so wise and all-remembering as men say."

The giant was wroth, and to Odin he said: "If thou art not wiser than I am, and if thy knowledge is less than mine, thy head shall speedily be struck from thy shoulders. If thou art proved the wiser, mine own head is forfeit."

First the giant asked Odin if he had knowledge of who drave the chariots of night and of day, and if he could name the world-dividing rivers. Odin answered him.

Then the giant asked where the last battle would be fought, and Odin gave ready response. "On Virgrid Plain," he said.

Much did the giant marvel. He besought Odin to sit by his side. When Odin was seated, he in turn put questions to Vafthrudner. He asked of the old giant how far back he remembered, and Vafthrudner said that he had beheld Ymer's son, Bergelmer, who escaped the

[p. 170]

blood deluge, when he was laid on the World-mill to be ground.

Of the beginning of things Odin did ask him, and of the end. The giant made answer with great wisdom. There was naught of which he could not speak with full knowledge.

Then did Odin rise from his seat and say: "One last question shall I put thee, O Vafthrudner, and if thou canst not answer it, thy head is forfeit."

The giant was without fear. He listened, fully assured that he could make ready response.

But Odin spake and said: "Tell me if thou canst, O maker of riddles, what did Odin whisper into Balder's ear?"

Then was the giant stricken with great fear, because he perceived that the stranger was none other than Odin himself. With trembling voice he confessed that he was vanquished. So he who sought to slay the stranger was himself slain. By Odin was his head struck off.

By the gods was Odin called Jalk [*1] when he slew the great giant.

But although Odin brought judgment upon the tyrant Vafthrudner, as he was wont to do unto all evildoers, it was long ere he meted out just punishment to him who had in secret devised the death of Balder. But his hour was very nigh. His place beside Fenrer awaited him.

Shunned was Loke in Asgard, and rarely he went thither; for Balder he mourned not nor shared the grief of the gods, by whom he was suspect.

The time came when Aeger sent messengers to the high Celestial city to invite the dwellers there to the harvest-end feast of the autumnal equinox. Thither

[p. 171]

they journeyed, robed in state, to drink of Aeger's mead.

Now, while they sat round the board, Loke, who was not bidden to the feast, entered with stealthy steps. Funafeng, the guardian of the door, sought to hold him back.

"No seat awaits thee here," he said. "Thou hadst better haste to Ironwood and feast with Angerboda, mother of the Fenrer wolf."

Wroth was Loke with Aeger's servant, and more wroth was he when he heard the gods praising Funafeng because of the words he had spoken. So he turned on the bold guardian of the door and slew him.

The gods rose in anger, and seized their weapons to be avenged, but Loke fled forth in the darkness and concealed himself in a deep forest at the sea bottom.

Then was the feast resumed. Mead flowed plenteously from Aeger's vessels, for, like the horn of Utgard-Loki, they could never be emptied, and they were ever full.

Again Loke returned. Eldir guarded the door. The Evil One spake freely to him and said: "Of what do the gods speak as they drink their mead?"

"They speak of thee," Eldir answered, "and the evil deeds thou hast done."

"Then shall I enter," said Loke. "I shall revile them one after another until they are covered with shame."

Silent in their anger were the gods when they beheld Loke in their midst once again. But he demanded a seat at the board.

"Am I not an Asa-god?" he cried. "The golden mead I claim as my due."

Brage, god of music and song, spake fiercely and said:

[p. 172]

[paragraph continues] "Thou shalt never again be an equal of the gods. For thy villainy art thou become an outcast. For thee is now prepared a drink of revenge."

To Odin did Loke make stern appeal, saying: "Promised we not each to the other in olden days, when our blood we mixed together, never to drink mead that was offered not unto both?"

When Loke spake thus, Odin consented that he should sit at the board, for indeed he had spoken truly. His claim was just according to ancient vows.

A goblet of mead did Loke receive, and he cried: "Hail to all who are here save Brage, who refused me hospitality."

When he drank from the goblet he taunted Brage with scorn, and the Song-god challenged him to combat; but Loke heeded him not. He heard him with silent scorn.

To Njord then turned Loke and flouted him because that he was but a hostage of the Vans.

Njord answered and said that he was father of Frey, who was hated by none, whereat the Evil One heaped abuse upon the harvest-god. But Tyr said that Njord's fair son was the best of all chiefs among the gods, and that his doings were ever benevolent, so that by mortals was he well loved.

Loke cried: "Silence, O Tyr. Thou hast but one hand since the Fenrer wolf seized thee."

Tyr answered: "Better to lose a hand than a good reputation, for that thou hast not, Loke."

Frey in wrath then said: "If thou art not silent, with thy wolf son shalt thou be bound."

Then did Loke taunt Frey because he had given to Gymer the Sword of Victory with which to buy Gerd.

Shame fell upon Frey and on all the gods whom

 

Click to enlarge
LOKE AT AeGER'S FEAST
 From the painting by Constantin Hansen

 

[p. 173]

[paragraph continues] Loke reviled in that hour. Then Frigg spoke angrily to the Evil One and said:

"If I had here in Aeger's hall a son like to Balder, who is dead, thou wouldst never go from hither, for in wrath thou wouldst be slain."

"Ha!" cried Loke, leaping to his feet; "is it thy will, O Frigg, that I should speak further? Now hear and know that I am the cause of Balder's death. To Hela was he sent by me, for to Hodur did I give the mistletoe arrow that struck thy son down."

The gods seized their weapons to attack their evil reviler, when suddenly thunder pealed in the hall, and Thor stood there in their midst.

Now Loke knew well that the gods sought not to defile the dwelling of Aeger by shedding blood. So he went and stood before Thor, whom he addressed, saying: "Dost thou remember, O Asa-Thor, when thou didst hide with fear in the thumb space of Skrymer's glove?"

"Silence, thou evil one," roared Thor, "or else with my hammer shall I strike thy head off and end thy life!

Then did Loke answer humbly. "Silent indeed I shall be now, O Thor, for I know well thou shalt strike."

So saying he left the hall. But the gods rose to pursue him, so greatly angered were they because that he had caused Balder's death. But Loke assumed the guise of a salmon and escaped through the sea, and in vain they sought him. Never again could he enter Asgard.

The gods took counsel together and decreed that Loke should be bound because of the many evils he had done, and especially because he devised the death of Balder. They searched for him in Midgard and in Jotun-heim, but found him not, for a cunning retreat had Loke discovered. In a cliff he dwelt behind a great

[p. 174]

waterfall. Four doors there were in his cavern, and they were ever kept open, so that he might make quick and sure escape. There he devised plots to overcome the Asa-gods.

But wearily passed the days of his solitude. One morning he took flax and yarn and fashioned a net with which to capture fish, and in the manner which he made it have fishermen ever since fashioned theirs. He took pride in his cunning work, but for what end he devised it no man knoweth.

Meanwhile the gods sought greatly after him. Then Odin mounted his golden throne and looked over the nine worlds, searching for the place in which Loke was hidden. He saw the cavern behind the waterfall. He perceived Loke sitting within. Then he called the gods and told them where the Evil One could be found.

Then set they forth and made cunning approach to the cavern. They divided to enter all the four doors.

Loke perceived them, but not until they were very nigh to him. Then he flung his net upon the fire, and in salmon guise leapt into the pool which was below the waterfall. There he concealed himself betwixt two stones.

When the gods entered the cavern they knew that the Evil-worker whom they sought was not far distant, for the fire still smouldered. Kvasir, son of Njord, who was keen-eyed as Heimdal, at once beheld on the white embers the ashes of the net which Loke had made. So the gods sat down and speedily they wove another of like kind. When it was finished they threw it into the stream, knowing that he whom they sought was there. But the net went over Loke.

Then did the gods take the net a second time, and weighted it with stones so that it could be dragged along

[p. 175]

the stream's bed. Loke divined their purpose and leapt over the net into the waterfall.

But the gods espied him, and Thor went into midstream so that he might not escape. On either bank did the avengers drag the net towards the pool.

Loke perceived that there were but two means of escape left to him. One was to again leap over the net; the other was to swim out to the sea and brave the perils that are there. He chose to leap. But he escaped not, for Thor grasped him in his hand. In vain Loke sought to wriggle free, but Thor closed his strong fingers over his tail. That is why the salmon's tail has been narrow since that day.

When Loke found he could not escape, he assumed his wonted shape. Then did the gods do as Frey had threatened at Aeger's feast. Him they bore unto the place where his son the wolf Fenrer was already bound on the geyser-sprayed island in the gulf of Black Grief.

Loke's two sons, Vali and Narvi, followed him, as did also gentle Sigyn, his wife, whom he had despised and wronged. Incantations were sung over Vali, and he became a fierce wolf. Upon his brother Narvi he sprang and tore him to pieces.

Then did the gods lay Loke on three sharp-edged rocks next to the Fenrer wolf. With the sinews of Narvi (the binder) they made chains which were like iron, and with these they bound the Evil One securely.

Skade came from her mountain home rejoicing because that he who had caused the death of her father, Thjasse, was at length overcome. She bore with her a poisonous snake, and bound it on the rock above Loke's head. From its jaws dropped burning venom, which tortured the Evil One with great agony.

Then took the avengers their departure, leaving Loke

[p. 176]

in torment.... His faithful wife Sigyn remained behind. Over Loke's head she is ever holding a goblet to receive the dripping venom. So does she constantly guard her evil husband. But when the vessel is filled to the brim she must needs bring it down, so that it may be emptied. Then do venom drops fall upon Loke's face, burning him fiercely. . . . When that happens he struggles madly with his bonds, and the rocks shake and Midgard trembles to its foundations. . . . It is thus that earthquakes are caused.

On the island of the Gulf of Black Grief must Loke and the Fenrer wolf remain until Ragnarok. The wolf dog Garm shall bark aloud when they escape from their bonds.

Footnotes

^165:1 According to Geoffrey of Monmouth, the mythical Belinus, King of Britain, made in London a gate of marvellous workmanship "which the citizens do still in these! days call Billingsgate".

^168:1 "They went forth to the war, but they always fell."--Macpherson's Ossian. The reference is to Scandinavian invaders. Matthew Arnold applied the quotation to the Celts.

^170:1 Jack the Giant-killer.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 177]

  

CHAPTER XVII

  

The Dusk of the Gods

The Vala's Song--Signs of Ragnarok--Evil among Men--Fimbul Winter--Goldcomb's Warning--Giants assail Bif-rost--Heimdal's Horn is blown--The Quaking of Ygdrasil--Loke and the Monsters freed--Ship of Death--Fear in Hela--Harper of Ironwood--The Midgard Serpent rises--Coming of Monsters--The Last Scene--Gods in Battle: their Doom--Odin avenged--Sun and Moon devoured--The End of All--World's New Age--Balder's Return--The Regenerating Race--All-father's Decrees.

THERE was a Vala who sang of the end of all things, of the doom of gods and men, of the last dread battle and Odin's death, and of the coming of Surtur, whose flames shall consume the world. In mid-air she sang, and at high noon. Odin, sitting in his throne of gold, was silent, and listening he understood, for from the beginning he had foreknowledge of the end. Yet was he not afraid. He awaited Ragnarok, "the Dusk of the Gods", as in youth he had waited, and now he was grown old.

.       .       .       .       .       .

It was thus the Vala sang:

"The Age of Evil hath come upon earth--the Knife Age, the Axe Age, and the Age of Cloven Shields. The violent fall upon the peaceful; brothers slay brothers, and the children of sisters are shedding one another's blood. Great luxuries do men seek, and sensual sin prevails. The world is doomed, yet is it hard and cruel and full of sin. Thick-pressed in Hela's heavy streams doth Urd behold wading confusedly perjurers and murderers and evildoers without number. . . .

[p. 178]

"Follows the Age of Northern Winds. Sword blasts are cleaving the darkened skies. Fierce beasts from forests and mountains and barren wilds seek their prey among men. None spares his neighbour, nor lifts a hand to save. . . .

"Fimbul Winter is now come. Heavy snows are driven and fall from the world's four corners; the murder frost prevails. The sun is darkened at noon; it sheds no gladness; devouring tempests bellow and never end. In vain do men await the coming of summer. Thrice winter follows winter over a world which is snow-smitten, frost-fettered, and chained in ice. . . . Yet wars are waged, blood is shed, and evil grows greater. . . .

"Suddenly Goldcomb crows loud in Asgard; from Hela's depths the Red Fire-Cock makes answer. On a hilltop in Ironwood the Storm-Eagle flaps heavily its wings, and tempests bellow over ocean and land. . . .

"The giants have gathered to assail Asgard. To Bif-rost they hasten: at the north end are Frost-giants and Mountain-giants; at the south end are the dread sons of Suttung. Heimdal beholds them. In his hand is the Gjallar-horn, which has long been hidden in the deepest shade of Ygdrasil, and from it he blows a thunder blast which awakens the nine worlds. . . . Mimer's seven sons start from sleep in Hela's golden hall, and arm themselves for conflict. . . . Odin talks with Mimer's head; he divines the end of all things, and unafraid he plans his battle array in the last conflict.

"With clamour and speed the giants ascend Bif-rost, and the sublime bridge breaks with the weight of riders, whereat Ygdrasil quakes--the old ash, deep-rooted and strong-rooted, trembles standing, so that the worlds are shaken and the bonds of fettered giants are broken. Loud barks Garm on the rocky isle of the Gulf of Black

[p. 179]

[paragraph continues] Grief, for the wolf Fenrer escapes and Loke is set free, Snapped are the cords that bind Naglefar, the great Ship of Death; it breaks loose. . . .

"The gods are unafraid; they sit in counsel in their High Thingstead. But Njord leaves Asgard and returns to the wise Vans, for the war is waged against the Asa-gods, and Suttung seeks to be avenged upon Odin. . . .

"The elves tremble, and the dwarfs shudder in dim-discovered caverns; they hide behind their rocky walls. In Jotun-heim there is loud bellowing and defiance, and terror spreads among men in Midgard. White fear passes over Hela, for the uncertain conflict is at hand. The sons of Mimer guard the gate: their long swords are in their hands. . . .

"In gloomy Ironwood the ice-cold heart of Angerboda is made glad. Gymer sits upon a mound alone, playing a harp; he is merry because of what is at hand. Long hath he awaited the hour of doom. To him comes Fjalar-Suttung, creator of illusions, in the guise of Hela's red cock, and he seeks the Sword of Victory which Gymer hath guarded--the sword which Thjasse-Volund forged with spells to wreak vengeance upon the gods, which Mimer captured and Svipdag found, the sword which Frey should wield in the last battle, and he yet gave to Angerboda for love of Gerd. To Fjalar-Suttung is the Sword of Victory given up, and he hastens to Surtur. . . .

"Now from the east drives Hrym; a buckler covers him, and his hordes follow. The Midgard serpent is shaken with giant rage, for its hour hath come; it writhes and wallows on Ocean's slimy floor, so that billows are raised and driven over Midgard high as the mountains; it rears its shaggy head out of the sea; venom-spotted is its body, and fire fumes it sends forth.

[p. 180]

[paragraph continues] In Ironwood the storm eagle rises with beating wings. It snaps its sharp beak; it hungers for dead men's flesh. . . .

"The Ship of Death is sailing over the sea. On board are the sons of Muspel, who were bound; the stricken Jotuns, freed from bonds; Garm, the watch-dog; and the unfettered wolf Fenrer. Monsters gaunt and grim are in the ship, and Hel is there also. Loke is the pilot and holds the rudder. To Ironwood he steers over it his host he shall lead to the plain of Vigrid. . . .

"From the south comes black Surtur. In his hand flames the Sword of Victory, which he hath received from Suttung. Seething fire gleams from the sunbright blade, and his bleak avengers follow him. . . .

Mountains are shaken and the rocks tremble. The giant maids are stricken with fear. Mortals n Midgard are strewn in death, and their shades crowd the path to Hela. Heaven yawns; it is rent in twain because that Surtur issues forth. . . .

"On the plains of Vigrid is the last battle fought, A hundred miles it stretches in length, and a hundred miles in width, enclosing the wood of Vidar the Silent, where Odin is doomed to die. . . . The hosts of evil come against the hosts of Asgard. Frey leads the heroes of Valhal in the fray. He goes against black Surtur, unarmed and without fear, and by the Sword of Victory he is slain.

"Against strong Tyr leaps Garm, the fierce wolf-dog, and in dread conflict they engage; and one by the other is wounded, so that both fall dead.

"Loke battles with Heimdal, but against the shining hero the Evil One cannot prevail. Terrible is Loke's aspect after long torture, for his beard and hair have grown like horns. With his bright sword the watchman

[p. 181]

of Bif-rost takes his head. But even after death is the Evil One avenged, for his head strikes the body of Heimdal, who is grievously wounded thereby and brought to life's end.

"There is no longer fear in Hela; the sons of Mimer rejoice because that Loke is dead.

"Thor is engaged in fierce combat with the Midgard serpent. Long is the strife and uncertain. The serpent is coiled and uncoiled; it writhes before Thor; it avoids his hammer blows, and over him it pours floods of venom. Terrible is the wrath of the thunder-god, and fain would he smite his enemy, dreading that he will be overcome. But at length he prevails. Thunder bellows loud and Mjolner flashes fire as Thor smites the deathblow, and the monster is stretched dying upon the plain. Great renown, indeed, hath the God of Thunder gained, yet pays he life's cost for the victory. With its last fierce breath the serpent sends forth suffocating venom fumes, and Thor staggers back nine paces. Then with a thunder groan the victor falls dead. . . .

"How fares Odin in this dread hour? He combats with the ravenous wolf Fenrer, the avenging monster which broke free from its bonds. From earth to heaven its jaws gape. Fiery flames dart from its nostrils and from its eyes. Odin fights with his spear Gungner, and violent are his blows. He rides on Sleipner; on his head gleams his helmet of gold; his blue robe streams behind. Fearless is Odin and proud, and his form is stately in this his hour of doom. Naught can avail him in the great combat. He is stricken down in his splendour, and by the wolf is he devoured.

"Yet short-lived is the triumph of Fenrer. Strong Vidar the Silent advances speedily to avenge his sire's death. His iron-shod foot is stamped on the monster's

[p. 182]

under jaw. He struggles fiercely with the terrible wolf, for he is stronger and must prevail. In the end he tears asunder the great jaws, and plunges his spear in Fenrer's heart through that throat of fire. Thus Odin is avenged. . . .

"How fares the Asa-hosts when Odin and Thor fall, and Tyr and Frey lie dead? The heroes of Valhal are scattered, hordes of giants are killed, and the field is wet with blood. The black dragon Nidhog is soaring through the air with rustling wings. It flies towards the plain of battle and swallows the bodies of the dead. . . . Surtur alone prevails.

"In Heaven there is disaster. Closer and closer hath the giant wolf Skoll crept towards the sun, and now he swallows it. By Hati-Managarm is the moon devoured.

"So is the sun darkened at high noon, the heavens and the earth are turned red with blood, the seats of the mighty gods drip gore. So is the moon lost in blackness, while the stars vanish from the skies.

"Now Surtur completes creation's doom. He casts his firebrands against the scattered Asa-hosts, and those who remain are burned up, save Vale and Vidar, sons of Odin, and Modi and Magni, sons of Thor. Midgard is swept by flame; the smoke curls round mountain tops; all things are burned up; nothing with life remains. Asgard is scorched, and fire envelops the withering trunk of Ygdrasil. Even Nidhog is destroyed in its flight. . . . Earth, smouldering and black, sinks into Ocean; the billows cover it. . . .

"Now there is naught but thick blackness and silence unbroken. The end hath come-Ragnarok, 'the Dusk of the Gods'!"

.       .       .       .       .       .

Silent was then the voice of the Vala in mid-air and

[p. 183]

at high noon. Odin sat in his throne of gold listening through the stillness, unafraid, waiting for Ragnarok and his own doom. Waited he also for the song's end and the promise of Time's new morning, when evil would cease to be and Balder would come back.

The skylark soars till its song falls weakly; at morn is its singing fresh and sweet. Sweet, too, and fresh was the song of the Vala when Odin heard, sitting in his throne, her voice falling through the stillness, afar off but clear.

.       .       .       .       .       .

"In Hela's realms there is sure defence. None goeth thither to conquer, and the long swords are unstained with blood. The fire hath reached not the Underworld. Mimer's seven sons, who have awakened, sleep not again. The roots of Ygdrasil are watered once more from Mimer's well; fire has destroyed not the tree save those branches which had withered; it grows green again.

"The World's New Age hath dawned. The sun is bright in heaven, for Balder hath returned. Earth rises a second time, from the deep sea; it rises clad with green verdure. The sound of falling waters fills the morning air. High soars the eagle; from the mountain ridge he espies the fish. . . .

"Asgard is again made fair. The young gods arrive. Balder is there, and Hodur, his brother; Vale and Vidar are there also, and Mode and Magne, who bear with them Mjolner, the hammer of Thor. Honer, who reads the future, is in their midst; he is able to choose his part.

"Of the evils and perils of past time do the gods converse. Midgard's serpent they call to mind and the wolf Fenrer. They forget not the judgments of the

[p. 184]

gods and the antique mysteries. They remember the sacred runes of mighty Odin. On the grass they find the tablets of gold with which in the Golden Age was played the game of the gods. So did the Asa clan find them on Time's fair morning ere yet by the Hag was Asgard corrupted.

"The world is decked in beauty. Fields yield produce without being sown. Evil is ended and every ill hath ceased. Balder hath indeed returned, and with Hodur he dwells in the holy halls of Odin.

"The sons of the two brothers are in the vast abode of the winds, the wide free hall of the cloud drift. In the sun chariot is Sol's daughter, who is more beautiful than was Sol, and she drives in brightness over a heaven of blue.

"Lifthraser and Lif and their descendants, who are the regenerating race, have come from Mimer's realm to inhabit Midgard. Pure are they and without stain. Honey-dew is their food in Time's new morning: their children shall overspread the earth.

"The new race shall dwell, when life ends, in their hall which is named Gimle. Brighter it shines than the sun, and its roof is of gold, and it stands in high heaven. There indeed shall the holy ones dwell in peace and eternal joy for evermore.

"Northward on Nida mountains is a golden hall. The sons of Mimer and Sindre's race have dwelling within it. In heaven there is also the hall Brimer, where mead drinkers sit round the board amidst plenty and in peace.

"The evil ones who have fallen from their high state dwell in Naastrand. A vast hall it is, and of great height. Its doors are open to the north. With serpents was it built; they are entwined so that their backs are outward and their heads are within. Venom drops from

 

Click to enlarge
THE DUSK OF THE GODS
 From the painting by P. N. Arbo

 

[p. 185]

their jaws; it burns the sinners on the benches beneath; they wade through venom floods in the hall. . . .

"Odin returns not again, nor Heimdal. Another comes who is more mighty. Him I dare not name, for he is All-father. He comes to the great judgment; he utters decrees. He governeth all realms, by him are all things swayed. He settles strife; he makes war to cease. He ordains sacred laws which are inviolable and shall flourish for ever."

.       .       .       .       .       .

The Vala's song was ended, and Odin sat in his golden throne, pondering in silence.

  

Regeneration

Far to the south, beyond the blue, there spreads
 Another Heaven, the boundless--no one yet
 Hath reach'd it; there hereafter shall arise
 The second Asgard, with another name.
 Thither, when o'er this present earth and Heavens
 The tempest of the latter days hath swept,
 And they from sight have disappear'd, and sunk,
 Shall a small remnant of the Gods repair;
 Hoder and I shall join them from the grave.
 There re-assembling we shall see emerge
 From the bright Ocean at our feet an earth
 More fresh, more verdant than the last, with fruits
 Self-springing, and a seed of man preserved,
 Who then shall live in 'peace, as now in war.
 But we in Heaven shall find again with joy
 The ruin'd palaces of Odin, seats
 Familiar, halls where we have supp'd of old;
 Re-enter them with wonder, never fill
 Our eyes with gazing, and rebuild with tears.
 And we shall tread once more the well-known plain [p. 186]
 Of Ida, and among the grass shall find
 The golden dice wherewith we play'd of yore;
 And that will bring to mind the former life
 And pastime of the Gods, the wise discourse
 Of Odin, the delights of other days.
            --From "Balder Dead", by Matthew Arnold.

 

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 187]

  

CHAPTER XVIII

  

The Coming of Beowulf

The First Parents--Heimdal's Mission--A Wise Ruler--Passing of Scyld--Hrothgar builds Heorot--The Demon Grendel--Warriors devoured by Night--Reign of Terror--Beowulf of the Geats--He sets forth to fight the Demon--The Voyage--Challenged by the Shore Guardian--The King's Welcome--Beowulf asks a Boon--Waiting for Grendel--Beowulf keeps Watch.

To Ask and Embla, the first man and the first woman, did the gods impart divine attributes when they had but tree life, and were of little might and without destiny. Naked they stood before Odin at the seaway end. Perceiving their conscious shame, he gave unto them divine garments, and in these they took pride. In Midgard they dwelt, on the shore edge of Western waters, and their children multiplied, and their children's children. The lives of mortals were long in those days; they were yet innocent, and dwelt together in peace. The Golden Age prevailed in Asgard, nor had the Evil One of Ironwood corrupted the gods.

In after days Heimdal, son of Odin and of the nine Vana-mothers who were daughters of sea-dwelling Ran, was given from out of Gjallarhorn a wisdom draught of Mimer's mead. Then became he a child in human guise. In a fair ring-stemmed ship was he laid, wrapped in soft slumber and his pillow was a golden grain sheaf, the gift of Frey, god of harvest. Around him were heaped great treasures war glaives and full armour, weapons and tools,

[p. 188]

which the gods had made in Asgard. The sacred fire-borer took Heimdal also with him--he who was called Stigande, the journey-maker.

There came a sunbright morn when men, looking westward from Scedeland's high shore, saw drifting towards them over the blue sea a fair ship, and on the stem shone golden rings. Nigh it came, and it found a safe harbour and lay therein. With wonder the people beheld on the deck a man-child wrapped in soft slumber; his pillow was a golden grain sheaf, and they named him Scyld [*1] of the Sheaf. Him they took unto their chief's home, and there he was nourished and fostered tenderly. The treasures that were in the ship gave great riches and power unto the tribe, and they received knowledge to grow grain and to use the sacred fire. When the child reached to wise manhood, he became a ruler among men, and long were his years.

Of Heimdal have skalds sung that thrice were sons born to him of earth mothers. The first was Thrall, from whom thralls are descended; the second was Churl, sire of freemen; and the third Jarl, from whom all nobles have sprung.

So when warriors assembled to feast together and drink mead, and ere the song was raised, have skalds spoken thus:--

"Give ear all ye divine races, great and small, sons of Heimdal".

Scyld of the Sheaf achieved great renown. He who was received as a helpless child became a great and good king. He drove invaders from the shores, he scattered ravaging bands, and among the tribes he was regarded with awe, Indeed he waxed so powerful that tribute

[p. 189]

was paid to him by the people who dwell beyond the seaway of whales.

A man-child was born unto Scyld. He was named Beowulf [*1], and when he came to years of strength and knowledge he won fair repute. Among the followers of his sire he distributed many money gifts, so that he won their favour; ready were they indeed to serve him in wartime.

When Scyld was of great age, he departed at his fateful hour to go into the keeping of the Lord. According to his dying request his faithful subjects carried him down to the seabeach. There in the small harbour lay the ship in which as a child he had come over the waves. Ready to go seaward, the vessel waited him in wondrous wintry beauty, glistening with hoar frost and ice. By the mast, on the broad bosom of the ship, the mourners laid down their well-beloved lord, the generous giver of golden money rings. Great treasures they heaped around him-graven ornaments from distant lands, armour and weapons of war and bright swords--and on his breast they put many gems. As rich and numerous were the gifts they gave as were those they had received with the child in other years.

Over the dead king they hoisted a banner of gold. . . . Then was the boat let loose . . . . The tide bore it away to the heaving ocean . . . . Thus in deep sadness was the king given unto the sea, while his people sorrowed for him, watching from the shore. . . . No man can tell who received that fair ship's burden

Beowulf then reigned over the Scyldings, and was honoured and well loved. His son Healfdene [*2], who followed him, was famed afar as a warrior, and when he waxed old he was yet fierce in battle. Four children

[p. 190]

he had--Herogar, a captain of war men; Hrothgar, who became king; Halga the Good; and Elan, the queen of a Swedish chieftain.

Hrothgar was a strong leader, and won many great battles. He received willing service, and under him the young war-men increased in numbers, until he commanded a mighty army. Then bethought he to have a great Hall built, with a larger feasting room than was ever heard of among men. For that purpose were workers from many tribes put in service, and in due season was erected the high, horn-gabled building which was called Heorot, and it awaited the devouring flames.

There was much feasting and merriment in the great Hall. A fierce man-eating monster, which dwelt in darkness, was made angry by the revelry, the music of harps, and the cheerful songs of skalds. One [*1] was in the hall, too, who told how the Almighty did create man and the earth in the midst of the encircling sea, and did set the sun and moon in the heavens to give light and cover the land with branches and leaves.

Thus did war-men live happily indeed in the Hall, until the Hell-fiend began to work evil. Grendel was his name, and he hovered by night on the marches and held moorland and fen. By the Creator were he and his kind banished to their dark lairs, because they were the kindred of Cain, the slayer of Abel, whose evil progeny were monsters and elves and sea-demons, as well as the giants who fought with God, for which he paid them their reward.

Now it happened that in the midst of the night the demon Grendel entered the silenced hall to discover who were lodged there after beer-drinking. He beheld a

[p. 191]

band of high war-men who had feasted, and were wrapped in deep slumber; they had forgotten sorrow, that woeful heritage of men.

With fury was the demon possessed, and thirty of the war-men he carried off while they slept, hastening with exulting heart to his lair with that fill of slaughter.

At daybreak there was grief and loud wailing in the Hall. The great and honoured prince sat moodily, stricken with great sorrow, and gazed at the blood track of the fierce demon. His distress was long-lasting, and deep.

On the next night the demon Grendel returned, and did more murderous deeds. Nor had he any regret thereat, so much was he steeped in crime. Then was it easy indeed to find men who sought inner chambers by night. He alone who found farthest retreat escaped the fierce fiend. [*1]

Then became Grendel the master indeed. For the space of twelve long winters Hrothgar endured because of the demon great sorrow and deep loss. Minstrels went abroad making known in song the ceaseless outrages and fierce strife. No offering would Grendel take, nor could the greatest war-man who was seized expect to escape his doom. He entrapped young and old; on the mist-dark moorlands he seized his victims night after night. In vain did Hrothgar lament and make offerings unto idols, and pray that the soul destroyer would give them release from the demon. So did the heathen, as was their custom, remember hell, for they knew not the Creator, the Judge of Deeds, the Lord God, nor could they praise the Lord of Glory.

Then did Beowulf, a thane among the Geats, come to hear in his fatherland of the deeds of Grendel. In his

[p. 192]

time he was the strongest among living men, and he was noble as he was indeed mighty.

"Get ready my good wave-traverser," he said. "I shall go unto Hrothgar over the swan-way; he hath need of men."

The prudent, who depended on his aid, sought not to hold Beowulf back; they urged on the stout-hearted hero, and looked eagerly for favourable omens.

Beowulf selected fourteen of the finest war men to go with him, and took also a sea-skilled mariner, who knew the landmarks along the path of Ocean. Then to the ship they all went together: it lay beached below a sheltering headland. The warriors, bearing their arms, walked on to the stem. while the sea waves were washed against the sand. The armour and ornaments were placed on board, and then the willing heroes pushed into deep water the strong timber-braced ship. Like to a bird was that swift floater, necked with white foam, driven by favourable winds over the sea waves. All night they sailed on, and next day they beheld high and shining cliffs, steep mountains, and bold sea-nesses. So came they to the seaway end; the voyage was over and past.

The heroes leapt speedily from the ship and made it fast to the shore. Their armour clinked as they turned inland, while they thanked God that the seaway had been made easy to them.

Then there came towards them the Coast Guardian of the Scyldings, riding upon his horse along the shore. He shook his strong spear shaft as he drew nigh, and he spake, saying:

"Who are ye who in a high ship have come over the seaway, well -armed and bearing weapons? Know ye that I keep watch over the shore so that sea plunderers may not do harm to Denmark. Never have I beheld armed

 

Click to enlarge
VIKING SHIP FROM GOKSTAD
 Now in the University, Christiana

 

[p. 193]

men landing more openly; nor know ye the password of friends. Nor ever have I beheld a greater earl than this one among you. Unless his looks belle him, he is no home-stayer. Noble is his air. . . . Ere you advance farther to spy out the land, I must know who ye are. Now, listen to me, sea travellers from afar, my frank advice is that ye reveal at once from whence ye come."

That shore guardian did Beowulf answer thus: "We are Geats, the hearth friends of Hygelac. My sire Ecgtheow, the noble leader, was renowned among the people; he is remembered by every wise man. Now know that we come seeking thy king, the son of Healfdene, protector of the people. Be thou our guide. A great mission is ours, nor need its purpose be concealed. To us; hath it been told, and thou knowest if it is true, that a malignant foeman works evil by night among the Scyldings. I can council Hrothgar how the fiend may be overcome and his misery have end."

On his horse sitting, the fearless shore guardian spake in answer, saying: "A shield war man shall judge well between your words and deeds. Friendly are you, I hear, to the ruler of the Scyldings. Then pass onward in armour carrying your weapons. I shall guide ye. My comrades shall guard thy ship, so that the well-loved man, thy leader, may return over the sea tides to the borders of the Weders. To him it is assured that he shall come unscathed through the battle crush."

Together they went on their way until they came to the high and gold-decked Hall of Hrothgar. The shore-guardian pointed towards it and said: "Now must I take my departure. May the Almighty protect you all in your adventure. To the seashore I must hasten to keep watch against hostile bands."

Beowulf and his heroes reached the Hall. Sea-weary

[p. 194]

they all were, and they placed their shields and armour against the wall; they put their spears together and rested on benches.

A warrior, who was Hrothgar's messenger, asked them whence they came. "Never," said he, "have I seen bolder strangers. It would seem that ye have come to seek Hrothgar, not because of exile, but because of your bravery and noblemindedness."

Then did Beowulf reveal who he was and seek audience with the king, and his message did Wulfgar bear unto Hrothgar, who sat, grey-headed and old, among his peers.

"As a youth I knew Beowulf," the aged ruler said. "He comes to a sure friend. Of him have I heard that his hand hath the strength of thirty men. The holy God hath sent him hither as a help against the dreaded Grendel."

So he bade the messenger welcome Beowulf and his men and usher them to his presence.

When Beowulf entered he hailed Hrothgar, the kinsman of Hygelac, standing before him in shining armour.

"In my youth," he said, "I have undertaken great exploits. In my fatherland heard I of the evil deeds of Grendel, and my people counselled me, knowing my great strength, that I should come hither. For they know well that I avenged the sorrow of the Weders, bound five of their foes, slew a brood of giants, and killed sea monsters by night. . . . Alone shall I go now against this demon, this giant Grendel!"

Then asked Beowulf as a boon that he alone with his warriors should be left to cleanse the hall of the monster. Having heard that Grendel had no fear of weapons, he also made known his desire to contend with him unarmed.

[p. 195]

[paragraph continues] "With the fiend," he said, "I shall wrestle for life, foe against foe."

Hrothgar accepted Beowulf's offer with gladness, and granted him the boon he sought. Then was a bench cleared for the noble heroes. They sat there in pride and drank of bright liquor. Songs were sung by a clear-voiced minstrel. There was much joy in the hall among the Danes and the Weders, who were no small company.

When they had feasted, and the queen bore the cup round the heroes, young and old, she greeted Beowulf, who, when he had drunk, said he had vowed to slay Grendel or perish in his clutches.

The old queen was much pleased to hear the words which the great hero spake.

Loud revelry was heard in the hall once more until Hrothgar desired to go to his couch. Well he knew that the night-haunting monster would attack the hall when the sun's radiance was dimmed and shadows fell, and dusky shapes were stalking under the clouds.

Then the whole company arose and greeted the heroes. Hrothgar greeted Beowulf and wished him success and power in the hall.

"Be mindful of thy renown," the king said, "make known thy great might, be watchful against the foe. . . . Thou shalt lack naught that thou dost desire if thou shalt survive this conflict."

Whereupon Hrothgar went forth with all his warriors, leaving the hall to Beowulf and his men.

When he was thus left alone with his heroes, the chief of Geats took off his armour, and gave his decorated sword to his thane. Ere he lay down in bed he said

"No less in fighting strength than Grendel do I

[p. 196]

account myself. I shall not slay him with my sword as I well might. He knows not the noble art to strike back, splitting my shield, although he hath courage and strength in evildoing. No weapons shall we use if he dares combat without them. . . . May the wise God, the holy Lord, give victory to the side which may seem meet to Him.

On his pillow Beowulf then laid his head. Around him on beds lay his warriors, nor did one of them expect ever again to return to his home; for each of them had heard how, in times past, the Danish warriors were taken from the Hall in bloody death.

In the blackness of night Grendel, the shadow-goer, came striding towards the Hall. . . . The warriors, sea-weary and spent, lay wrapt in deep slumber, nor kept watch--all save one. He alone was defiantly awake, awaiting the issue of the conflict with increasing wrath.

Footnotes

^188:1 As in Beowulf. Elsewhere Scyld is called son of Sheaf.

^189:1 The elder Beowulf; not the hero of the poem.

^189:2 Halfdan.

^190:1 Evidently an interpolation by a Christian copyist. Further on offerings are made to idols.

^191:1 Grendel could enter the hall only: other dwellings were "taboo".

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 197]

  

CHAPTER XIX

  

Conflict with Demons

Grendel enters the Hall--A Warrior devoured--Struggle with Beowulf--Terror-stricken Danes--The Hero Triumphant--Flight of the Demon--The Great Feast--Beowulf honoured--Grendel's Mother takes her Revenge--The Hero follows her--His Great Dive--Fight in the Cave--The Ancient Giant-sword--The She Demon slain--How Beowulf became a Prince.

OVER the moor in the black mist Grendel came stalking. The wrath of God was upon him. He saw the high hall and hungered for human flesh. . . . Stealthily he strode below the dark clouds, so that he might peer into the feasting chamber, which was decorated with gold and shining with ornaments. . . . It was not the first time he had entered it, but never before did he meet therein with a mightier warrior and braver watchmen.

So came that accursed fiend towards the Hall. The door was shut and strongly barred with iron bands; but he smote it with his great hands and it flew open. The demon was bent upon evil and swollen with fury as he tore through the entrance. With swift footsteps he strode his silent way over the finely paved floor. . . . He raged inwardly, and in the darkness awesome lights, like to fire, burned in his eyes. . . . He surveyed the hall; he saw warriors asleep on the benches and his heart exulted as he resolved to devour each one separately ere the night was spent. . . . But he had come to his last feast of human flesh.

[p. 198]

Beowulf lay watching Grendel. Soon the hero beheld how suddenly the fiend snatched up his prey. Without delay that grim monster clutched a sleeping warrior, tore him asunder, chewed his flesh, and drank his blood, swallowing great mouthfuls quickly, until he completely devoured the man, and even his hands and feet.

Then Grendel came nearer; his claws darted out to wards Beowulf as he lay in bed. But the hero divined the demon's purpose, and he clutched the monstrous arm and threw his weight upon it. . . . Never before did Grendel feel a stronger hand-grip, and he was suddenly stricken with terror and sought to escape. . . . In vain he struggled to break free, so that he might take flight into the blackness of night-back again to the demons of his gang.

But Beowulf was mindful of his evening boast; he leapt from bed; he stood erect; tightly he grasped the monster; his fingers burst. . . . Grendel twisted and swayed; backward he sprawled towards the door, but the hero went with him, nor relaxed his grip. The wily fiend sought to slip without, if it were possible, and then flee to the darksome fen. He realized what strength there was in Beowulf's hands. . . . A luckless visit indeed had the monster made to Heorot.

Loud rang the clamour in the hall. Terror seized upon the Danes in their safe dwellings without; there was panic among them. . . . Beowulf and Grendel raged with fury; the building resounded as they struggled and crashed round and about. . . . It was a wonder that the feasting-hall was not shattered, and that it ever survived the savage conflict; it might well have fallen to the ground, but the timbers were bound together by well-forged iron bands. . . . Never could it be destroyed by hands, although the flames might devour it.

[p. 199]

Then arose a loud and awesome scream. . . . The Danes were stricken with terrible dread, because they heard the demon's cries of despair--his screeching song lamenting for his wound.

Beowulf held fast; he would not suffer the man-eating fiend to escape alive. . . . Of little account was Grendel's life to the world of men. . . .

The battle heroes in the hall sought to help their lord. They fell upon the monster without fear, and smote him with their war swords, but without avail, for Grendel's body was charmed against weapon wounds, and they could do him no hurt.

But miserable was to be the life ending of the fiend; his alien spirit was fated to travel afar to be bound by devils. The crime worker, the devourer of men, the enemy of God, realized that his body would endure not or give him help and sure defence. Brave Beowulf had him in his power; each loathed the other with fierce hate.

In agony was Grendel. . . . A wound gaped on his shoulder; it was torn wider and wider; the sinews snapped; the flesh burst . . . . The glory of battle was given to great Beowulf . . . . Sick unto death Grendel must indeed escape to his joyless lair below the darksome fen: he knew that his life days were spun to an end. . . . So tearing away, he left his arm and shoulder in Beowulf's hands.

Thus was the desire of the Danes achieved, and the boast of the great hero fulfilled. The high hall was cleansed of Grendel. That indeed did the people who were stricken and put to shame realize when they entered Heorot, for from the great roof had Beowulf suspended the arm of the night demon with its iron-strong hand and clutching claws.

In the safety of morning the warriors hastened to the

[p. 200]

[paragraph continues] Hall; from far and near the people gathered to gaze with wonder on the traces of the conflict. The blood tracks of the monster were on the ground. The warriors followed his trail on horseback until they came to the water of sea demons, which they beheld weltering with blood; the waves surged red and hot with gore. The death-doomed Grendel had laid his life down in his lair--his heathen soul. There Hela [*1] snatched him away.

Then the mounted warriors rode back and proclaimed the tidings and the glory of Beowulf, of whom they said that no other warrior between the seas and the world ever was his equal or worthier of a kingdom.

Then was great rejoicing. Warriors held races on horses, one with another, and a minstrel thane sang of Beowulf's deed, and of Sigemund, the Volsung, who slew the dragon. To the Hall went many retainers to behold the arm of Grendel. The king went to view it with his nobles, and the queen went with her maidens.

Hrothgar gave thanksgiving to God because that the dread of Grendel was ended, and, addressing Beowulf, whom he called "the valiant hero", he vowed that henceforth he would love him as a son. "Thy fame," he said, "shall endure for ever."

Beowulf spake in answer, and said he had done the deed with great goodwill. "Would", he said, "that thou hadst witnessed the conflict. I thought to hold down the fiend on his deathbed until he died, but I could not prevent his going away."

The warriors were silent about him: they looked on the arm suspended from the roof; they saw the finger-claws which were like steel. Then they said that no weapon could have cut off that bloody battlehand of the demon.

 

Click to enlarge
VIKING RELICS
 1. Gold Collar from Oland. 2. Masked Helmet from Thorsbjerg Moss. 3. Drinking-horn. 4. Portion of a Damascened Sword from Nydam. 5. Bronze Sword Grip decorated with gold and garnets.
 1. 3, and 5 reproduced by permission from ''Kulturgeshichte Schwedens'' by Oscar Montelius

 

[p. 201]

A great feast was given in Heorot in Beowulf's honour. Hrothgar gave unto the hero as gifts a golden banner, a helm and war armour and richly jewelled sward. Eight battle steeds gave he also, and on one was the king's war saddle, adorned with embroidery and gems. To each of the hero's followers was given a sword, and blood money was paid for the warrior whom Grendel had devoured.

At the feast a minstrel sang of the deeds of King Finn [*1] and of Hengest, Hnaef, and Hildeburgh--how Finn married Hildeburgh, the sister of Hnaef, who was afterwards slain and burned at the king's hall, and how Hengest went against Finn and slew him, returning to the fatherland with Hildeburgh.

When the song was ended, Hrothgar's queen, Wealtitheow, gave the golden cup to the king, and then bore it to Beowulf, to whom she also gave two golden armlets, a mantle, and a jewelled collar which was as precious as the collar of the Brisings, [*2] which Hama took from Eormanric. The wondrous collar did Beowulf afterwards gift to his king, Hygelac, who wore it when, in after days, he fell fighting against the Frisians, when to them it passed.

The feast was then spread; men drank wine. They knew not stem Wyrd [*3]--Destiny--as had many of the nobles before them there. And when evening came, Hrothgar rose and left the hall, and Beowulf went also to sleep in an outer dwelling. The benches were cleared and laid out as sleeping couches. . . . One among the revellers was doomed that night to die. . . . Each of

[p. 202]

the warriors hung his armour and weapons on the wall at his head, ready for sudden alarm and night attack. Brave men were they!

Now demon vengeance was brooding against the warriors because that Grendel was slain. His mother, a female demon, was filled with woe in her dwelling amidst awesome waters and cold streams. Ravenous and wrathful she resolved to go forth to avenge her son's death.

In the darkness she made her sorrowful way, and came to Heorot while the warriors slept on the benches. When she broke in there was again terror in the hall, which was just as much less than before as is a woman's strength unto a man's on the battlefield.

Swords were drawn hastily: there was no time to don armour. The she demon, perceiving that she was discovered, made haste to depart, but she had seized in her grim claws a sleeping noble, and she carried him off towards the fen. He was Hrothgar's comrade warrior and shield bearer, Aeschere, who was famed between the two seas and well beloved. . . . A wailing arose in Heorot; the demon had taken life for life.

The old king was sorrow-stricken when he knew that his chief warrior was slain. He summoned Beowulf to a council, and the hero went with his followers. Along the floor strode the war-famed hero, while the timbers resounded his steps. He asked of the king if he had passed, according to his desire, an easeful night.

"Ask not of my welfare!" the king cried. "Sorrow has again fallen upon the Danes. Aeschere is dead--my right-hand man, my councillor, my teacher. The death demon is his murderer. By her is her son's death avenged. My comrade she hath slain because thou didst kill Grendel, who for long slaughtered my people. So is the feud continued against us ... . . .

[p. 203]

Then did the king tell Beowulf that ofttimes he heard that two dread stalkers held the moors by night. One of them had a woman's seeming; the other was Grendel. None knew if there was a sire in times past. Their lair was under the cliffs where a stream fell downward--in an underworld flood below a tree-girt mere. Nightly was a wonder beheld there--fire in the flood! No man knew how deep was the mere. The hart when close pursued will die rather than enter the water. An awesome place it is!

Thence do the waves surge to the clouds when the wind stirs up fearsome storms, the air is filled with mist, and the heavens weep. [*1]

Then said the king unto Beowulf: "Once more do we look to thee for aid. Thou knowest not yet the demon lair, the perilous retreat, where the monster may be found. Seek it if thou art unafraid! Then shall I reward as heretofore with gifts of gold if thou shalt survive."

Beowulf was, indeed, without fear. He besought the king to sorrow not. "Better it is," he said, "to avenge a comrade than to grieve without end." So he counselled that they should go forth quickly and follow the demon's blood trail to her den. Bravely he spoke thus:--

"Not in earth's bosom, in mountain wood, or in the sea depths, go where she may, shall the kin of Grendel escape me! . . . Be patient in thy grief this day, O king, as I expect of thee."

With joy the king leapt up, hearing the words that Beowulf spake. He called for his horse, and, followed by his men, went forth with Beowulf and his warriors.

[p. 204]

[paragraph continues] They followed the track of the demon over the moor, and came to the stony places and the cliffs and the homes of sea-monsters. They reached the grey rock [*1] overhung by trees, and below they beheld the mere surging and red with blood. On a cliff top they found Aeschere's head.

In the water they beheld serpents and awesome sea dragons. On a ledge were sea monsters that go down the ocean paths. When the horn gave out a battle-lay they rushed seaward, and one did Beowulf wound unto death with an arrow so that he swam slowly in the water. The war-men thrust barbed boar spears at it and dragged it ashore. With wonder they gazed on their awesome guest.

Beowulf then girded on his armour, and on his head put his battle helmet. Then gave Hrothgar's spokesman, Unferth, unto him the strong blade which was named Hrunting. Of iron was it made, and tempered with blood of battle; it had been forged with twig venom and never had it failed in battle.

Then Beowulf addressed Hrothgar and besought him to be guardian of his comrades should he himself survive not, and to send unto Hygelac the treasures he had received.

"I shall achieve fame with Hrunting," Beowulf cried, "or death shall take me."

He awaited no answer and plunged; the surging waters received him. Downward he sank a day's space ere he found the bottom. . . . Soon the demon discovered that an alien being came against her, and she clutched Beowulf in her finger claws, but by reason of his strong armour she could do him no hurt. Sea

[p. 205]

monsters attacked him with sharp tusks, [*1] so that he could not use his sword, and they followed as the demon drew him into her lair. Then did Beowulf perceive that he was dragged into a hall beyond the sea's reach. The glow of fire-like light was shining bright, and Beowulf perceived that the mere wife had taken him. He smote her with his sword--a great free blow he gave, and the blade rang on her head. But no wound could he inflict. Never before had the sword failed in conflict! Then did the hero fling down the blade. He would have his strength of arm for sure defence. So, desperate-minded, does a battle man fight when he hopes for fame and recks not of life. . . . The shoulder of Grendel's mother he seized and in great fury wrestled and flung the demon down. . . .

But fiercely she clutched at him. In her claws she held him securely. They struggled together thus until the battle hero, heart-weary, at length was overthrown. On the ground he fell and the she demon sat upon him. ... She drew swiftly her broad and bloodstained dagger to avenge her only son. . . . Then would the hero have died there, but over his shoulder lay his chain armour and that saved him. . . . To his feet he leapt again.

Beowulf suddenly beheld among the armour in the demon's lair an ancient giant-sword. It was a blade without an equal. No other living man could wield it, for it was the choice of splendid weapons, and giants had made it. The hero seized it and wielded it.

Strong was Beowulf, and in battle fury he swung the giant-sword and smote the demon a fierce blow, cleaving her at the neck and shattering her bone-rings. Right through her body went the blade, and she sank

[p. 206]

in death.... Blood-wet indeed was the sword, and Beowulf gloried in his deed.

Then light flashed through the hall, as when heaven's candle gleams from on high. . . . The hero gazed about him. . . . He saw Grendel lying maimed and dead on his resting place, and in vengeance for the evil that monster had done, Beowulf smote his body so that it was split open. Then the head he struck off.

On the cliff top the warriors waited, watching the angry waters. . . . In time, Hrothgar beheld the waves rising red with blood. Old and grey-haired war men spoke one to another about the brave one; nor did they expect to see him return again in triumph, for they deemed that the wolf demon had torn him asunder. . . . So they spoke and waited, until in the ninth hour the Scylding heroes turned away. Hrothgar went with them to his home. . . . Nor did the Geats expect ever to behold Beowulf again; yet they waited, gazing at the blood-red waters.

Meanwhile, in the demon's wave-protected hall, the giant sword which the hero had wielded began to waste away in the bloodstream. A strange thing was that! Like ice it melted, as when the Father unties the frost chains and the flood flows free.

Beowulf took not any of the other arms that were on the wall, but he kept the gold and graven swordhilt of which the blade was burnt up by reason of the fiend's hot and poisonous blood. Then, seizing the monstrous head of Grendel, he entered the waters and soon again he was swimming--he who survived fearsome strife, for by this time were the waters purged of blood and he rose quickly. He came to shore, and his war men rejoiced, as did also the brave hero, for he was proud of his mighty load of sea spoil.

[p. 207]

Quickly did his men unloose his armour, and with glad hearts they went inland with him. Heavy was the burden of Grendel's head, which was carried to the hall on a spear shaft, the warriors marching in triumph.

Into the feasting-chamber they strode, where people sat drinking, and dragged Grendel's head along the floor. . . . An awesome sight was that to the nobles and the queen who sat with them. In silence the warriors gazed upon the monstrous head, wondering greatly.

Then did Beowulf address the king, telling him of the dread peril he endured ere yet he slew the demon. "But now," the hero said, "thou canst sleep in Heorot among thy warriors as heretofore, nor fear murderous attacks in the darkness."

To Hrothgar gave Beowulf the sword-hilt rich in victory, the work of a wonder-smith. It was a heritage of the past, and upon it was engraved that primeval war when the surging sea engulfed the race of giants [*1]. Terribly were they punished--that people who were alien to the Eternal Lord; the Supreme Ruler gave them their final deserts in the flood. A gold plate upon the hilt had engraved in runes the name of him for whom that choicest of weapons was first made with decorated hilt and serpent ornament. [*2]

There was silence in the hall when Hrothgar, son of Halfdane, spoke of Beowulf's deed. Well may he say, an aged guardian who promotes truth and right among the people and remembers all from the far past, "that this nobleman is of high birth. Beowulf, my friend, thy renown is raised above all people, far and

[p. 208]

wide. With modesty and prudence thou dost bear thyself. My friendship thou shalt have, as I promised thee. Thou shalt ever be a strength to thy people and an aid to war men.

Not so was Heremod [*1] to the children of Ecgwela, the renowned Scyldings. Not for their happiness did he flourish, but to bring cruelty and slaughter to the Danes. God had given him power and strength greater than any other man, but he had a fierce heart; he gave not money rings; he was without joy, and he endured grief because of his savagery and never-ending enmity with his people. Follow not that example. Have manly virtue. Many winters have made me wise, and for thee I have told this tale."

Further did the king give wise counsel to Beowulf, advising him to distribute gifts to his people, so that he might ever have their support, and to avoid vaunting pride, because the day would come when his strength would depart, and in the end death would take him.

A great feast was held in the Hall, and there was much rejoicing, and Beowulf slept there until the raven, with blithe heart, proclaimed the joy of dawn.

Then did the hero bid Hrothgar farewell. An alliance of peace was formed between the Scyldings and the Geats. The old king kissed the hero and shed tears.

To the coast guardian Beowulf gifted a gold-hilted sword. Then with his followers he went aboard the ship in which were the treasures and armour and horses which Hrothgar had given.

 

Click to enlarge
VIKING ORNAMENTS
 1. Pin-brooch; 2, 3, 4, 5, Bronze Buckles; 6, Gold Neck-chain with Hammer of Thor hanging at bottom

 

[p. 209]

The good ship clove the sea waters; the sail swallowed the wind; the timbers creaked; necked with white foam the ocean traverser, with curved stem, sailed away. Favourable were the winds until they saw the Geatish headlands and the keel grated on the shore.

To King Hygelac did Beowulf relate his adventures, and then he distributed the gifts he had received, giving that monarch a coat of mail and four horses, and to the queen, Hygd, the beauteous collar and three horses. Hygelac awarded the hero a gold-headed sword, much money, a country seat, and the rank of a prince.

Footnotes

^200:1 Urd, Queen of Hela.

^201:1 One of several heroic poems founded on the Ivalde moon-myth.

^201:2 Probably a legend founded on the fight between Heimdal and Loke, when the latter tries to steal Brisingamen, Freyja's necklace. Hama is Heimdal.

^201:3 Urd, Queen of Fate (as chief Norn) and of Death.

^203:1 Ironwood and the Hag are suggested. Hati-managarm, Angerboda's son, is also a maneater like Grendel.

^204:1 The Svipdag-dragon is also under a grey rock. The treasures he guards, and especially Freyja's necklace, also shine like fire in the water.

^205:1 Walruses?

^207:1 The sons of Ymer.

^207:2 The traditional Sword of Victory, made by Thjasse-Volund, which was in the keeping of the Hag of Ironwood and her shepherd, Gymer. The runes, the smith's name, and the serpent charm suggest its magical qualities. It was evidently intended to achieve as great a disaster as did the Ymer deluge.

^208:1 A reference to an older heroic tale. Hermod, the son of Odin, who visited Balder in Hades, has some connection with the Svipdag myth. Indeed, Rydberg identifies him with Svipdag. Beowulf is a hero of similar cast. Each has the attributes of the age in which their deeds were sung, and reflect the ideals of the people who celebrated them. Older savage conceptions, preserved by tradition, were condemned when compared with the new and nobler.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 210]

  

CHAPTER XX

  

Beowulf and the Dragon

Beowulf in Battle--He becomes King of the Geats--A Slave's Discovery --Theft of Treasure--The Dragon devastates the Kingdom --Beowulf is angered--He sets forth to slay the Monster--Address to his Followers--The Dragon comes forth--The Great Conflict--Flight of Followers--The single Faithful Knight--He helps the King--Dragon slain--The Treasure--Beowulf's Death--Wiglaf reproaches the Battle Laggards--How the People sorrowed.

BEOWULF gave faithful service to Hygelac. In peace he was his wise counsellor, and in war his right-hand battle man. Then did the king fall fighting against the Frisians and Hugs. His death was avenged by Beowulf on the field, for he seized Doeghrefn, the hero of the Hugs, and slew him, not with his sword. "I grasped him," the hero could boast; "his beating heart I stilled. I crushed his bones." Then swam Beowulf away towards home, escaping unscathed, and bearing with him the armour of thirty warriors.

Queen Hygd mourned the king's death, and to Beowulf made offer of the kingdom, but he chose to be faithful to Hygelac, and protected his young son, Heardred, until he grew to years of wisdom and strength. But the young king was slain by Eanmund, and Beowulf was given the throne. He avenged the death of Heardred by slaying his murderer's brother, Eadgils.

For fifty winters did Beowulf reign wisely and well. Then a great dragon began to ravage his country with

[p. 211]

fire. Alone did the monarch combat  it, and in the end was the victor. But he paid life's cost for his triumph.

Now the dragon had its dwelling in a secret cavern beneath a grey rock, on the shoreland of a lonely, upland moor. No man knew the path thither. It chanced then that a slave who had been sorely beaten by his master fled towards the untrodden solitudes, and he came to the dragon's lair while yet the monster slept. Quaking with fear, he beheld it there guarding rich treasure which had been hidden in ancient days by a prince, the last of his race. All his people had fallen in a great war, and he wandered about alone mourning for his friends. Then he hid the treasures of the tribe where the slave found them. Armour and great swords were there, a banner of gold that lit up the cavern, golden cups, and many gems and. ornaments, collars and brooches, the work of giants in ancient times.

The ancient dragon which went forth by night wrapped in fiery flame found the treasure unprotected, and from that hour became the guardian of it.

Now the slave who discovered the monster's lair had more greed than fear in his heart as he gazed upon the hoard. So he went lightly past the dragon's head and seized a rich golden cup, and fled away over the rocks. To his master he carried the treasure, and thus secured his pardon and goodwill.

The dragon soon afterwards awoke. He smelt along the rocks; he saw the footprints of the man on the ground, and searched for him angrily. Round about the monster went, but saw no one in that dismal solitude. Hot was the dragon's heart with desire for conflict. Then he returned to the cavern and found that the treasure had been rifled. Great was his wrath thereat,

[p. 212]

and he panted to be avenged. So waited he for nightfall, when he could go forth against mankind.

In the thick darkness the great dragon flew over the land. He vomited coals of fire over many a fair home. The flames made lurid blaze against the sky, and men were terror-stricken. It seemed that the night flyer was resolved not to leave aught alive, for far and near the countryside blazed before him. Great harm, indeed, did he accomplish in his fierce hate for the people of Geatland.

All night long the raging flames swept the land, and far and near they wrought disaster. Not until it was very nigh unto dawn did the dragon cease his vengeful work and take swift departure to its lair. Great faith had he in the security of his hiding place, but his faith proved to be futile.

To Beowulf the grievous tidings of the night horrors were sent quickly. His own country dwelling, the gift of the Geats, was smouldering in fire. Sorrow-stricken, indeed was the brave old king; no greater grief could have befallen him. In deep gloom he sat alone, who was wont to be cheerful, wondering by what offence he had made angry the Almighty, the Everlasting Lord.

The fire drake had burned up the people's stronghold; the sea-skirting land was devastated. Waves washed inland. . . . Beowulf was filled with anger against the monster, and resolved to be avenged. So he began to make ready for the combat. He bade that a shield of iron be made for him, for a wooden shield would be of no avail against raging fire. . . . Alas! the valiant hero was doomed to come ere long to life's sad end, as was also the serpent fiend who had for so long kept guard over the secret hoard. . . .

Beowulf scorned to attack the flying monster with a

[p. 213]

host of war men; he had no fear of going forth alone, no dread of single combat, nor did he hold the battle powers of the dragon as of high account. Many conflicts and many war-fights he had survived unscathed since he, the hero of many frays, had cleansed Heorot and wrestled in combat with Grendel, the hated fiend.

Twelve valiant and true war men he selected to go with him against the fire drake. And as he had come to know how its dread vengeance had been stirred up against his people, he took with him also the slave who had rifled the treasure, so that he might be a guide to lead them unto the monster's den. A sorrowful heart was in th at poor man; abject and trembling he showed the way, much against his will, to the mound in which was the treasure, while underneath the dragon kept guard. It was on a rocky shoreland where the waves bellowed in unceasing strife.

Beowulf sat on the grey cliff looking over the sea. His hearth comrades were about him, and he spoke to them words of farewell, for he knew that Wyrd had tied fast the life thread of his web. His soul was sad and restless, and he was ready to go hence. Not long after that his spirit departed the flesh.

Of his whole life the king spake, recounting the long service he had accomplished since that he was but seven years old, when King Hrethel took him from his father and gave him, food and pay, mindful of his kinship. Of his deeds of valour he spoke, and life's afflictions, and touchingly he told of a father's sorrow when his son was taken from him. Such an one in his old age remembered every morn the lost lad. For another he had no desire. With sorrow he beheld his son's empty home, with deserted wine hall that heard but the moaning winds, for the horseman and hero slept in the grave, and no longer

[p. 214]

was heard the harp's music and the voices of men making merry.

'Twas thus he spake of Hrethel, the king who sorrowed when his son was slain and avenged not; abandoning the world the stricken monarch sought a solitary place in which to end his days.

Then spake Beowulf of Hygelac, whom he served and did avenge, and his son whom he avenged also.

"When yet young," the hero said, "I fought many battles, and now when I am old I seek fame in combat with the dragon, if he but come from his underground dwelling."

He must needs, Beowulf told his followers, wear his armour in that last fray. Naked he fought with Grendel, but now he must stand against consuming flame.

"I shall draw not back a foot's space," he said boldly and with calm demeanour, "nor shall I flee before the watcher of treasure; before the rock it shall be as Wyrd [*1] decrees--Wyrd who measures out a man's life. . . . Ready am I, and I boast not before the dragon. . . . Ye warriors in armour, watch ye from the mound, so that ye may perceive which of us is best able to survive the strife after deadly attack. . . It is not for one of you to fight as I must fight; the adventure is for me only. . . . Gold shall I win for triumph, and death is my due if I fail. . . ."

Then fully armoured under his strong helmet, his shield on his left arm, his sword by his side, the valorous hero of the Geats went down the cliff path towards the dragon's cavern. . . . He saw the stream which flowed from the stone ramparts steaming hot with deadly fire; nigh to the hoard he could not endure long the flame of the dragon.

[p. 215]

But filled was his great heart with battle fury. A storm-like shout he gave--a strong battlecry that went under the grey stone. . . . In wrath the monster heard him; he knew the voice of man. . . . Nor was there time then to seek peace. Fiery flame issued forth first: it was the dragon's battle breath. . . . The earth shook. . . . Beowulf stood waiting, his iron shield upraised. . . . The monster curled itself to spring; Beowulf waited in his armour. . . .

Then forth came the wriggling monster--swiftly to his fate he came. The shield gave that strong hero good defence against the flame. His sword was drawn, and it was an ancient heritage, keen-edged and sure. . . . Both the king and the dragon were bent on slaughter; each feared the other.

Beowulf swung his great sword, and smote the dragon's head, but the blade glanced from the bone, for Wyrd did not decree otherwise. Then the hero was enveloped in fire, for in wrath at the blow the monster spouted flame far and wide. Greatly did the brave one suffer. . . . His followers standing on the mound were terror-stricken; to the wood they fled, fearing for their lives.

But one remained; he alone sorrowed and sought to help the king. He was named Wiglaf, a shield warrior, a well-loved lord of Scyldings. He remembered the honours and the gifts which Beowulf had bestowed upon him. . . . He could not hold back; he grasped his wooden shield and drew his ancient sword--a giant's sword which Onela gave him. To his comrades he cried: "Promised we not to help our lord in time of need when with him we drank in the mead-hall? Rather would I perish in fire with our gold-giver than that we should return again with shields unscathed. . . . Advance then.

[p. 216]

[paragraph continues] Give help to our lord. . . Together shall we stand side by side behind the same defence."

So speaking, that young hero plunged through the death smoke, hastening to Beowulf's aid. Never before had Wiglaf fought at his chief's side.

"Beloved hero," Wiglaf spake, "do thy utmost as of yore. Let not thy honour fail. Put forth thy full strength and I shall help thee."

Then came the dragon to attack a second time. Brightly flamed the fire against his hated human foes. The young hero's wooden shield was burnt up, and behind Beowulf's he shielded himself.

Again Beowulf smote the dragon, but his grey sword, Naegling, snapped in twain, whereat the monster leapt on the lord of the Geats, and took that hero's neck in his horrible jaws, so that the king's life blood streamed over his armour. But Wiglaf smote low, and his sword pierced the dragon, so that the fire abated.

Beowulf drew his death dagger, and striking fiercely he cut the monster in twain. So was the dragon slain; so did the heroes achieve great victory and renown.

But the king was wounded unto death. The dragon's venom boiled in his blood, and he knew well that his end was nigh. Faint and heart-weary he went and sat down, gazing on the rocky arches of the dragon's lair, which giants had made. . . . Wiglaf came and washed the bloodstained king, who was weary after the conflict, and unloosed his helmet and took it off. Tenderly he ministered unto Beowulf in his last hour. Well knew the king that he was nigh unto death.

"It is now my desire," Beowulf said faintly, "to give unto my son, if it had been granted to me to have one, this my war armour. . . . For fifty winters I have ruled over my people, nor was there a king who dared come

 

Click to enlarge
ENTRANCE TO PASSAGE-GRAVE AT UBY, DENMARK
 The hiding place of Grendel--the dragon's den--was almost certainly a forgotten passage-grave, the treasure being the original gifts to the dead chieftain buried there

 

[p. 217]

against me in battle. At home I waited my fateful hour, never seeking to make strife, nor ever breaking a pledged oath; so now when I am sick unto death I have comfort because the Ruler of all mankind can charge me not with murderous doings when I die."

Then he bade Wiglaf to bring forth the treasure from the dragon's lair, so that he might behold the riches he had won ere life was spent. The young hero did as was asked of him. He brought forth ancient armour, and vases of gold, rich ornaments and gems and many an armlet of rare design. A banner of gold which lit up the cavern he also bore to the king, in haste lest the last breath should be drawn ere he returned. . . . He found Beowulf gasping faintly, so once again he laved the king's face with cold water until he spake, gazing on the treasure, with thankfulness.

"To the Lord of glory I give thanks," he said, "because that he hath permitted me, ere I died, to win such great treasure for my own folk. . . . Give thou the gifts unto my people according to their needs. . . . I have paid life's cost for them. . . . No longer can I remain."

Then the king made request that on the cliff top overlooking the sea there should be raised his burial mound, and that it should be made bright with fire. He desired also that it should be built on Hronesness, as a memorial, so that seafarers, whose ships are driven through spray mist, might call it "Beowulf's Grave".

To Wiglaf the dying hero then gave his golden neck ring, his helmet adorned with gold, and his strong armour, which Weland had fashioned, bidding him to make ever good use of the gifts.

"The last of our race, the Waegmundings, art thou, O Wiglaf," Beowulf said faintly, as life ebbed low. "Wyrd took one by one away, each at his appointed

[p. 218]

hour; the nobles in their strength went to their doom. . . . Now must I follow them . . . ...

These were Beowulf's last words. His soul went forth from his body, to the doom of good men. . . . Wiglaf sat alone, mourning him.

Then came the battle laggards from the wood and approached Wiglaf, who spoke angrily to them, because that they had fled their lord in his hour of need. Nevermore, he vowed, would they receive gifts or lands; each one would, when the lords were told of their cowardice, be deprived of their possessions.

"For a noble warrior, Wiglaf cried, "death is better than a life of shame."

When the people heard that Beowulf was dead, they feared that their enemies would renew the blood feuds and come against them. The messenger whom Wiglaf sent to bear the sad tidings spake of wars to be, when many a maiden would be taken away to exile and many a warrior slain. Then would their ghosts lift up their spears; the harp would be heard not as it awakened warriors, but instead the blood-fed raven would ask how fared it with the eagle as it fought with the wolf to devour the slain.

In sadness and sharp grief the people went towards the dragon's lair, and they saw the dread monster that had been slain. In length it measured fifty feet; horrible it was and blackened with its own fire. Round the dead king they gathered, weeping sorrowfully, and Wiglaf spake, telling them of Beowulf's last words, and his desire that he should be buried in a high barrow at the place of the bale fire.

Then, while the bier was being made ready, Wiglaf led seven men into the cave, and what treasure remained they brought forth. The dragon was thrown into the

[p. 219]

sea, and the body of grey old Beowulf was borne to the headland which is called Hronesness.

A great pyre was built, and it was hung with armour and battle shields and bright helms. Reverently they laid the great king thereon--the well-loved lord for whom they mourned. . . . Never before was so large a pyre seen by men. Torches set it aflame, and soon the smoke rose thick and black above it; the roaring of flames mingled with the wailing of the mourners while the body of Beowulf was consumed. . . .

A doleful dirge sang the old queen, and again and again she said that oft had she dreaded the coming of conflict and much slaughter. She feared for her own shame and captivity.

Heaven swallowed the smoke. . . . The people then raised a grave mound of great height. For ten days they laboured constructing a wall which encircled the ashes. Much treasure did they lay in the mound--all that was in the hoard--and there the riches lie now of as little use to men as ever they were.

Twelve horsemen rode round the great mound on Hronesness [*1] lamenting for their lord. All the people sorrowed together, and they said that Beowulf was of all the world's kings and of men the mildest and most gracious, the kindest unto his people and the keenest for their praise.

  

The Curse of Gold

The antique world, in his first flow'ring youth,
 Found no defect in his Creator's grace; [p. 220]
 But with glad thanks, and unreproved truth,
 The gifts of sovran bounty did embrace:
 Like angel's life was then men's happy case;
 But later ages Pride, like corn-fed steed,
 Abused her plenty and fat-swoll'n increase
 To all licentious lust, and gan exceed
 The measure of her mean and natural first need.
 Then gan a cursed hand the quiet womb
 Of his great grandmother with steel to wound,
 And the hid treasures in her sacred tomb
 With sacrilege to dig; therein he found
 Fountains of gold and silver to abound,
 Of which the matter of his huge desire
 And pompous pride eftsoons he did compound;
 Then Avarice gan through his veins inspire
 His greedy flames, and kindled life-devouring fire.
 "Son," said he [*1] then, "let be thy bitter scorn,
 And leave the rudeness of that antique age
 To them, that lived therein in state forlorn.
 Thou, that doest live in later times must wage
 Thy works for wealth, and life for gold engage."
                      --From Spenser's "Faerie Queene".

 

Footnotes

^214:1 Urd.

^219:1 Hronesness is translated "Whales' Ness" by some: others incline to the mythological rendering, Ran's Ness. Rydberg in this connection shows that Rhind's son, Vale, the wolf slayer, is called, by Saxo, Bous, the Latinized form for Beowulf. Stopford Brooke shows that Hronesness is next to Earnaness, Eagle's Ness, and considers that "the unmythological explanation is plainly right"."

^220:1 Mammon (Mimer) to the knight Guyon.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 221]

  

CHAPTER XXI

  

Hother and Balder

Hother's Accomplishments--His Love for Nanna--Balder becomes his Rival--The Valkyries' Warning--The Sword of Victory--Where it was concealed--Hother's journey to the Other-world--Miming is overcome--Helgi and Thora--War between Gods and Mortals--Hother overcomes Thor--Love-sick Balder--Hother in Solitude--The Great Battle--How Balder was slain--Odin woos Rinda--Balder's Death is avenged.

HOTHER was but a lad when his father Hodbrodd was slain, and him did King Gewar take to his castle to be reared as his own son. Strong and nimble he became, and very comely to behold. He could perform mightier feats than any of his foster-brothers: he could swim deftly and far like to a sea bird, he was a skilled archer, and he could box well with the gloves. Great gifts of mind had Hother also. He was a singer of songs, and a sweet musician. With rare skill he fingered the harp, and played the lute, and such power had he with stringed instruments that he could at will make his hearers merry or sad; he could fill their hearts with pleasure, or stir them with strange terror.

Pleasing indeed was this fair youth, unto beauteous Nanna, his foster-sister, the daughter of King Gewar. Her heart was moved with love towards him, and no less passionately did he love her also. Dear unto Nanna were the fond embraces of Hother.

Now there came a fateful day when Balder, son of Odin, saw Nanna while she bathed. The vision held

[p. 222]

him spellbound, and he was consumed with burning love by reason of the splendour and beauty of her comely body. When she vanished, the day was made dim, and Balder sighed full oft as he thought with tenderness of the beautiful maid; but when he remembered his rival he was moved to anger, for full well he knew that Hother would be the chief obstacle between him and his heart's desire. In the end he resolved to slay the young hero.

Hother soon came to know of Balder's burning love, and his fierce and bloody purpose. One day he went hunting alone in a deep wood. A deep mist drave over the land and enveloped the trees, so that he knew not whither he was wandering. In time he came to the dwelling of wood maidens. They called him "Hother", and he marvelled greatly thereat. When he asked them who they were, they told him that it was their lot to decide the issue of battle conflicts [*1]; invisible they fought in the fray, assisting those whom they favoured so that victory might be achieved. Hother wondered to hear. Then they told him that Balder had gazed with eyes of love upon Nanna while she bathed, and was possessed with burning desire to have her for his bride. Hother did they warn not to combat with his rival, because that he was a demigod whose body was charmed against wounds. But to Hother they gave a sword-proof coat of mail, so that he might have protection like unto Balder. They made promise to aid him in battle.

Then the maidens vanished, and their dwelling also, vanished from before the eyes of the young hero, and he found himself standing alone upon a barren plain, where there was not tree nor any shelter whatsoever. The mist was driven before the wind.

The youth thereafter returned quickly unto King

[p. 223]

[paragraph continues] Gewar, to whom he related what he had seen, and what had been told unto him concerning Balder. He also made request that Nanna should be his bride.

Gewar was willing indeed that his daughter should wed Hother, but he said that he feared greatly the wrath of Balder, if he came seeking for Nanna and were refused.

"No weapon," Gewar said, "can do hurt to Balder save a certain sword [*1] which is guarded in a cave by Miming, the wood satyr. A wondrous ring doth he also possess, which hath power to increase the wealth of him who owns it. . . . But long and dangerous is the road which leads unto the satyr's lair," the king added; "it is wintry cold, indeed, and hardly to be endured."

Hother, however, was resolved to win the sword with which to combat against Balder, and Gewar counselled him to yoke reindeer to his car so that he might be able to traverse the region of extreme and bitter cold with great swiftness.

"When thou dost reach the cave of Miming," Gewar said, "thou must set up thy tent so that its shadow may not fall upon the satyr, for if that should happen he would remain within. Thou must needs wait until the satyr goes out, when the sword and the ring will await for thee."

As Gewar advised, so did Hother do. He went swiftly with his reindeer over the bleak wintry way until he came unto Miming's cave, where he pitched his tent. But long he waited ere the wood satyr came forth. Sad and dreary were the days, and restless and anxious the nights, Then, after waiting through a night of long darkness, Miming came forth, and his shadow fell upon

[p. 224]

[paragraph continues] Hother's tent. The youth sprang to his feet, and struck down the satyr with his spear, and then bound him securely. Terrible were the threats of Hother, who vowed that he would slay Miming if he gave not unto him the sword and the bracelet. The satyr held life more dearly than wealth, and gave Hother the ransom which he demanded. In triumph did the young hero return unto the kingdom of Gewar, and his fame was mooted abroad.

Then Gelder, King of Saxony, came to know that Miming had been robbed, and he urged his war-men to go against Hother, so great was his desire to become possessed of the treasure. But Gewar, who had magical powers, divined Gelder's purpose, and he counselled Hother to meet him with his band, and receive the shower of his javelins until there was none left, and then to fall upon the bold invaders.

So Hother went to meet the men from Saxony; he awaited them on the seashore. Eager were Gelder's heroes to make onslaught, and fast and furious did they cast their spears and javelins. But Hother had bidden his trained war-men to resist the missiles with shields interlocked, and not to cast a weapon. When the men of Saxony saw that, they were all the more eager to attack, and soon they flung away all their spears and javelins. Then Hother's men began to hurtle the weapons against the enemy, driving them back in confusion, whereat Gelder) in great alarm, hoisted up, on the mast of his ship, a crimson shield to make known that he desired to surrender, so that his life might be spared. But Hother showed nor anger nor vengeance against him; he approached the king with smiling face and offered his friendship. Thus became he victor by reason of his kindliness as well as his might.

[p. 225]

A strong friend to Hother was Helgi, King of Halogaland, who loved Thora, daughter of Cuse, the ruler of the Finns and the Bjarmians. The monarch had a blemish of tongue, so that he stuttered greatly, and was unable to utter with eloquence the sweet speeches of love. Indeed, he not only shrank from addressing strangers, but rarely spoke in his own household. He sent messengers unto Cuse, pleading for his daughter's hand, but they were rejected with disdain, for the king said that the man who could not urge his own suit was unworthy of love's prize.

Then did Helgi seek the aid of Hother, who could speak with fluency and charm, and promised him his lifelong service if he would win for him the heart of Thora. A great fleet did Hother fit out, and he voyaged to Norway, fully resolved to take, by reason of his strength, the maid whom words would conquer not. To Cuse he spake first with eloquent tongue, and the king said that his daughter must first be heard, for he deemed it not right that he should prevail against her wishes, or decide before her will was made known. So Thora was ushered in, and when she heard what Hother said, she gave consent to be Helgi's queen.

But while Hother was thus engaged, Balder invaded the kingdom of Gewar with an armed band, and demanded that he should have Nanna for his bride. The king said that he must needs make request of the maiden, and before her did Balder plead his cause with choice speech and flattering address. But she said that a humble maiden could not be wooed by one of divine birth, and that the pledges of the gods were often broken. Thus did the maiden reject the love of him who sought her.

When Hother returned, Gewar told him of what had happened, and the young hero was filled with wrath

[p. 226]

because of Balder's presumption. With Helgi he took counsel and together they debated how they could inflict punishment upon the god. They had no recourse save to battle-blows, and Hother fitted out his fleet and went against his rival. Helgi gave him strong aid, as did also Gelder.

Then broke out a war in which the gods fought against mortals. With Balder fought Odin and Thor, clad in full armour, and when the opposing fleets met at sea a great conflict was waged. Hother in sword-proof mail attacked the gods with fury. Now Thor was swinging his great club, and while he urged those about him to press forward, he called upon his foemen to attack. The black-browed god dealt furious blows; he struck down his enemies' shields; he broke through their ranks; for long none could withstand him. Terrible, indeed, was the slaughter, and to the gods it seemed that victory was being given. But Hother went against Thor with Miming's sword. He feared him not, and struck at the great club, which he severed in twain with his keen-edged sword. . . . Then the gods took flight before Hother, and the ships that remained were destroyed by the victors.

Hother rejoiced in his triumph, but he sorrowed greatly because that Gelder had been slain. A great pyre he caused to be built with the wreckage of Balder's warships, and the corpses of the oarsmen were placed there in a heap. Then above these was laid with reverence the body of the dead king. Torches were applied and the flames rose high and bright. The ashes of King Gelder were afterwards laid in a great mound which was erected to his memory, and there was much mourning for him.

Then did Hother return to Gewar, and Nanna and

[p. 227]

he were wed with great ceremony, while the people rejoiced. To Helgi and Thora, who were also united in their joy, did the young hero give gifts of treasure. Then Hother ruled over Zeeland and Sweden.

As greatly as was Hother praised by men, Balder was mocked because that he had fled.

But the strife came not to an end. In a land battle did Balder contend against his rival, and drove him from the field. For fickle indeed are the fortunes of war. Hother took refuge with Gewar; he who had achieved victory as a subject, was defeated when a king.

Balder's army was afflicted by a water famine, but the divine one dug wells and water streamed forth, so that his parched soldiers were able to slake their thirst. To this day is a spring called Balder's-brynd.

Even by night was Balder made unhappy in his sleep, because he was tormented by dreams of Nanna. His love consumed him like fire, and he grew melancholy and thin and careworn. At length he could no longer walk, and he was taken about in his chariot. He took no pleasure in his victory, because that he had not won Nanna. There was a magical food prepared for Balder, so that he might not be brought unto death.

At this time Frey, who ruled for the gods, took up his abode nigh to Upsala, and revived the abhorrent rites of human sacrifice.

To Sweden did Hother take flight, and Balder possessed himself of Zeeland, where he received the willing service of the Danes, who before had reverenced. his rival. In due season Hother, having fitted out a fleet, again engaged in war with Balder, but was defeated and put to flight. He took refuge in Jutland, in a town which to this day bears the name of Horsens; then he returned to Sweden.

[p. 228]

Sad at heart was Hother [*1]; he was weary of life and refused to be comforted, and he took farewell of all, and wandered alone through solitary places and trackless forests, for solitude is dear to the sick at heart. The people were angry with him because that he had concealed himself in a place apart.

One day Hother, as he wandered through the deep forest, came to a cave in a lonely place in which dwelt the maidens who had given to him the sword-proof coat of mail. They received him with eyes of wonder, and they asked why he paid visit to them. Whereupon Hother bewailed his fate and with sorrow spake of the afflictions he endured. The maidens did he also reproach because that they had not helped him as they had promised. But they told him that he had inflicted greater disasters than he deemed of, and promised him ultimate triumph.

"Victory will assuredly be thine," they said, if thou shalt but find the magical food with which Balder is nourished so that his strength may have increase. Possess thyself of it and he shall certainly die."

Then once again did Hother, encouraged by what the maidens had said, raise a great army to wage war against Balder. A fierce and long conflict was fought, and when night fell the issue was undecided, because that the forces were of equal strength.

Hother could not sleep, for he was afflicted with anxiety, and he went forth to reconnoitre the opposing camp. . . . He beheld three maidens who prepared the magical food for Balder, and followed their footprints through the dewy grass when they fled from him, so that he reached their dwelling and entered therein.

The maidens asked him who he was, for they perceived

[p. 229]

that he was an enemy, and he said that he was a musician. Then gave they to him a lyre, and he played sweetly thereon, so that their ears were charmed.

He saw them prepare the food for Balder. They had three serpents and their venom dropped into the mixture. One of the maidens offered Hother a portion, but the elder one said that to do so would be treason, because it would increase the strength of one of their foes. But in the end Hother was given to eat, and the maidens also conferred upon him a shining girdle which had power to assure him of victory in conflict.

Then did Hother leave the dwelling to return to his camp. But he had not gone far when he met Balder. Drawing his sword he thrust it in his foe's side so that he fell wounded nigh unto death.

There was great rejoicing in Hother's camp when he returned and told how he had stricken his rival; in Balder's camp there were loud lamentations.

Next day, when the battle was renewed, Balder bade his men to carry him into the midst of the fray upon a stretcher, so that he might not meet with death in his tent.

When night again fell Balder saw standing beside him the vision of Proserpine [*1], and she told him that on the morrow she would have him for her guest. At the time appointed Balder died, and he was buried in a great grave mound with pomp and deep mourning.

In after days Harold [*2] and other men sought to rob Balder's mound of its treasure, but when they pierced it a great flood of water burst forth [*3] and they fled in confusion. So was terror implanted in the minds of

[p. 230]

youths there, so that they feared to disturb the mound again.

Hother again ruled over his kingdom, but he had great sorrow when Gewar was attacked and burned in his castle by Gunno, a jarl who served him. He took speedy vengeance, and burned Gunno alive upon a pyre.

When Odin came to know of Balder's death, he went unto prophets to divine how he could be avenged, and he came to know that a son would be born to him of Rinda; his name would be Boe, and he would slay Hother.

Now Rinda was a daughter of the king of the Ruthenians, and Odin went forth disguised and entered the service of that monarch. He became the captain of a band and won a distinguished victory; then he fought singlehanded against a host and achieved renown above all other men. There was great wonder thereat. Great gifts were given unto him, and he was honoured in the royal household. Then he secretly told the king of his love for Rinda, and his suit was favoured, but he must needs woo the fair princess and win her heart ere he would have her for his bride.

Not easily was Rinda wooed, because when Odin sought to kiss her, she smote him with anger. A year passed by, and then he went to the Court in foreign guise and said he was a wonder-smith. With bronze did he fashion many fair ornaments, for which he received much gold. To Rinda he made offer of a rare bracelet and rings, but again she smote him when he sought to woo her. Although her sire remonstrated with her, she scorned to wed a man of many years, especially as she was herself of tender age. A third time went Odin to woo the maid. He was disguised as a young warrior, but again he was repulsed. Then had he recourse to magic arts. He had with him a piece of bark on which

[p. 231]

runes were graven, and with that he touched her, so that she was seized with madness.

Odin returned next in the guise of a woman who was a skilled physician, and offered to cure Rinda, who was prostrate with sickness. In the end he prevailed and won the maiden for himself, and she became the mother of Boe.

At this time the gods ruled at Byzantium, and they were moved to wrath against Odin because that he had practised magic arts; so they deprived him of his high honours and drove him into exile. Oller ruled in his stead. Not until ten years had passed was Odin recalled to the throne, and then Oller fled to Sweden, where he was slain by certain Danes. It is said of Oller that he possessed a bone, graven with fearsome spells, with which he could cross the ocean as if it were a ship.

Odin reigned with greater dignity and power than before, and his renown was spread far among men. Then found he Boe, his son by Rinda, and him he constrained to go forth to avenge the death of Balder.

Thus it came that Hother was slain by Rinda's son in a fierce battle, but Boe [*1] was wounded unto death, so that he was borne from the field upon his shield. Next day he died, and the Ruthenian soldiers buried him in a stately mound, so that his memory might not perish in after days, but ever have renown among men.

After Hother's death his son Rorik became king.

Footnotes

^222:1 Valkyries.

^223:1 The Sword of Victory concealed in Mimer's realm. Hother resembles Svipdag very closely. Gewar is the moon-god of the Ivalde myth.

^228:1 Like King Hrethel in Beowulf.

^229:1 Urd.

^229:2 Believed to be a historical personage who lived in the twelfth century.

^229:3 Balder is associated with well worship. Wells sprang from his horse's hoofmarks, and he found water for his soldiers. Water defends his mound.

^231:1 Vale, who in mythology is the slayer of the wolf, is thus Boe (Beowulf) in Saxo's Danish legend. He receives his deathwound when he slays Hother, who, as Svipdag, was a dragon guarding beneath a grey rock great treasure, which shone like fire in the flood. At the same time Hother is confused with Hoder, Balder's blind brother. One of Svipdag's names was Odur. So do the divine and heroic elements of a passing mythology intermix in tradition. Each age, each race, and each bard leaves in turn impresses upon a persistent legend. The memory of the mythical hero may survive, or his deeds may become associated with the traditions of a national hero. Mythological incidents which appeal to the popular imagination not infrequently develop into independent narratives.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 232]

  

CHAPTER XXII

  

The Traditional Hamlet

Horwendil slays King Koll--Birth of Amleth--Horwendil slain by Feng--The Prince feigns Madness--His Witty Sayings--Polonius is slain--Amleth scolds his Mother--His Uncle's Treachery--Visit to Britain--His Return--How he won the Crown--Second Visit to Britain--Mission to Scotland--The Lovesick Queen--Amleth's Victory--Over-king claims his Kingdom--His Death--An Unfaithful Queen.

KING RORIK, son of Hother. made joint governors of Jutland two brothers whose names were Horwendil [*1] and Feng. Their father, Gerwendil, was governor before them. Horwendil was chief ruler, but he sought for glory as a sea rover. King Koll, of Norway, was also ambitious for ocean renown, and he longed to battle with the ships of Horwendil. The rivals met together at an island in the midst of the sea, which they each desired to possess, and young Horwendil challenged Koll to fight a duel. Thus it came that the two men contended one against the other on a portion of spring-green sward.

Horwendil was the bolder and more daring of the two. He flung aside his shield and grasped his sword with both hands. Furious attack did he make upon the King of Norway, whose shield he split in twain. Then he inflicted wounds, and smote off Koll's foot so that he sank in death before the valorous young hero. But Horwendil honoured the sea king with stately burial, and

 

Click to enlarge
KING RORIK
 From the painting by H. W. Koekkoek

 

[p. 233]

caused to be erected a great grave mound so that his memory might endure forever.

Many triumphs did Horwendil afterwards achieve, and to his king he gave gifts of the spoils of battle. So became he a hero in the kingdom. Rorik, who exalted Horwendil with honours, and made him King of Jutland, gave his daughter, the princess Gerutha [*1], to that renowned sea rover to be his wife. To them was a son born whose name was Amleth.

Now, Feng was stricken with jealousy because of his brother's fortune and renown, and he resolved to accomplish his death. His fell purpose he achieved with treachery, and to the crime of slaying his kin he added another, for he took Horwendil's widow to be his bride. Unto men did Feng declare that he had slain his brother because that he had shown cruelty unto Gerutha, whom he had rescued when in danger. In this he was believed.

But Amleth [*2] was not deluded. He perceived the evil purpose of Feng's heart, and, fearing his own safety, he, feigned madness with great cunning so that he might live to slay the usurper. He went about with mire on his face. Often would he sit brooding over the fire, cutting twigs and pointing them with barbs; and when asked why he did so, he said he was preparing to avenge his father's death.

There were those who suspected that his madness was a pretence, and he was cunningly put to test, but his foster-brother [*3] went about with him and gave him timely warning.

A horse was brought to Amleth, and he mounted it with his back to its neck, seeking to drive it by the tail. As he rode in this grotesque manner a wolf passed him,

[p. 234]

and those who were with him called it "a colt", whereupon Amleth said that there were too few colts of that kind in his uncle's stable.

On the shore lay a ship's rudder, and the men called it "a knife", whereupon Amleth said, pointing to the sea, that it was of appropriate size to cut such a huge ham.

To the sand dunes they then pointed, and said: "Behold the meal", and Amleth, speaking of the sand, declared that it was well-ground meal from the Mill of Storms. [*1]

A maiden was sent forth to waylay Amleth, but with her he had a secret understanding. Thus were those who sought to expose the prince as one who shammed thwarted in their purposes.

A courtier [*2], one of Feng's friends, who had more self-assurance than good tact, contrived a plot with purpose to make certain of knowing whether Amleth were weak-minded or a cunning pretender. He counselled Feng to leave Amleth alone with the queen, so that he might speak freely, for a son was never slow to trust his mother. Then the courtier, having convinced Feng that his proposal was a shrewd one, concealed himself under a heap of straw in the room where the queen and her soil would hold converse together.

[p. 235]

But Amleth was too cunning to be waylaid thus. When he found, on entering the room, that the king had left on the excuse that he had business to attend to elsewhere, the prince, ere he addressed his mother, behaved with seeming madness; he crowed like a cock, and imitated the bird's wing-clapping with his hands. On the heap of straw he leapt, and then stamped about upon it. Feeling something hard below his feet, he drew his sword and drove it through the man who sought to be an eavesdropper. Then the prince hauled the body forth, cut it to pieces, and scalded it with hot water. He flung the hacked flesh to the swine.

Amleth afterwards returned to the queen, who wept and lamented her son's Madness. The prince heard what his mother said, and her he addressed with great seriousness, saying:

"O, shameless woman! seek not by dissembling sorrow to conceal thy terrible guilt--thou wanton embracer of thy husband's murderer, thou harlot who took in vile wedlock the slayer of thy son's father! Thou hast mated like the brute, and with brute nature forgotten thy first husband. . . . Ask not of me why I feign madness and speak foolishly; fear I not that he who slew his brother may also do further evil unto his kindred? Although I seem to be bereft of sense, and guard myself with pretended craziness, yet am I resolute ill my consuming desire to avenge my father's death, waiting patiently fit opportunity and the favourable moment. Against so foul a schemer I must needs exercise great cunning. . . . Now, canst thou--oh! thou who shouldst be wailing over thy dark shame--realize that it is needless for thee to lament my seeming madness. Better were it for thy soul if thou didst shed tears for the frailty of thine own heart, and not for the weak

[p. 236]

ness of another's. . . . Thou hast heard me. . . . I counsel thee to speak not of this."

So did Amleth upbraid his mother, and reawaken in her heart, with bitterness, the memory of her murdered husband.

Soon after was the courtier, whom Amleth had slain, sought for by Feng, but of his whereabouts no man had knowledge, and the prince was laughed at when he said that he beheld him falling through a sewer to be devoured by swine. But it was ere long discovered that the courtier had indeed perished as the prince had said.

Feng would fain have put Amleth to death, but he feared the wrath of King Rorik and of his wife, so he sent the prince forth to pay visit to the King of Britain that he might be put to death by him. Ere the prince took his departure, he counselled his mother in secret to sorrow for him in a year's time as if he were dead, and to drape the walls with knitted curtains of mourning.

Two courtiers did Feng send with Amleth on his pretended mission, and he gave them a missive inscribed upon wood, beseeching the King of Britain to slay the prince. One night, while the men slept, Amleth read the missive and shaved it off the wood, inscribing in its stead a request that the courtiers should be hanged, and that he who accompanied them should be given a princess for his bride.

When they reached Britain the king read the letter, nor revealed its contents, but entertained the two messengers and the prince at a feast. Amleth made all who sat round the board wonder greatly because that he ate not of the food nor drank the wine. So, being curious to know what his guests thought of his fare, the king sent a servant to listen to their conversation after they had gone to their sleeping chamber.

[p. 237]

Amleth's companions reproached him because of his conduct at the feast, but the prince said that the flesh smelt like human carcass, and that there was blood in the bread, and iron rust in the liquor. The king he also reviled, saying that he had the eyes of a slave, while the queen had acted like one who was low born.

It seemed to his companions that he spoke crazily, but when the king was told what Amleth had said, he sent for his chief servant and asked where the corn of which the bread was made had been grown. The servant answered him that a plenteous crop had been grown upon an old battlefield.

The monarch then asked regarding the swine, and was told that they had strayed and fed upon the body of a robber who had been slain. The liquor, he learned, was made from meal and from water taken from a certain well. The king had this well dug out, and rusted swords were found which contaminated the water.

So the king did thus prove that Amleth had spoken with knowledge. But he was not yet satisfied, and he spoke in secret to his mother, who confessed that she had been a slave.

Next day the king spoke to Amleth, whom he admired greatly because of his wisdom, and he besought of him why he had said that the queen had acted like one who was low born.

The prince gave three reasons for what he had said--she had drawn her mantle over her head like a bond servant; she had lifted her gown to walk; and she had with a small splint picked her teeth, and then chewed the shreds of food from between them.

The monarch was so enamoured of Amleth that he gave him his daughter for wife. He also had Feng's two messengers hanged, and the prince pretended to be angry

[p. 238]

thereat, so the king gave him their price in gold. Amleth had the gold melted and poured into two sticks, hollowed out for that purpose.

A year passed ere Amleth returned home, leaving his wife, the princess, in her sire's castle. When he came to Jutland he smudged his face and dressed grotesquely and went towards Feng's hall, carrying nothing save the two sticks filled with gold. There he found that the people sorrowed for him as one who was dead, and when he entered the feasting chamber he saw it was hung with mourning drapery. At first the guests were stricken with terror, because they believed him to be a ghost; but soon they made merry and cast gibes one at another because that they had been fooled.

When Amleth was asked where the king's messengers were, he lifted up the sticks saying: "This is one and that is another;" nor did they realize that he spoke truly.

The prince was in gay mood, and he poured forth plenitude of wine to the guests. They all drank freely. Once or twice Amleth drew his sword, and cut his fingers with it, so they took the weapon from him and nailed it across the scabbard upon the wall.

More wine did Amleth pour forth to the guests, because he had laid a deep plot, and soon they were all made so drunken that they could not walk. They lay down to sleep on the benches and on the floor. Then the prince tore down the mourning drapery which his mother had knitted and threw it over the slumbering lords. Each of these, by aid of the sticks, he entangled in the network, so that none of them could rise up. Thereafterwards he set fire to the building, which was consumed. All who slumbered there perished in the flames.

Amleth, meantime, made haste to Feng's sleeping

[p. 239]

chamber, and first he snatched the sword that was hanging from the king's bed and put his own in its place. He shook his uncle from sleep and said that his courtiers were being burned alive.

"Withal I am here now, carrying my sticks," the prince cried, "with purpose to avenge my father's death."

Feng leapt from his bed and seized the mutilated sword; but while he tried vainly to draw it, Amleth slew him.

Thus did the prince put to death the man who had murdered and supplanted his sire, and all the nobles who had supported him.

Amleth then fled and concealed himself, so that he might know how the people regarded his deed. Soon he came to know that they were not greatly grieved, while a portion rejoiced that the tyrant had been overthrown. Whereupon he left his place of concealment, and gathered together his father's friends, whom he addressed.

"Ye who sorrowed for Horvendil," he said, "need sorrow not now any longer. Behold the corpse of a murderer of his kin I The hand that slew my sire made you all bondsmen.

Then Amleth revealed to the people that he had feigned madness, so that he might accomplish the ruin of Feng and his supporters. He told them how he had suffered in secret, hounded to death by his wicked uncle, disdained by his own mother, and spat upon by the nobles. "Who among ye", he cried, "is so hard of heart, that he is not moved towards me with sympathy and compassion?"

Thus he pleaded with them, and beseeched that they should honour him as their prince, and reward him with smiles of kindness.

[p. 240]

"I have blotted out my country's shame," he said; I have ended my mother's shame; I have stamped out tyranny. I have avenged myself on the murderer of my sire, and overcome the evil designs of my wicked uncle. I have restored what you lost; your glory have I revived. The tyrant is thrown down and the butcher is slain. . . . What I have done is done, and for your sakes was it accomplished. My reward I now beg from you.

Thus did Amleth win the hearts of the people, and they declared him their king. His reward was his father's crown.

When the country was settled and well organized King Amleth crossed the seas to Britain, taking with him his choicest warriors. He had had a great shield made on which all his exploits were depicted, and it was of rare craftsmanship. The shields of his followers were covered over with gold.

When the King of Britain received him, he asked regarding Feng's welfare, and Amleth related unto him all that had happened. The king heard him with sorrow, because he had sworn a secret compact with Feng that one of them should avenge the death of the other. Nor could he consider the blood ties of his house above the sacredness of his oath. He cared not to accomplish the death of his daughter's husband with his own hands, so he contrived a plot whereby Amleth would fall by the hands of another. His queen had died, and he made request of his son-in-law to become his envoy to a queen in Scotland whom he desired to wed.

Now the King of Britain knew full well that this Scottish ruler was a lady of great chastity, who scorned to be loved, and put to death those who sought to woo her. But Amleth, although he knew the mission was

[p. 241]

begirt with peril, disdained to refuse the king's request, and, taking with him his armed followers and a few of the British war men, he went north to execute his mission.

When he drew nigh to the dwelling of the Scottish queen he went into a green dell to rest his horses, and by the side of a stream he fell asleep. Over his head he put his shield to shade him from the sun's rays.

The queen heard of his coming. She sent forth spies, who found Amleth lying fast asleep. They took away his shield and the missive which he bore from the King of Britain. Thus did the Scottish queen come to know of Amleth's great deed, because on the shield which he had made she saw depicted how he had slain his father's murderer. She read the missive and rubbed out the writing, and substituted a message from the King of Britain, expressing his desire that she should wed the bearer of it.

Amleth woke up ere the spies returned, but pretended still to sleep. When one of them was about to place the king's missive from where he had taken it, Amleth sprang up, seized him, and had him bound. Then went he to the queen's dwelling. Her name was Hermutrude. She read the altered missive, and she praised the bearer, because that he had avenged his father's death and possessed himself of the crown. She also expressed her surprise that he should have wed a slave's daughter. So noble a prince, she said, should wed one of high birth, for rank was of more account than beauty. But there was one nobly born, who was worthy of him. She herself was worthy of him, because that his kingdom and his ancestors were not greater than hers. She offered him her love and her possessions with

[p. 242]

it, and pleaded with him to set aside his marriage and have her for wife. [*1]

Then the queen rose and embraced Amleth, kissing him, and he with joy embraced and kissed her in turn. A great feast was held, and they were married with ceremony and in great pomp.

Accompanied by a band of Scottish war men, Amleth then set out to return to the King of Britain; but his first wife met him and warned him against her sire. She made bitter complaint that he had slighted her, but said that her love for him was stronger than her hate of his adultery. A son was born to her, she told Amleth, who might grow up to hate the Scottish queen, but she herself. would love her rival.

Then came nigh the King of Britain, and he embraced Amleth, but afterwards sought to slay him. Amleth would have fallen by the sword, which was thrust treacherously at him from behind, had he not been protected by a shirt of mail.

So it came that war broke out between them. The British king and his war men fell upon Amleth's forces and put them to flight, killing many. On the next day. the young warrior found himself closely pressed, but he had resort to a cunning stratagem. He collected together all the slain war men, and set them up tied to stakes as if they were alive; on horseback even were many made fast. Thus he seemed to command an imposing array of battle warriors.

When the King of Britain's army came against Amleth, and beheld the apparent strength of his force, the soldiers were terrified, and they broke and fled in confusion. The Danes charged, and they slew the king ere

[p. 243]

he could escape. Then Amleth ravaged the land and possessed himself of much treasure. Soon afterwards he returned to Denmark with his two wives.

It chanced that King Rorik died. His son, Wiglek, regarded Amleth as a usurper, and claimed the throne of Jutland. A war was thereupon declared, and Amleth was slain. Ere he entered the fateful battle he had foreknowledge of his fate, and he sought to choose a second husband for Hermutrude; but she vowed that she would share his fate on the field, saying that a woman who feared to die with her husband was an abomination. But when Amleth fell, the queen kept not her promise; she made offer of herself to Wiglek and became his bride.

Amleth was buried on a plain in Jutland which still bears his name. [*1]

 

  

Hamlet and his Mother

  Queen. What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
 In noise so rude against me?
   Ham.                        Such an act
 That blurs the grace and blush of modesty;
 Calls virtue hypocrite; takes off the rose
 From the fair forehead of an innocent love,
 And sets a blister there; makes marriage vows
 As false as dicers' oaths: O, such a deed
 As from the body of contraction plucks
 The very soul, and sweet religion makes
 A rhapsody of words!--heaven's face doth glow;
 Yea, this solidity and compound mass,
 With tristful visage, as against the doom,
 Is thought-sick at the act.
   Queen.                  Ah me, what act,
 That roars so loud, and thunders in the index? [p. 244]
 Ham. Look here, upon this picture, and on this--
 The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
 See what a grace was seated on this brow;
 Hyperion's curls; the front of Jove himself;
 An eye like Mars, to threaten and command;
 A station like the herald Mercury
 New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill;
 A combination and a form, indeed,
 Where every god did seem to set his seal,
 To give the world assurance of a man:
 This was your husband.--Look you now, what follows:
 Here is your husband; like a mildew'd ear,
 Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
 Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
 And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes?
 You cannot call it love; for at your age
 The heydey in the blood is tame, it's humble,
 And waits upon the judgment: and what judgment
 Would step from this to this? Sense, sure, you have,
 Else could you not have motion: but, sure, that sense
 Is apoplex'd: for madness would not err;
 Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thrall'd
 But it reserv'd some quantity of choice,
 To serve in such a difference. What devil was't,
 That thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind,
 Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
 Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
 Or but a sickly part of one true sense
 Could not so mope.
 O shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,
 If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
 To flaming youth let virtue be as wax,
 And melt in her own fire: proclaim no shame,
 When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,
 Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
 And reason panders will.
   Queen.                 O Hamlet, speak no more:
 Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul; [p. 245]
 And there I see such black and grained spots,
 As will not leave their tinct.
   Ham.                     Nay, but to live
 Stew'd in corruption--
   Queen.              O, speak to me no more;
 These words, like daggers, enter in mine ears;
 No more, sweet Hamlet!
   Ham.                  A murderer and a villain;
 A slave, that is not twentieth part the tithe
 Of your precedent lord;-a vice of kings:
 A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
 That from a shelf the precious diadem stole,
 And put it in his pocket!
   Queen.                 No more!
   Ham. A king of shreds and patches:--
    .       .       .       .       .       .
 My Pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time,
 And makes as healthful music: it is not madness
 That I have utter'd: bring me to the test,
 And I the matter will re-word; which madness
 Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
 Lay not that flattering unction to your soul,
 That not your trespass, but my madness, speaks:
 It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
 Whilst rank corruption, mining all within,
 Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;
 Repent what's past; avoid what is to come;
 And do not spread the compost on the weeds,
 To make them ranker. Forgive me this, my virtue;
 For in the fatness of these pursy times,
 Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg;
 Yea, curb and woo, for leave to do him good.
   Queen. O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
   Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it,
 And live the purer with the other half.
                                           Shakespeare.

 

Footnotes

^232:1 Rydberg identifies Horwendil with Orvandil, Svipdag's father, and holds that there are memories of the Svipdag myth in the Hamlet story as related by Saxo, Halfdan being the original of Feng, and Groa of Gerutha (Gertrude).

^233:1 Gertrude.

^233:2 Amleth means "insane".

^233:3 Shakespeare's Horatio.

^234:1 The World-mill. In an old saga, reference is made to the Island-mill beyond the world's edge, which is worked by nine maidens. It is called "Amlode's mealbin". Thus, in the tenth century, we have an Icelandic reference to a mythical "Hamlet" who is connected with the mill. When Orvandil and the other sons of Ivalde declare war against the gods (see chapter "The Winter War") two giant maids who are relatives of Orvandil jerk the mill handle violently, and put it out of order. Here then is another link between Svipdag, the avenger, son of Orvandil, and Amleth, the avenger, son of Horvendil. Before Svipdag journeys to Hela, he is protected by Groa's incantations against the storms caused by the World-mill. In vague traditions we do not expect exact references, but rather suggestive associations. The chief actor in a popular tale absorbs all else as he develops independently through the ages.

^234:2 Shakespeare's Polonius.

^242:1 Evidently a memory of Pictish marriage customs. The Irish Cuchullin has a similar experience in Scotland.

^243:1 Muller says there are two localities named "Amelhede"

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 246]

  

CHAPTER XXIII

  

Hamlet's Storm-mill

When Frode was King--What the Mill ground forth--The Giant Maids --Their Ceaseless Labour--Desire for Vengeance--Sea Rovers plunder the Kingdom--The Maelstrom--Tale of Two Brothers--A Deal with the Devil --Wonderful Quern Stones--The Covetous Brother--Flood of Broth--The House by the Sea--A Skipper's Bargain--Why the Sea is salt.

"AMLODE'S mealbin", [*1] which the Prince of Denmark called the "Mill of Storms ", Was also named by skalds "Frode's Mill". [*2]

King Frode was a wise and just king, and there was peace when he reigned in Denmark. Harvests were abundant, so that there was no lack of food, and treasure was never concealed, because there were no robbers. Strangers who visited the kingdom were received with hospitality and allowed to depart in peace.

The king had two wonderful quern stones, which ground at Frode's will whatever he desired of them. When he wanted gold he named it. Then the stones were turned round and the shining grist was poured forth. Silver and gleaming gems were produced in like manner. The wondrous mill could also grind peace

[p. 247]

and goodwill, and thus it was that there was great prosperity when Frode reigned over the land.

Once upon a time the millstones gave forth naught, because there were no servants in the kingdom who had sufficient strength to turn the handle. In vain did Frode make search for strong workers, and at length he came to know that the King of Sweden had two slave women of great stature and strength. With a gift of gold Frode purchased them. Their names were Menja and Ferja; eight feet in height were they, and broader than the doughtiest war man; their muscles were as hard as iron.

They were set to grind the mill, and they cried: "What shall we grind?"

The king said: "Grind gold, so that I may have great wealth."

So they ground gold in plenty, and King Frode was soon the possessor of much treasure. Then they ground for him peace and plenty, and the harvests were rich, the streams flowed ever, and ships made prosperous voyages. By day and by night the giant maids ground, and they were weary, so they beseeched the king that they should have rest.

"Thou shalt pause no longer than the cuckoo is silent in the springtime," the king said.

"Rarely is the cuckoo silent in spring," they made answer; "permit that we may have longer rest."

"Thou mayest rest," the king said, "as long as the verse of a song is sung."

Frode obtained more and more wealth from the mill, but he was never satisfied. Then the maidens grew angry, and vowed vengeance upon him. One to another they said: "Are we not the daughters of mountain giants; are our kindred not greater than Frode's. We have beheld the quern in other days. In the home of

[p. 248]

giants we whirled it round, so that the earth trembled and thunder bellowed in the caves. [*1] Frode hath not done wisely."

Thus did they complain, weary of grinding, and Fenja at length counselled that they should no longer grind good for him who gave them no rest and was never satisfied.

Then Menja sang a weird incantation, which brought a band of warriors over the sea to work disaster with fire and sword.

Fenja called upon Frode, warning him of approaching peril, but he slept and heard her not. The warriors came to the shore; they laid waste the land, they burned the town, and scattered before them the warriors of Frode. The king was wounded grievously, so that he died.

Thus came Mysinger, the sea rover, and plundered the land, which he robbed of its vast treasures. The ships were heavily loaded thereafter, and Mysinger took with him the wondrous mill and the giant maids who turned it.

Then the sea rover set the slaves to grind salt, because there was none in the ships. As he bade them, so did they do. When night fell they asked him if they had ground sufficient for his needs; but he was no wiser than Frode, and commanded them to cease not their labours. So Fenja and Menja ground on until the ship was so full of salt that it sank into the deep.

From that day the giant maids have continued to grind the mill, for there is no one to bid them to take rest. On the sea bottom are they ever turning the stones. At the spot where they work is the great Maelstrom, a name which signifies "the grinding stream".

[p. 249]

It is said that Fenja and Menja still work as Mysinger commanded them, and that is why the sea is salt. But there is another tale that minstrels were wont to tell regarding a wondrous mill which sank below the waves.

There were once two brothers, and one was rich while the other was poor. On a Christmas Eve the brother who was in need went unto the other and asked him in God's name for food, because that he had naught to eat.

The rich brother said: "A flitch of bacon shall I give thee if thou wilt do as I desire."

Readily did the starving man agree to his brother's terms. He took the flitch of bacon, and then he was told: "Hasten thou straight to hell with what I have given thee."

The poor brother must needs carry out the compact, so he set forth by a long and weary road. He travelled until darkness fell, and then he saw a light and went towards it. Soon he reached a dwelling. Standing outside it was an old man with a long grey beard, who hewed wood for his Christmas fire.

"Whither art thou going at this late hour?" asked the old man.

I am journeying to hell," the other made answer, but I know not the way."

"Thou hast no need to go any farther," the old man said, "because this dwelling is hell. When thou goest within thou shalt find not a few who will readily purchase the flitch of bacon from thee. But sell it not to any man unless thou art given the quern which is behind the door. When thou dost receive it, carry it without, and I shall show thee how to turn the handle. The quern can grind forth anything thou desirest."

[p. 250]

The poor man knocked at the door, and it was opened. . . . All the demons swarmed towards him, begging for the flitch, and one did outbid the other with desire to purchase it.

"I shall sell it," the man said, "for the old quern which is behind the door."

The devil at first refused to barter the quern, but soon he relented, and it was given to the man for the flitch of bacon.

When the grey-bearded woodcutter taught the poor brother how to use the quern, he set out with it towards his home.

He found his wife waiting for him, and she complained bitterly because that there was no food in the house, nor fuel to light a fire. When she ceased scolding him, the husband said:

"I had to travel a long way, first for one thing and then for another, but now we shall see what we shall see."

He put the quern on the table, and he bade it grind forth fuel and food and ale, and soon they had a warm fire and Christmas fare in plenty. The old dame was made happy indeed, and she said: "Where didst thou get this wonderful quern?"

"Ask me not," answered her husband; "here is the quern, and indeed it is an excellent one. The millstream never freezes. That is enough."

Then the man made the quern to grind much food and ale, and he gave a feast to all his friends. His rich brother came, and when he saw that the larder was full he grew angry because that he wished not his brother to have anything.

"On Christmas Eve," he said, "thou didst come to me to beg for a little food in God's name. From whence have you received all this wealth?"

[p. 251]

The brother who had been poor answered: "I obtained it from behind the door."

Nor would he say aught else at that time.

But ere the evening was spent the rich brother saw that the other had drunk deep, and he asked him again regarding the quern. So the man who had sold a flitch of bacon to the devil told him all. His brother pleaded for the quern, which he coveted greatly, and offered for purchase three hundred pieces of gold. The other said he would get it for that sum at the hay harvest.

Next day the man who had been poor set the quern to work, and he kept it grinding until he had enough food and drink to last him for the rest of his days. Then gave he the quern to his brother, but he told him not how to work it.

It was the beginning of the hay harvest, and the rich brother, who was a farmer, told his wife, when he carried the quern home, to go out to the field with the workers while he prepared the midday meal. Then he set the quern upon the kitchen table, and he bade it to grind forth herrings and broth in plenty.

The quern set to work, and the herrings and the broth were poured from it in abundance. First all the dishes in the house were filled, and then all the tubs, and still the food poured forth until the kitchen floor was covered over. In vain did the farmer seek to stop the supply. He seized the handle of the quern roughly, and twisted it this way and that, but without avail. The herrings were heaped high and the broth flooded the kitchen. In terror the man fled to the parlour, but the broth followed him, and he had to struggle towards the door, half-smothered in the food stream. to escape being drowned.

When the door was opened he ran down the road,

[p. 252]

and the flood of broth and herrings went after him, roaring like a mountain waterfall and spreading all over the farm.

The farmer's wife wondered greatly that she and the workers were not called home for dinner, and she said: "Although we have not yet been bidden, we may as well return. Perhaps the master finds it harder than he expected to cook our meal, and has much need of my help."

So the dame and the workers left the hayfield and went towards the farmhouse. Ere long they beheld a strange spectacle. Pell-mell the farmer came running towards them, escaping from a torrent of herrings and broth. As he came nigh he shouted: "I would that each of ye had a hundred throats. . . . Beware, lest you are drowned in the broth!"

He ran on and hastened to his brother, and besought of him to take back the quern. But this the man who got it from the devil refused to do, unless he were paid another three hundred pieces of gold.

"If it goes on grinding for another hour," the farmer declared, "the whole parish will be covered with herrings and broth."

So he gladly paid the money demanded by his brother, who thus got back the quern again, and a goodly sum of money as well.

Then did the man who gave the flitch to the devil set the stones grinding without delay. He got all he desired from them. Before long he had a fine farmhouse, which was larger and more commodious than his brother's, and he had so much gold produced by the mill that he covered his new dwelling with plates of gold. It stood upon the shore, and far out at sea it was beheld shining in beauty. Sailors cast anchor when they came nigh to

[p. 253]

that shore, so that they might land to see the golden house and the rich man who inhabited it. They were one after another shown the wonderful quern, and its fame was spread far and near.

One day a sea captain called at the golden house, and when he saw the quern he asked if it could grind salt. The man who purchased it from the devil said that it gave forth anything that was desired.

Now the captain was accustomed to go long voyages for salt, and he offered to buy the quern. At first the owner would not consent to sell it, but at length he agreed to do so if he received a thousand pieces of gold. The skipper paid that sum, and went off with the quern, but he was not instructed how to work it. He hastened on board his ship and sailed away. When he was far out at sea he thought he would set the quern a-working, so he commanded it to grind salt in plenty, and as speedily as could be.

The quern set to work. It ground salt in plenty, and ground very fast. Soon the hold was full, and the skipper, feeling satisfied, sought to stop the quern. But that he was unable to do. It ground and ground until the decks were covered over, and at length the immense load of salt weighed down the ship, so that it sank below the waves.

On the floor of ocean lies the quern, and by day and by night it grinds on as the skipper bade it to do. . . . That is why the sea is salt.

Footnotes

^246:1 The following is an extract from a tenth-century Icelandic saga which makes reference to Hamlet: "'Tis said that far out, off yonder headland, the nine maids of the Island-mill stir amain the host-cruel skerry-quern--they who in ages past ground Amlode's (Hamlet's) meal".

^246:2 Frode is the god Frey humanized. His crops were ground on the World-mill. According to an Eddic poem his servant Bygver divided food among men. This elf is of the mill-brownie type so familiar in folktales.

^248:1 See chapter "The Winter War".

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 254]

  

CHAPTER XXIV

  

Land of the Not-dead and many Marvels

King Gorm and Thorkill--Voyage of Exploration--Isle of Giants--Adventures in Geirrod's Land--City of Dreadful Night--Giants in Torture--The Treasures--Battle with Demons--Thorkill's Second Voyage--Loke bound--Erik in Odainsaker--The Magic Tower--Helge Thoreson--His Demon Bride --Spells, Blessings, and Prayers--Why Helge was made blind--Hadding in the Underworld--The Flowers of Hela.

THERE was a King in Denmark whose name was Gorm, and he had more desire to obtain knowledge than to win great glory in battle. He had royal courage, which he sought to prove in searching out the profound mysteries of the dread Unknown rather than by engaging in bloody conflict with his fellow men.

Now, Gorm came to hear of a lone, undiscovered land in the distant north, where vast treasure was concealed in caves. The giant Geirrod dwelt there, and although the way to his abode was full of peril for mortals, Gorm. was consumed with desire to explore it. Many travellers who had ventured forth to discover the giant's country never again returned; they had to pay the dues of death.

To reach the abode of Geirrod ships must needs cross the vast tempestuous ocean that encircles the earth, and voyage on through horrors undreamt of, until the sunway is passed and the stars vanish from sight. For in that dread land there is no light, nor warmth of summer; winter endures without end, and there is ever eternal darkness unbroken and deep.

[p. 255]

But Gorm was without fear. No peril daunted him, nor could fear of suffering hold him back. He sought not wealth, although treasure abounded in the land of night; he desired rather the glory of achievement in searching out marvels unbeholden by living men.

So it came that the king made known his purpose to the people, and three hundred of his choicest war-men clamoured to share his renown. There was among them one braver than the rest, and it was he who had brought intelligence to Gorm of the dark undiscovered land. His name was Thorkill; he had coasted the perilous shores and knew well the path of ocean thither, so he was chosen to be leader of the exploring band.

Thorkill counselled that there should be built three strong and commodious ships, covered with thick ox hides to afford shelter from tempest spray, for vast food stores must needs be taken in them. As Thorkill advised, so did Gorm of Denmark do. He had the vessels built, they were covered with skins, and well laden with provisions and arms. In due season the voyage was begun. Northward sailed the billow-cleaving galleys, wind-driven through seething foam, and in each there were a hundred chosen men.

Ere long they came to Halogaland, and they had favoured progress on pleasant waters; but then the waves grew fierce, and the winds opposed them so that the galleys were tossed and stayed on perilous seas, driven hither and thither. and turned divers ways from their proper course. So they suffered delay, and their voyage was prolonged until their food stores were all but consumed, and hunger menaced them with death. In dire straits they made meagre pottage and fed sparingly thus on scanty fare for many days.

But at length their sufferings had end. One night in

[p. 256]

thick darkness they heard, booming hard on the wind, the breaking surf of shoreland billows. To the masthead at dawn a youth climbed nimbly, and in the distance he saw, hazed by spray, the high beetling cliffs of a rocky isle. Towards it were the galleys steered, and with glad eyes the wasted men gazed upon the welcoming land, rough and desolate as it was. Against wind and tide they made their way, until at length they reached a haven of refuge. Then they went ashore, scrambling over broken rocks, and climbed by slippery paths the stern precipitous heights of the island until they reached the level ground.

On a green place nigh to a deep forest they beheld great herds of browsing cattle. They were easy prey, for they feared not men, whom they had never before beheld; indeed the beasts assembled together to gaze with wonder on the sea-roving band.

Thorkill had knowledge of the island perils, and he counselled the men to slay not more of the cattle than were needful for a single repast, lest the giants who kept watch there might be angered, and should seek to prevent their departure. But the men heeded him not So great was their greed that they slew many cattle and filled the galleys with their flesh. Heavily they feasted and were made glad, but there were those of them who paid dearly for their rashness.

When night fell black, there were threats of dire vengeance. The forest resounded with loud bellowing, and from the rocky beach dread monsters dashed through the surf and beset the galleys. One, greater and fiercer than the others, strode knee-deep in the sea, swinging angrily a tree-like club. He rated the seafarers because they had slaughtered the cattle, and demanded to be given a man from each galley because of the loss which the island had suffered. There was no choice but to

[p. 257]

accept of the monster's terms; the few must oft be sacrificed so that the many may escape. So Thorkill cast lots. and three men were thus chosen and delivered unto the monsters who guarded the island herds.

Thereafter a favourable wind sprang up; the sails were set, and the ships drave onwards. Swiftly they voyaged and far. The days grew shorter and dimmer, until at length the sun was left behind and the stars vanished. . . . So traversing seas unknown they came nigh to Outer Bjarmaland. It was a dreary land, ice-cold and dark; the snows never melt there, and eternal night prevails.

Blacker than all else, the men saw dimly deep pathless forests through which ever roam strange ferocious beasts, unseen elsewhere. Many rivers were foaming seaward over sharp and treacherous reefs.

Thorkill at length found the haven he sought, and the ships were drawn high on the beach. Then were the tents pitched.

"From here" said Thorkill, "the journey to Geirrod's dwelling is short. . . . Now unto all give I timely warning. Let no man open his mouth unto any monster that comes nigh, lest words should be spoken which would give them power to injure you. None save one who knows the customs of this land can converse safely with its strange people."

Soon there came towards the seafarers a giant who called each seafarer by his name and spoke freely. The men were stricken with terror, and answered him not. Thorkill told them that the giant was Geirrod's brother. and was named Gudmund [*1]; he was guardian of that weird land, and protected from peril all men who sojourned there.

[p. 258]

Gudmund spoke unto Thorkill and asked him why the men answered him not, and the wily seafarer answered that they had little knowledge of his language, and were ashamed to speak it.

Then the giant bade them all to a feast, and led the way along the banks of a river. Soon the travellers came to a golden bridge, and they desired to cross it, so fair did it seem, but Gudmund warned them that the river which they gazed upon divided the land of mortals from the land of horrid sights, and that the opposite bank was by sacred decree declared unlawful for mortals to tread. [*1] So they went onward by the road they had taken, until they came to the dwelling place of Gudmund.

Privily did Thorkill then speak unto his companions, and warned them to eat not of the food placed before them, or drink of the liquor, or touch any man who was there.

As he commanded them so did they do, and at the feast they partook of their own viands only.

The feasting hall was ablaze with splendour. With Gudmund were his twelve stately sons and twelve beauteous daughters, and they made merry. But when the host perceived that King Gorm partook not of the food or the wine placed before him, and that the others likewise refused the fare, he spake to Thorkill, protesting that his hospitality was despised. But that wily seafarer said that his companions had long been unaccustomed to such rich fare, and feared to eat of the dainties lest they should be sickened.

Gudmund was ill-pleased, because the food was prepared with spells so that the guests might be made forgetful of the past and compelled to remain for ever ill

[p. 259]

the dismal shade among creatures non--human and weird.

So the giant sought to tempt them further. To the king he offered his daughter for wife, and unto the others he would fain give brides also. But Thorkill prevailed upon them to make refusal. All save four of the men obeyed him, and these were made insane. [*1]

Then Gudmund invited the king to visit his garden, so that he might partake of its wondrous fruits; but Gorm was warned by Thorkill and refused to be lured thither. So the host perceived that he was baffled; and consented to guide them to the dwelling of Geirrod. He then conducted the travellers over the river, and promised to await their return.

They entered a dismal land which was fraught with peril and full of terrors. Not long did Thorkill and his companions travel when they beheld a strange city which seemed to be composed of vapour. Dismal and gloomy it was, and covered with dust and slime as if it were neglected and deserted. Yet was it thickly peopled by sorrowing folk. The not-dead inhabited it amidst horrors and illusions.

Lofty were the battlements that surrounded the city, and surmounting them on stakes were the heads of fallen war-men. The gates were situated so high that they could not be reached save by ladders, and fierce hel-hounds kept watch before them. Thorkill went first, and climbed towards the entrance, which is ever open. To the hounds he flung a horn smeared with fat, and they licked it greedily and were appeased. Then his companions followed him, and together they entered the gloomy city of the not-dead.

[p. 260]

Horrible were the shades that hastened past them with faces fixed aghast, and ever screaming woefully. They came and went beholding naught--

                          A great stream
   Of people there was hurrying to and fro,
   Numerous as gnats upon the evening gleam,

All hastening onward, yet none seemed to know
   Whither he went, or whence he came, or why
   He made one of the multitude, and so

Was borne amid the crowd, as through the sky
   One of the million leaves of summer's bier;
   Old age and youth, manhood and infancy

Mixed in one mighty torrent did appear,
   Some flying from the thing they feared, and some
   Seeking the object of another's fear.
                                                         Shelley

The streets were misty and loathsome; putrid scum and miry filth--

Stifled the air till the dead wind stank.

Every sense was offended; every man was repulsed. The reeking foulness and nameless horrors froze Gorm and his followers with agonized loathing.

Then they came to Geirrod's mountain lair. The door opened on the ledge of a black precipice, but they faltered with icy dread before it; they shrank back lest they might be overcome. But Thorkill. spake words of encouragement and bade them fear not, but he warned them not to touch aught which might tempt them--gems, or gold, or any treasure--nor to be terrified by what was horrible and weird. If a hand were laid upon anything within, he told them, it could never be withdrawn;

[p. 261]

it would be bound; it would be knotted up. Then he bade them all to enter in companies of four. Broder and Buchi, the skilful archers. with Thorkill and the king went first; the others followed in order.

The doorposts were black with soot, which was centuries old and very deep; filth lay everywhere. Gaunt monster sentinels were on guard; they were numerous. noisy, restless, and menacing. Some leapt about with maniac-like frenzy, playing a strange repulsive game.

No man spoke. Half-stunned by belching filth reek from within they entered falteringly. The dwelling was wellnigh a ruin; the walls were dark and loathsome in the faint twilight; horrors loomed through the shadows. A roof of arrowy stings was above them, and the floors were made of venomous snakes steeped in foulness. Thorkill's companions were quaking with. terror, and they could scarcely endure the violent and suffocating fumes. Yet they could not forbear gazing about them, confused with horror and mute with alarm. Vast giants were stretched as if dead upon benches of iron; in silent agony they lay as if carved from stone. Others wallowed in torture.

Thorkill led the strangers through a rocky fissure, and they beheld, sitting on a high ledge, the old giant Geirrod. His body was transfixed to the cliff by a javelin. Three giant maids with broken spines lay squirming beside him. These were the monsters whom Thor had thus punished because that they sought to overcome him with treachery. [*1]

From the halls of torture the bold seafarers passed to a chamber of treasures, where the air was sweet. Fair indeed was the spectacle they beheld. Tankards of mead stood around them; these were encircled with fine gold

[p. 262]

and decorated with rings of silver. Among the treasures were a gleaming ivory tusk, circled with gold, a golden armlet, and a great drinking-horn, graven with pictures and set with sparkling gems.

Three men with covetous hearts could resist not their desire to be possessed of these rare treasures, and seized them greedily. Then did they pay life's cost for their boldness. The tusk became a sword which pierced the heart of him who laid hands upon it, the armlet became a venomous snake which stung to death the man who held it, and the great horn was transformed into a fiery dragon which devoured the robbers. [*1]

The other men were stricken anew with terror in that dread land, and they, all feared they would share the fate of their companions. But they passed in safety to another chamber, which had greater splendour than that which they left. It was filled with shining armour and bright weapons, and rich apparel radiant with silver and gold and ablaze with jewels. Fairest of all were a great king's robe, with his splendid headgear and his graven gem-decked waistbelt.

Thorkill. who had warned others, could not resist his desire to possess some of the rare treasure, so, impulsively he seized the royal mantle. . . . Then did dire disaster threaten them. The chamber tottered as if shaken by earthquake; women's screams were heard, and wailing voices asked if these despoilers were to be endured any longer.... The whole dwelling was stirred with noisy alarm. Monstrous beings who seemed to lie dead sprang suddenly to their feet, menacing and horrible, and with hordes of wail and shadowy furies made fierce

[p. 263]

attack upon the strangers, who were begirt with awesome peril. It was well for Thorkill and the others that the skilled archers, Broder and Buchi, were with them, for they bent their bows and shot magic arrows against the assailing horde. Spears were also cast and deadly missiles were flung from ready slings. So were the Furies beaten back. although many men fell, to be torn asunder by monsters. Those who survived made speedy escape from Geirrod's dwelling, and from the city of the not-dead, and returned to Gudmund. who waited for them, as he had promised. Then did the giant ferry them over the river and take them unto his own dwelling.

Again they were feasted and again did they resist the temptation to partake of the food and wine, and have for brides the demon maids that were offered to them. But Buchi, the archer, was stricken with love for a daughter of Gudmund, and he was driven insane in her embrace. He who contended against the monsters in Geirrod's dwelling was overcome by a maiden of gentle seeming, and he never again returned to his native land, for when Thorkill and the king took their departure he followed them towards the shore, but he was caught in a river and dashed to death.

The king and Thorkill, mourning for those who had fallen, and especially Buchi, made haste to leave the land of terror. But their voyage homeward was beset with perils; the seas wallowed in tempest, and the galleys were driven hither and thither by contrary winds, so that they suffered great delay. The food stores were at length exhausted and many died of hunger. Prayers were made to divers gods without avail, but at length the king made vows and offerings to Utgard-Loke, whereat the seas were calmed, and a favourable wind drove the vessels towards the haven of home. Of the three hundred

[p. 264]

men who had set forth to visit the land of the not-dead, but twenty returned to Denmark.

The king sought not further adventures over perilous seas towards distant lands. He lived at peace after sore travail, and he engaged in meditation regarding the mysteries of life and death. Certain teachers convinced him that to men's souls immortal life is given, and Gorm wondered whether the gods would cause him to suffer torture or reward him with bliss, because that he had spent his days in adoration and had given peace offerings.

Now the god whom the king favoured most was Utgard-Loke, and his friends counselled him that he should send Thorkill to appease that deity in the land of night. They also made grave accusations of treachery against the brave seafarer, who waxed wroth and demanded that these evil advisers of the king should accompany him on his fearsome voyage. Gorm forced the men to sail with Thorkill, and unwillingly they went forth to face the perils of the Unknown.

Great were the sufferings of the men who went towards the dwelling of Utgard-Loke. Many died from starvation ere they came to the land of eternal darkness. At length they reached a rocky shore on which there was a black tremendous precipice. Thorkill and his companions went ashore, and they came to the narrow entrance of a vast cavern. Iron benches were seen within by the light of the torches carried, and they perceived that the floor swarmed with venomous snakes. They went inward on a rocky ledge, and passed a warm and foul river, and afterwards entered a chamber which reeked with loathsome vapour and was strewn with slime. Then did they behold Utgard-Loke. [*1] He was bound to the

[p. 265]

rock with great fetters. So long had he lain there that his hair and his beard had grown hard as elk horns. Desiring to return homeward with proof of his achievement, Thorkill snatched out a single hair of Utgard-Loke's beard, whereat a foul stench came forth. Then flying serpents made attack upon the strangers, spouting venom which caused limbs to wither and heads to be struck off, so that but few men escaped to the galleys.

When Thorkill returned to Denmark he was so greatly disfigured by the venom that his friends hardly knew him. He went to the king and related all he had seen and what had happened to him, and he showed the horn-like hair of Loke's beard from which deadly fumes escaped and suffocated several who were nigh. Gorm was terror-stricken when he came to know of the horrors of the foul dwelling of his favoured god, Loke, and he fell back dead ere Thorkill had finished his tale.

Beyond the realms of torture are "the Glittering Plains", where good men and women who have died upon earth live ever in bliss and amidst scenes of beauty. This part of the Other-world is also called Odainsaker, "the acre of the not-dead", and Jord lifanda manna, "the earth of living men".

Erik, a prince of Denmark, made a vow that he would go thither, and another prince from Norway, who was named Erik also, set forth with him and their followers towards the east, and they journeyed a great distance beyond India, until they reached a dark forest, in a land where the sun never shone and the stars were beholden by day. Onward they went through perilous places until there was light again. They came at length to a river, which was spanned by a bridge of stone, and on the other side was a green and level plain. A great dragon stood upon the bridge, keeping constant guard,

[p. 266]

and its jaws gaped wide, issuing forth flame and smoke. Erik of Denmark feared to go farther, and said they must needs return; but Erik of Norway drew his sword, and seizing the right hand of one of his followers rushed forward with him. In horror and anguish the others beheld the two men vanishing in the dragon's jaws, so they mourned for them greatly and returned home by the way they had come.

Many years passed by, and at length Erik of Norway and his companion appeared in their native land. They told that when they went nigh to the dragon they were blinded by smoke, but they pressed on. Soon the air was cleared, and they found that they had crossed the bridge and were travelling over a glittering plain which was covered with gleaming flowers that gave forth sweet odours. It was ever summer there and ever bright and warm, but there were no shadows cast by flowers or trees or living beings. They journeyed on until they saw a beauteous tower suspended in mid-air. A ladder hung from it, and they climbed towards the door. Fair was the room they entered. The carpet was of hushing velvet, and on a gleaming table, which was laden with rich dainties, stood dishes of silver and wine goblets of graven gold. Sumptuous beds were in the tower also, and the air was filled with faint perfume. Erik and his companion were made glad, because they deemed that they had at length come unto Odainsaker.

Now while Erik lay in soft slumber there appeared before him a shining youth, who was his guardian spirit, [*1] and he asked the prince if he desired to remain there forever. But Erik said that it was his desire to return, so that he might relate the wonders he had beheld. Then the spirit told him he had reached not Odainsaker, which

[p. 267]

lay beyond, and was so very fair that the tower and the land over which it was suspended seemed dreary and unlovely in comparison. But no man who ever went thither could return again. It was the prince's choice, however, to seek his fatherland; and when he returned and told of the wondrous things he had beheld he was called Erik the Far-travelled.

Helge Thoreson also visited the Glittering Plains. In a great forest he met Gudmund and his twelve daughters, who were clad in scarlet robes, and rode upon stately steeds harnessed with gold. Ingeborg, the fairest of the maids, was moved with love towards Helge, who remained with her for three days. A great tent was erected and a feast prepared; rich were the dainties, and the dishes were of silver and gold. When Helge took his departure he received much treasure from Gudmund, and he returned with it to his sire, nor were men ever told whence it was obtained.

There came a great tempest on Yule-night, and in the midst of it two strange men entered the dwelling of Helge's sire, and took the young man away.

When a year had gone past Helge appeared again with the two men, and stood before King Olav Trygveson in his feasting hall. The strangers gave to the monarch .two great drinking horns, which were decorated with gold, and said that they were sent to him by Gudmund. These were then filled with mead, and the bishop blessed them, [*1] but when the horns were handed to the strangers they threw them away. Then the fire went out; every light was extinguished; there was clamour and confusion

[p. 268]

in the feasting hall and the guests were terror-stricken. Afterwards it was found that Helge and the strangers had vanished. Then were prayers offered up for Helge's return.

At next Yuletide the strangers came back with Helge unto the king, and immediately went away, leaving behind them the young man, who was stricken with blindness. He told that he had spent happy days with Gudmund, but he was forced to return because of the prayers which were offered up. Ere he parted from his spirit bride she made him blind, lest his eyes should ever gaze with love upon the daughters of men.

Now after Hadding, son of Halfdan, had slain the sea dragon [*1] he had strange adventures. He rescued, from a great giant Ragnhild, the fair daughter of the King of Nitheri, and she became his bride. One evening, in midwinter, while they feasted together, a spirit woman rose up, and she bore with her a bunch of white cowbanes, freshly plucked, and she asked Hadding, who wondered greatly to see summer flowers at such a time, if be had desire to behold the place where they grew. The young king answered her that he would fain see it, whereat she flung her mantle over him and together they disappeared.

'Twas thus it came that Hadding set forth to journey towards Hela. He went through a dark land, and black were the mists about him, while the air was ice-cold. Then he came to a road which was daily trod by many feet, and he walked on until he reached a swiftly flowing river which was filled with sharp and pointed weapons. With his guide Hadding crossed the bridge, and came to a plain where two great armies contended in battle. Thus did many men who were sword-slain upon earth

 

Click to enlarge
HUNDINGSBANE'S RETURN TO VALHAL
 From the painting by E. Wallcousins

 

[p. 269]

choose to live in Hela, where they performed again their deeds of might and fell without fear.

At length the woman took Hadding towards a place which was surrounded by a high wall. He had already gazed from afar off, as he descended the hills, upon the beauties of the enclosure, where grew the flowers which were plucked in midwinter and stately beings in robes of purple had blissful dwelling.

The old woman tried to leap over the wall, but was unable to do so. She, however, showed Hadding that the place within was indeed the land of life. She seized a fowl which she carried with her, and flung its head, which he wrung off, over the wall. The head was speedily restored again, and the bird crowed loudly.

Hadding thereafter returned again unto his own land, and he endured many perils upon the way.

  

Spenser's Mimer

Guyon finds Mammon in a delve
   Sunning his treasure hoar,
 Is by him tempted and led down
   To see his secret store.

At last he came upon a gloomy glade,
 Covered with boughs and shrubs from heaven's light,
 Whereas he sitting found in secret shade
 An uncouth, savage and uncivil wight, [*1]
 Of grisly hue and foul ill-favoured sight;
 His face with smoke was tann'd and eyes were bleared,
 His head and beard with soot were ill bedight,
 His coal-black hands did seem to have been seared
 In smith's fire-spitting forge, and nails like claws appeared.

 

[p. 270]

His iron coat, all overgrown with rust,
 Was underneath enveloped with gold
 Whose glittering gloss, darkened with filthy dust,
 Well yet appeared to have been of old
 A work of rich entail and curious mould,
 Woven with antiques and wild imag'ry:
 And in his lap a mass of coin he told
 And turned upside down, to feed his eye
 And covetous desire with his huge treasury

   .       .       .       .       .       .

And round about him lay on every side
 Great heaps of gold that never could be spent;
 Of which some were rude ore, not purified
 Of Mulciber's devouring element;
 Some others were new driven, and distent
 Into great ingots and to wedges square;
 Some in round plates withouten moniment [*1];
 But most were stampt, and in their metal bare
 The antique shapes of Kings and Kesars strong and rare

   .       .       .       .       .       .

"What secret place," quoth he, [*2] "can safely hold
 So huge a mass, and hide from heaven's eye?
 Or where hast thou thy wonne [*3], that so much gold
 Thou canst preserve from wrong and robbery?"
 "Come thou," quoth he, "and see." So by and by
 Through that thick covert he him led, and found
 A darksome way, which no man could descry,
 That deep descended through the hollow ground,
 And was with dread and horror compassed around.

So soon as Mammon there [*4] arrived, the door
 To him did open and afforded way:
 Him followed eke Sir Guyon evermore,
 Ne darkness him ne danger might dismay.
 Soon as he entered was, the door straightway [p. 271]
 Did shut, and from behind it forth there leapt
 An ugly fiend, more foul than dismal day;
 The which with monstrous stalk behind him stept;
 And ever as he went due watch upon him kept.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

Both roof, and floor, and walls, were all of gold,
 But overgrown with dust and old decay,
 And hid in darkness, that none could behold
 The hue thereof; for view of cheerful day
 Did never in that house itself display,
 But a faint shadow of uncertain light,
 Such as a lamp, whose life does fade away;
 Or as the moon, cloathed with cloudy night,
 Does shew to him that walks in fear and sad affright.

In all that room was nothing to be seen
 But huge great iron chests, and coffers strong,
 All barr'd with double bends, that none could weene
 Them to enforce with violence or wrong;
 On every side they placed were along,
 But all the ground with skulls was scattered
 And dead men's bones, which round about were flung
 Whose lives, it seemed, whilome there were shed,
 And their vile carcases now left unburied

They forward pass; ne Guyon yet spoke word,
 Till that they came unto an iron door
 Which to them opened of its own accord,
 And showed of riches such exceeding store,
 As eye of man did never see before,
 Ne ever could within one place be found,
 Though all the wealth, which is or was of yore,
 Could gathered be through all the world around,
 And that above were added to that underground.

The charge thereof unto a covetous spright
 Commanded was, who thereby did attend,
 And warily awaited day and night,
 From other covetous fiends it to defend, [p. 272]
 Who it to rob and ransack did intend.
 Then Mammon, turning to that warrior, said:
 "Lo, here the worldes bless! lo, here the end
 To which all men do aim, rich to be made!
 Such grace now to be happy is before thee laid."

He brought him, through a darksome narrow strayt [*1],
 To a broad gate all built of beaten gold:
 The gate was open; but therein did wait
 A sturdy villain, striding stiff and bold,
 As if the Highest God defy he would:
 In his right hand an iron club he held
 But he himself was all of golden mould,
 Yet had both life and sense, and well could weld
 That cursed weapon, when his cruel foes he quell'd.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

He brought him in. The room was large and wide,
 As it some guild or solemn temple were;
 Many great golden pillars did up-bear
 The massy roof, and riches huge sustain;
 And every pillar decked was full dear
 With crowns and diadems, and titles vain,
 Which mortal princes wore while they on earth did reign.

A route of people there assembled were,
 Of every sort and nation under sky
 Which with great uproar pressed to draw near
 To th' upper part, where was advanced high
 A stately siege [*2] of sovran majesty;
 And thereon sat a woman gorgeous gay,
 And richly clad in robes of royalty,
 That never earthly prince in such array
 His glory did enhance, and pompous pride display.

 

Click to enlarge
'And all that press did round about her swell
 To catchen hold of that long chain, thereby
 To climb aloft, and others to excell:
 That was Ambition, rash desire to sty,
 And every link thereof a step of dignity.''
 After the drawing by Walter Crane. By permission of Messrs. George Allen & Co.

 

Her face right wondrous fair did seem to be,
 That her broad beauties beam great brightness threw
 Through the dim shade, that all men might it see;
 Yet was not that same her own native hue [p. 273]
 But wrought by art and counterfeited shew,
 Thereby more lovers unto her to call;
 Natheless most heavenly fair in deed and view
 She by creation was, till she did fall;
 Thenceforth she sought for helps to cloak her crime withal.

There, as in glist'ring glory she did sit,
 She held a great gold chain y-linked well,
 Whose upper end to highest heaven was knit,
 And lower part did reach to lowest hell;
 And all that press did round about her swell
 To catchen hold of that long chain, thereby
 To climb aloft, and others to excell:
 That was Ambition, rash desire to sty [*1],
 And every link thereof a step of dignity.

Which whenas Guyon saw, he gan enquire,
 What meant that press about that lady's throne,
 And what she was that did so high aspire?
 Him Mammon answered: "That goodly one
 Whom all that folk with such contention
 Do flock about, my dear, my daughter is; [*2]
 Honour and dignity from her alone
 Derived are, and all this worldes bliss,
 For which ye men do strive; few get, but many miss.
            From "The Faerie Queene", Book II, Canto VII.

  

The Garden of Hela

                          Him forth thence led
 Through grisly shadows by a beaten path
 Into a garden goodly garnished
 With herbs and fruits, whose kinds mote not be redd [*3]:
 Not such as earth out of her fruitful womb
 Throws forth to men, sweet and well savoured, [p. 274]
 But direful deadly black, both leaf and bloom,
 Fit to adorn the dead and deck the dreary tomb.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

The garden of Proserpina [*1] this hight:
 And in the midst thereof a silver seat,
 With a thick arbour goodly over dight,
 In which she often used from open heat
 Herself to shroud, and pleasures to entreat:
 Next thereunto did grow a goodly tree
 With branches broad dispread and body great,
 Cloathed with leaves, that none the wood might see
 And laden all with fruit as thick as it might be.

Their fruit were golden apples glist'ring bright
 That goodly was their glory to behold;
 On earth like never grew, no living wight
 Like ever saw, but they from hence were sold. . . .

   .       .       .       .       .       .

The war-like elf much wondered at this tree [*2]
 So fair and great, that shadowed all the ground;
 And his broad branches laden with rich fee
 Did stretch themselves, without the utmost bound
 Of this great garden, compassed with a mound. . . .

  

The River of Torture

Which to behold he clomb up to the bank;
 And, looking down, saw many damned wights
 In those sad waves, which direful deadly stank,
 Plonged continually of cruel sprites,
 That with their piteous cries and yelling shrightes [*3],
 They made the further shore resounden wide:
 Amongst the rest of those same rueful sights
 One cursed creature he by chance espied
 That drenched lay full deep under the garden side.

[p. 275]

Deep was he drenched to the upmost chin,
 Yet gaped still as coveting to drink
 Of the cold liquor which he waded in;
 And, stretching forth his hand, did often think
 To reach the fruit which grew upon the brink;
 But both the fruit from land, and flood from mouth,
 Did fly a-back, and made him vainly swink;
 The whiles he starved with hunger, and with drouth
 He daily died, yet never throughly dyen couth [*1].

He looked a little further and espied
 Another wretch, whose carcas deep was drent [*2]
 Within the river which the same did hide.
 But both his hands most filthy feculent [*3]
 Above the water were on high extent,
 And feigned to wash themselves incessantly.
 Yet nothing clearer were for such intent,
 But rather fouler seemed to the eye;
 So lost his labour vain and idle industry.

  

The Fruit of Forgetfulness

Infinite more tormented in like pain
 He there beheld, too long here to be told;
 Ne Mammon would there let him long remain,
 For terror of the tortures manifold,
 In which the damned souls he did behold,
 But roughly him bespake, "Thou fearful fool
 Why takest not of that same fruit of gold?
 Ne sittest down on that same silver stool,
 To rest thy weary person in the shadow cool?"

All which he did to do him deadly fall
 In frail intemperance through sinful bait
 To which if he inclined had at all
 That dreadful fiend, which did behind him wait, [p. 276]
 Would him have rent in thousand pieces straight;
 But he was wary wise in all his way
 And well perceived his deceitful sleight,
 Ne suffered lust his safety to betray;
 So goodly did beguile the guiler of his prey.

And now he was so long remained there
 That vital powers gan wax both weak and wan
 For want of food and sleep, which two up-bear
 Like mighty pillars, this frail life of man,
 That none without the same enduren can:
 For now three days of men were overwrought,
 Since be this hardy enterprise began:
 Forthy [*1] great Mammon fairly he besought
 Into the world to guide him back as he him brought.

The god, though loth, yet was constrained t' obey;
 For longer time than that no living wight
 Below the earth might suffered be to stay:
 So back again him brought to living light.
 But all so soon as his enfeebled spright
 Gan suck this vital air into his breast,
 As overcome with too exceeding might,
 The life did flit away out of her nest,
 And all his senses were with deadly fit oppressed.

  

Hela in the Border Ballads

  

The Three Roads

True Thomas lay on Huntlie bank;
   A ferlie he spied wi' his ee;
 And there he saw a ladye bright,
   Come riding doon by the Eildon Tree.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

[p. 277]

"Harp and carp, Thomas," she said;
   "Harp and carp along wi' me;
 And if ye dare to kiss my lips,
   Sure of your bodie I will be."

Betide me weal, betide me woe,
   That weird [*1] shall never daunton me."--
 Syne he has kissed her rosy lips,
   All underneath the Eildon Tree.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

She's mounted on her milk-white steed;
   She's taen true Thomas up behind:
 And aye, whene'er her bridle rung,
   The steed flew swifter than the wind.

O they rade on, and farther on;
   The steed gaed swifter than the wind;
 Until they reach'd a desert wide,
   And living land was left behind.

Light down, light down, now, true Thomas,
   And lean your head upon my knee;
 Abide and rest a little space
   And I will shew you ferlies three.

O see ye not yon narrow road
   So thick beset with thorns and briers?
 That is the path of righteousness,
   Though after it but few enquires.

And see ye not that braid, braid road,
   That lies across that lily leven?
 That is the path of wickedness,
   Though some call it the road to heaven.

"And see not ye that bonny road,
   That winds aboot the fernie brae?
 That is the road to fair Elfland,
   Where thou and I this night maun gae.

[p. 278]

"But, Thomas, ye maun hold your tongue,
   Whatever ye may hear or see;
 For, if you speak word in Elfyn land,
   Ye 'll ne'er get back to your ain countrie."

O they rade on, and farther on,
   And they waded through rivers aboon the knee,
 And they saw neither sun nor moon,
   But they heard the roaring o' the sea.

It was mirk, mirk night, and there was nae starn light,
   And they waded through red blood to the knee;
 For a' the blood that 's shed on earth
   Rins through the springs o' that countrie.

Sync they came on to a garden green,
   And she pu'd an apple frae a tree--
 "Take this for thy wages, true Thomas;
   It will gie thee the tongue that can never lee."
                                     Thomas The Rhymer.

  

The Mountains

"O where have you been, my long, long love,
   This long seven years and more?"--
 "O I'm come to seek my former vows
   Ye granted me before."--

   .       .       .       .       .       .

She has taken up her two little babes,
   Kissed them baith cheek and chin;
 "O fare ye weel, my ain two babes,
   For I'll ne'er see you again."

   .       .       .       .       .       .

She had not sailed a league, a league,
   A league but barely three,
 When dismal grew his countenance,
   And drumlie grew his ee.

[p. 279]

The masts that were like the beaten gold,
   Bent not on the heaving seas;
 But the sails, that were o' the taffetie,
   Fill'd not in the east land breeze.

They had not sailed a league, a league,
   A league but barely three,
 Until she espied his cloven foot,
   And she wept right bitterlie.

O hold your tongue of your weeping," says he,
   "Of your weeping now let it be;
 I will show you how the lilies grow
   On the banks of Italy."--

"O what hills are yon, yon pleasant hills,
   That the sun shines sweetly on?"--
 "O yon are the hills of heaven," he said,
   "Where you will never win."--

"O whaten a mountain is yon," she said,
   "All so dreary wi' frost and snow?"--
 "O yon is the mountain of hell," he cried,
   "Where you and I will go."
                                     The Demon Lover.

  

Demon Vengeance

Up then spake the Queen o' Fairies
   Out o' a bush o' broom--
 "She that has borrowed young Tamlane
   Has gotten a stately groom."--

Up then spake the Queen o' Fairies
   Out o' a bush o' rye--
 "She's taen awa' the bonniest Knight
   In a' my companie.

"But had I kenn'd, Tamlane," she says,
   "A lady wad borrowed thee, [p. 280]
 I wad ta'en out thy twa grey een,
   Put in twa een o' tree.

Had I kenn'd, Tamlane," she says,
   "Before ye came frae hame--
 I wad ta'en out your heart o' flesh,
   Put in a heart o' stane."

"Had I but had the wit yestreen
   That I hae coft the day--
 I'd paid my kane seven times to hell
   Ere you'd been won away."
                              The Young Tamlane.

  

The Birk o' Paradise

There lived a wife at Usher's Well,
   And a wealthy wife was she,
 She had three stout and stalwart sons,
   And sent them o'er the sea.

They hadna been a week from her,
   A week but barely ane,
 When word came to the carline wife
   That her three sons were gane.

They hadna been a week from her,
   A week but barely three,
 When word came to the carline wife,
   That her sons she 'd never see.

"I wish the wind may never cease,
   Nor fishes in the flood,
 Till my three sons come hame to me,
   In earthly flesh and blood." [*1]

[p. 281]

It fell about the Martinmas,
   When nights are lang and mirk,
 The carline wife's three sons came hame,
   And their hats were o' the birk.

It neither grew in syke or ditch,
   Nor yet in ony sheugh;
 But at the gates of Paradise
   That birk grew fair eneugh.

  

Gilly Flowers

The fields aboot this city fair
   Were a' wi' roses set,
 Gilly flowers and carnations rare
   Which canker could not fret."
                                Clerk Saunders

  

The Garden Fruit

She led him intil a fair herbere,
   There fruit groand was gret plente,
 Pears and apples, both ripe they were,
   The date and eke the damsyn tree,
   The fig and eke the wineberry.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

He pressed to pull the fruit with his hand,
   As man for food was nyhonde faint,
 She said, "Thomas let that stand,
   Or else the fiend will thee attent.

"If thou pull them, sooth to say,
   Thy soul goes to the fire of Hell
 It comes not out till Domisday
   And there ever in pain to dwell."
                             Thomas The Rhymer.

 

Footnotes

^257:1 Mimer.

^258:1 Saxo's words are: "Cujus transeundi cupidos revocavit, docens, eo alveo humana a monstrosis rerum secrevisse naturam, nec mortalibus ultra fas esse vestigiis."

^259:1 In Highland lore these unions are followed by speedy death. The demon brides crush their lovers.

^261:1 See chapter "Thor in Peril".

^262:1 Thjasse-Volund's Sword of Victory and multiplying ring. Here we have the treasure which was cursed, and the dragon guardian of Beowulf, Volsunga saga, &c. The horn is Gjallar-horn which Heimdal is to blow at Ragnarok.

^264:1 This is evidently Loke, not the Utgard-Loki in the chapter "The City of Enchantments ". Loke's place of torture was situated in the utmost part of Nifel hel.

^266:1 His Hamingje.

^267:1 The blessing counteracts the evil influence of a spell. In the Highlands a child should be blessed ere its name is asked, and strangers should bless a house on entering it. The blessing is not only a proof of friendly intentions, but a preventive, for he who blesses is unable to practise black magic for the time being.

^268:1 See Chapter "The Gods Reconciled".

^269:1 This is Spenser's Mammon. He resembles very closely Gudmund-Mimer, the chief of elfin smiths who in Norse mythology produce the vast stores of treasure accursed.

^270:1 Superscription, image.

^270:2 The Knight Guyon.

^270:3 Dwelling.

^270:4 The gate of hell.

^272:1 Street, narrow passage.

^272:2 Throne.

^273:1 Ascend.

^273:2 Urd, goddess of fate, is Mimer's daughter.

^273:3 Must not be declared.

^274:1 In Saxo she is Urd.

^274:2 Like Ygdrasil.

^274:3 Shrieks.

^275:1 Could.

^275:2 Drenched.

^275:3 Muddy, foul.

^276:1 Therefore.

^277:1 Urd--destiny.

^280:1 She had evidently power to work a spell and secure her wish. Belief in wishing power is not yet quite extinct in Scotland.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 282]

  

CHAPTER XXV

  

The Doom of the Volsungs

The Swan Maidens--Weland Legend----Asa-god's Adventure--The Treasure Curse--Fafner becomes a Dragon--Regin the Wonder Smith--The Volsung Family--Odin brings the Magic Sword--Marriage of Signy--King Siggeir's Treachery--Volsung and his Sons are slain--The Survivor, Sigmund--Desire for Vengeance.

ERE the sons of Ivalde warred against the gods, they loved three swan maidens, whose songs in summer were sweet to hear. One morning the snow-white birds flew towards a lake in Wolfdales. The brothers followed them, and. they beheld sitting on the shore three beauteous valkyries, who were singing and spinning flax. Beside them lay their swan coverings, and these the brothers captured. Then had they the swan maids in their power, and they took them to be their brides. Egil-Orvandel had Obrun, Slagfin-Gjuki had Swan-white, and Thjasse-Volund had All-white.

For seven years they all lived happily together. But in the eighth year the swan maids were seized with longing, and in the ninth they flew away in search of conflicts. Nor did they ever again return. In vain did Orvandel-Egil make swift pursuit on his skees, and in vain did Slagfin-Gjuki search for his lost bride. But Thjasse-Volund remained behind, and when the Winter War began to be waged, he retired to a deep mountain recess where he concealed his treasure, which he cursed with spells.

[p. 283]

Then did Thjasse-Volund erect a smithy where he forged the magic Sword of Victory, so that he might wreak his vengeance upon the gods, and become chief ruler in Asgard. A wondrous serpent ring did he also fashion. It was given power to multiply without end, and when Mimer came suddenly upon the cunning artificer and bound him, he found within the smithy a chain of seven hundred rings which could fetter the wind.

In ancient England minstrels were wont to sing to Angles and Saxons of Volund, the wonder Smith, whom they called Weland. [*1] He was a prince of the fairies. In other lands and in other tongues was the "Lay of Volund" sung also. Mimer was named Nithud, and called "King of Sweden".

Now King Nithud desired greatly to possess the treasures of Weland. So he sent mounted warriors to Wolfdales to take the elf prince captive. In bright moonlight the men rode forth clad in shining armour. When they reached Weland's hall, they entered it boldly, for the Smith, who was a skilled archer, was hunting afar. They beheld, hanging on the wall, a chain of seven hundred rings; they took it down, and one ring they kept. Then the men concealed themselves. In time Weland returned from the chase. Keen-eyed was he indeed, for he at once seized the rings and sat down on a bear's skin to count them. He found that one was missing, and he deemed fondly that his fairy wife had returned, because for her he had forged the ring. Musing thus a long time, he fell fast asleep.

[p. 284]

In sorrow he awoke; his hands were chained and his feet were fettered.

Then his captors bore him away, and they put him on an island to forge weapons and ornaments for the king. The heart of Weland was filled with wrath.

"On Nithud's belt," he cried, "I behold the sword which I fashioned with all my skill. I have lost for ever my shining blade. Bodvild, the queen, hath now the ring of my fairy bride. I shall ne'er be appeased."

In his secret heart Weland vowed to be avenged. He took no rest; he sat not by day nor slept at night. He kept striking with his hammer.

One day two young sons of the king entered the smithy. He slew them, and of their skulls made drinking-cups which he sent unto the king. Then unto him came also Bodvild, the queen, and she loved him because that she wore the magic ring. So by the wonder smith was she beguiled.

Weland ceased not to work until he had fashioned for himself eagle pinions. Then he flew away, leaving the queen to grieve bitterly for him because of the spell that was upon her, while Nithud lamented for his sons.

When Thjasse-Volund perished in Asgard, whither he had flown, and the other sons of Ivalde passed also, the curse remained upon the treasure, which was then guarded by a dwarf, or, as some tell, by a fiery dragon. In after days the curse fell upon each man who became possessed of the doomed hoard of the sons of Ivalde. And ever did the rings continue to multiply, and the chain to grow, ring following ring and linking one to the other, and each one like to the first that was forged by the wonder smith. The rings came down the Ages and the chain extended from land to land.

So grew also, link by link, the wondrous story chain

[p. 285]

of Ivalde's sons and of the swan maidens whom they loved and lost. Their fame can never end nor, their sorrows, nor can the doom of the treasure curse pass away while ring follows ring and the chain grows on.

Old is the ring tale of the Volsung's doom. By Iceland's skalds was it sung to harp music in other days, and warriors loved to hear it in the feasting hall as they drank mead, while the log fire reddened their faces and the night wind bellowed through the gloom.

For it was told that there was once a dwarf king named Hreidmar who possessed much treasure. He had three sons and three daughters. The first son was named Fafner, the second Ottar, and the third Regin. Fafner had great strength, and was fierce as he was surly: he claimed the possessions of the others for himself. Ottar was wont to fish in otter guise, and caught salmon in the river, which he laid out on the bank. Regin had neither the might of Fafner nor the cunning of Ottar, but he had skilful hands, and he became a wonder smith who shaped weapons of iron and ornaments of silver and gold.

One day Odin and Honer and Loke journeyed together, and it chanced that they drew nigh to the dwelling of Hreidmar. On the river bank they saw the otter: he had devoured a salmon and lay fast asleep. Loke, who was ever working evil, flung a sharp stone which smote the dwarf's son and killed him, and when he had done that, he took off the skin. Then the gods went towards the dwelling of Hreidmar and entered it.

Wroth indeed was the dwarf when he beheld the otter's skin, and he seized the gods and demanded ransom. So Loke had to go forth alone to obtain sufficient gold, while Odin and Honer were kept secure.

Now Loke knew that a great treasure hoard lay hidden in a dark mountain cavern; it was guarded by

[p. 286]

a dwarf named Andvari, who had taken the guise of a pike, and ever concealed himself in a deep pool below a waterfall. Loke resolved to possess the gold, so that the gods might be set free. So he went to Ran, the sea-goddess, and when he had told her of the plight of the gods, he borrowed her wondrous net. Then he hastened to the pool below the waterfall and fished up Andvari the pike.

"What fish art thou?" he said. "Thou dost lack cunning to be thus taken unawares. Of thee I demand life ransom in water gold."

The pike answered: "My name is Andvari, and my sire is Oinn. By a Norn of evil fortune was I doomed to pass my days in cold waters."

But Andvari could deceive not Loke, and was forced to pay life ransom, unwilling as he might be. So changing his shape, he went to the mountain cavern to yield up the treasure of which he was guardian. In vain Andvari sought to keep back a single gold ring which had power to multiply. But Loke demanded it with the rest. Then was the dwarf moved to great anger.

"My treasure is accursed," he cried. "It shall bring death to two brothers, and cause strife among eight kings. No man shall ever be made glad by my gold."

Now Hreidmar had demanded of the gods that ne should receive as ransom for his son's death as much gold as would cover the otter skin. Loke laid upon the skin all the treasure he had obtained save the ring, which he sought to keep for himself. But Hreidmar perceived that a single whisker hair of the otter stood bare, and he demanded that it should be covered. Unwillingly did Loke lay the ring upon it. Then were the gods ransomed and set free.

Loke was angry as the dwarf had been, because he

[p. 287]

had perforce to part with the magic ring, and ere he went his way he spoke fiercely to Hreidmar, saying:

"Thou hast received gold enough now, and my head is safe. But thou shalt never prosper, nor shall thy sons prosper after thee. Take thou with the gold the curse that follows it."

Then Fafner arose and demanded the entire treasure for himself. He fought with his sire, to whom he gave his deathwound.

Ere he died, Hreidmar besought his daughters to avenge him. But one, who was named Lyngheid, said that a sister could slay not her brother, whereat her sire foretold that she would have a daughter whose son would be his strong avenger.

Fafner drave forth his sisters and his brother Regin, and possessed himself of all the treasure. Heavily indeed did the curse fall upon him, and there was never again any joy in his heart. He went unto a lonely place, which was called "Glittering Heath", to be guardian of his ill-gotten gold, and he brooded over it there with anger and suspicion, until he became a wingless dragon which was feared and hated by all men.

Regin was thus made poor, and he went to a king whose wonder smith he became. He shaped strong weapons and many ornaments of gold and silver, for which he received great praise and royal honours. But in his heart he grieved because that he had been robbed by his brother of his just share of the treasure. Great was his desire that the dragon should be slain, so that he himself might become possessed of the wealth. But many years passed ere the avenger had birth, as Hreidmar had foretold, and Fafner was killed. The avenger was Sigurd, and his sire was Sigmund, son of Volsung. Noble was he and of great strength and battle power,

[p. 288]

like all his kin. Bright, too, were his days until the curse of the treasure fell upon him.

Now the sire of Volsung was Rerir, who was the, son of Sige. The sire of Sige was Odin. It chanced that Sige went forth to hunt in wintertime through a snow-wreathed forest. With him went Brede, who was a servant to Skadi, and was skilful in the chase. At the day's end Sige was enraged because Brede had taken more game than him; so he slew the man and concealed his body in a snow wreath. But the crime was discovered and Sige was banished from the land of his folk.

Then did Odin come to his son's aid, and gave him war vessels and a force of brave war-men. Many victories were won by Sige. His fame in battle was spread far and near, and he conquered and ruled the land of the Huns. He achieved great glory in his prime, but his life's end was clouded by dissensions in the kingdom. Even the queen's brothers conspired against him. Then a great battle was fought and Sige was slain. His son Rerir reigned after him. His kinsmen he slew and put their army to flight. Thus did he avenge the death of his sire.

Rerir became a greater monarch than Sige. He took for wife a noble lady, but as the years went on they fell to mourning, because that no child was born to them. So they prayed to the gods, and Freyja heard them with compassion. Then was one of her maids, who was a daughter of the giant, Hrimner [*1], sent to earth in crow guise bearing an apple for the queen. Thus was the queen's desire fulfilled. But soon afterwards the king sickened and died. The child was not born until he was seven years old, and he was named Volsung.

Now Volsung became the most powerful king of his

[p. 289]

time. He was far famed as a warrior, and he ruled his people justly and well. A great house did he cause to be built. In the midst of it grew a mighty oak which was named Branstock, and its branches overhung the roof. It was told that Volsung had for wife the giant's daughter, Ljod, whom gentle Freyja had sent with the magic apple to his queen mother. They had two sons and one daughter, and the first-born were Sigmund and his twin sister, Signy. The lad was as strong and brave as the girl was comely and fair.

At that time Siggeir was King of the Gauts, and he sought to have Signy for his bride. So it came that they were wed in Volsung's hall. A great feast was given and the warriors of the Gauts were there, and they made merry with Volsung's nobles and his two sons.

When the feast was over, a tall, old man entered the hall. He wore a blue cloak, mottled with grey, a round hat which was drawn down over his face, and tight breeches of linen. He had but one eye, and his feet were bare. In his hand he carried a gleaming sword, and he plunged it into Branstock right up to the hilt. None spoke, but they all watched him with mute amaze. Then he spake gravely unto them.

"I gift this sword", he said, "unto the man who can draw it from Branstock. He shall find it a goodly blade indeed, for it hath no equal."

Then he vanished from before them. . . . He was Odin, but no man knew him.

Now the chief warriors who were there laid hands, one after the other, upon the sword. But in vain did they endeavour to draw it forth. It stuck deep in the tree, defying them as it tempted them. But at length Sigmund grasped the hilt in his strong right hand, and

[p. 290]

pulled out the blade, which he thus had for himself as a gift from Odin.

Ill pleased was King Siggeir, for he sought greatly to possess the shining blade for himself, and he made offer to purchase it with much treasure; but Sigmund refused to deliver it up even though the King of the Gauts gave unto him all the gold he possessed.

Siggeir answered not. He sat moodily apart, for he deemed that the young warrior had spoken scornfully. With anger in his heart he devised a treacherous scheme with purpose to gain his desire and to wreak vengeance upon the kinsfolk of his queen. So next morning he made ready to depart, although the wedding celebrations were not ended, and he invited Volsung and his sons to visit him after the space of three months. Volsung gave his word to do so, and took leave of Siggeir and Signy. Unwilling indeed was the fair bride to leave the land of her people, and she would have parted with her husband had her father permitted her.

When three moons had waxed and waned, Volsung and his sons with their followers voyaged in three ships to Gautland. Fair winds favoured them and they made speedy passage, and on a fragrant evening they reached a haven and went ashore. Then came Signy to them in secret to persuade them to return, because that her husband had collected together a great army to accomplish their fall. But Volsung disdained to go back.

"A hundred battles I have fought," he said, "and I was ever victorious. In my youth I feared not my foemen, and in my old age I shall flee not before them. A man can die but once, and he can escape not death at his appointed time. So we shall fare onward nor fear aught, and no man shall tell that Volsung ever fled from danger or sued for peace."

[p. 291]

Signy desired to remain with her kin, but Volsung bade her return to Siggeir and stay with him.

Next morning brave Volsung and his two sons with all their followers went fully armed towards the hall of Siggeir. But a strong force came out against them, and after fierce and long fighting Volsung was slain with all his followers, and his two sons were taken captive. Siggeir then became possessed of Sigmund's sword, which was named Gram.

Earnestly did Signy entreat that her brothers should not be put to death, and although the cruel Gaut king relented somewhat, he caused them to be bound together to a felled tree in a deep forest. In the midst of the night a fierce she wolf came and devoured one of them. Secret messengers bore the sad tidings unto Signy and she grieved piteously. On the second night another son of Volsung was devoured; and so night after night one perished by the wolf until Sigmund alone remained alive.

Then Signy sent her messengers to smear Sigmund's body with honey, and they did according to her desire. In the darkness of night the wolf came to devour him. But when the monster smelt the sweet savour, she began to lick the young hero's face. At length she thrust her tongue into his mouth, and Sigmund seized it between his teeth and bit it off. As he struggled, he burst his fetters and the monster was slain.

Now the wolf was none other than King Siggeir's mother, who was skilled in witchcraft and had power to change her shape.

Sigmund found a safe retreat in the wood, where he made for himself a subterranean dwelling. In time Signy came to know that it fared well with him, but Siggeir knew not that Sigmund remained alive and awaited the hour of vengeance.

Footnotes

^283:1 Beowulf had armour made by Weland. In Scott's Kenilworth, chap. xiii, he appears as "Wayland Smith ", whose fame "haunts the Vale of the Whitehorse" in Berkshire. The legend is associated with the burial place of a Danish chief. "Wayland", like the Highland fairy, performs during the night work left for him to do. His fee is sixpence. This fairy smith was also known in France.

^288:1 Angerboda, the Hag of Ironwood, when she was a maid attendant to Freyja.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 292]

  

CHAPTER XXVI

  

How Sigmund was Avenged

The Forest Hut--Waiting the Day of Vengeance--Signy's Sons--Why they were slain--Sinfjotle, the Volsung--The Were-wolves--Attack on King Siggeir's Hall--Avengers buried alive--Their Escape--Siggeir's Fate--Signy's Tragic Farewell--Sigmund returns to his Kingdom--Usurper overthrown.

FOR long years, through summer's heat and winter cold, did Sigmund dwell in his forest hut, biding his time. Signy had two sons, and it was her heart's hope that their Volsung blood would stir them up to avenge her sire's death. She set at length to proving their worth. On their hands she put winter gloves, which she sewed through their flesh. But they cried out thereat, and she feared that they had more of Siggeir's nature than that of her kin.

When the eldest was ten years old she sent him unto Sigmund, so that it might be found whether he was fit to give service n the work of blood vengeance. Sigmund greeted the lad and took him within his hut. Then secretly he placed a venomous serpent in the meal sack, and having bidden Signy's son to bake bread, he went through the forest to gather firewood.

In time he returned, and he found that no bread had been baked, so he asked why it was not ready.

"I feared to place my hand in the meal sack," said the lad, "because something darted quickly in it."

[p. 293]

Sigmund knew then that the lad lacked courage, and when he met with Signy he said her son was unworthy to be a Volsung.

"Then he is unworthy to live," his mother cried angrily. So Sigmund slew him.

Another winter came, and Signy sent her second son unto her brother; but he proved to be timorous like the first, and was put to death also.

Signy next conspired with a witch, and they changed shapes. The witch lived in Siggeir's hall as his queen. and Signy went through the forest towards Sigmund's secret dwelling. She begged for food and shelter, nor did her brother have knowledge of who she was. For three nights she dwelt in the underground hut and then returned to her home, where she again changed shapes with the witch.

In time Signy's third son was born, and he was indeed of Volsung blood. The name he received was Sinfjotle, and he grew up to pleasure his mother's heart, fair as her kin and strong and without fear. In secret she told him of her sire, and of how he died through Siggeir's treachery, and she told him of the wolf which devoured her fettered brothers. She filled his heart with the glory of the Volsungs and he took pride in their fame. One day she set to proving him, and she sewed gloves on his hands and wrists, piercing his flesh with the needle. But he twitched not a muscle, and her heart was gladdened. Then she tore off the gloves, and the raw flesh was laid bare.

"I have given thee sufficient pain," she said.

But the youth smiled. "Volsung", said he, "would shrink not from wounds so slight."

Soon afterwards Sinfjotle was sent by his mother unto Sigmund, and he was received as were the others, and set

[p. 294]

to bake bread. A venomous serpent was again placed in the meal sack.

When Sigmund returned with firewood, he found that the bread was made ready.

"Found ye aught in the sack?" he asked the lad.

"Something darted quickly through the meal," Sinfjotle answered, "but I paused not to discover what it was, and it is baked in the bread."

Volsung's great son was well pleased with the lad, but he warned him not to partake of the bread, because he could resist not the poison. But Sigmund ate of it himself, because he was of such great strength that the venom could harm him not.

Signy's son remained with Sigmund, who trained him in feats of strength. Together they robbed and murdered men in the forest, and the lad proved his worth and grew speedily to full strength. Sigmund thought sure he was a son of Siggeir, and he ever prompted him to avenge the death of Volsung, for he feared that the lad was but a Gaut at heart. So he regarded the lad with suspicion, and was watchful lest he might prove treacherous like to Siggeir.

It chanced that on a darksome night they came together to a house in which robbers lay asleep. There they found two wolfskins, which gave those who wore them power to change their shapes. These they took away, and when they put them on, Sigmund and Sinfjotle were transformed into were-wolves. Then were they fierce indeed. Between them they made a compact that one would call upon the other if confronted by seven men, and then they parted to prowl for their prey in the deep forest.

Ere long Sigmund had to fight against seven men. He set up the loud wolf howl, and Sinfjotle hastened

[p. 295]

to his aid, and between them they slew all the band. After that they parted, and then Sinfjotle had to contend against eleven men. But Signy's wolf son uttered no cry. He fought fiercely and alone, and slaughtered all his opponents. Then wearily he lay down to rest.

Sigmund came towards him soon afterwards, and when he found that Sinfjotle had surpassed him in valour he sprang upon the youth with wolf anger and did him grievous injury. But he speedily repented what he had done, and carried his companion to the underground dwelling, where he lay nigh unto death. In sore distress was Sigmund, and he vowed never again to go forth as a wolf. Then it chanced that he saw two weasels who fought together. One seized the other as he had done to Signy's son, but it ran speedily to find a herb which restored its companion to full strength again. He sought to find the healing herb, and a raven [*1] flew towards him bearing a leaf in its beak, which it let fall at his feet. Perceiving that it was of the herb he desired to find, Sigmund hastened to his hut and laid the leaf upon Sinfjotle's wounds. The youth was at once healed and the affliction passed.

Together the heroes waited until they could regain their wonted shape again. Then they destroyed the wolfskins, lest the one should slay the other.

Sigmund perceived that the lad was his equal in strength, and deemed that the time had come when they could wreak Volsung vengeance against Siggeir, King of the Gauts. So they armed themselves and went forth. When they reached the hall they concealed themselves among the mead casks which stood along the entrance way. But ere night fell two of Siggeir's children, who played with a golden ball, cried out because

[p. 296]

that they saw two grim warriors in shining armour crouching behind the casks. Sinfjotle sought to slay them, but Sigmund disdained to shed their blood. So the alarm was raised and Siggeir and his war-men issued forth to contend against the intruders. The avengers sprang up with drawn swords. They feared not the overwhelming force that clamoured for their blood. Sinfjotle first slew Siggeir's two children and then the fight raged fierce and fast. Many warriors fell. Sigmund and his companion made great slaughter, but their foemen were so numerous that in the end they were taken captive and bound.

Then did Siggeir and his nobles take counsel together to devise how the twain might be given the most cruel death, and it was decreed that they should be buried alive.

In the morning two stone grave chambers were made, one beside the other, and in these were Sigmund and Sinfjotle laid. Ere the slab and earth were placed over them, Signy came forth with flesh wrapped in straw and flung it into the graves. There was it allowed to remain, so that their torture might be prolonged. Then the barrows were covered over.

The buried heroes spake out one to another in the darkness, and Sigmund bethought him at length to partake of the flesh. So he cast aside the straw, and when he had done that he discovered that a sword was thrust through the flesh. He knew by the hilt that it was Gram, and his heart leapt within him.

With the wondrous sword the two men sawed through the great slab which covered the grave chambers, and when darkness fell they came forth.

It was the night of Volsung vengeance, long desired, long waited for. Sigmund and Sinfjotle hewed logs with

[p. 297]

[paragraph continues] Gram, and heaped the wood splinters round the hall. Then they put fire to them, and soon the dwelling of King Siggeir was wrapped in flames.

The king woke up, and through the smoke he cried in anguish: "Who hath come against me with fire? Now death assaileth me!"

Sigmund heard him, and in triumph he answered: "Now dost thou know, O treacherous man, that a son of Volsung remains alive. I am Sigmund, and Sinfjotle, son of Signy, is here with me."

The flames spread. Death encompassed all that were in the hall. None could escape, because the avengers guarded the door. But Sigmund was loath that Signy should perish, and he called to her to make escape with all the treasure she could seize. The queen heard her brother's voice amidst the roar of flames, and she came to the door with empty hands.

"Full well thou knowest," she said unto Sigmund, "that I never forgot how Siggeir killed King Volsung. My very children I had slain because they were too weakly to avenge my sire's death. But behold! Sinfjotle is a mighty warrior indeed, for he is not only mine own son, but a son of a son of King Volsung also. For vengeance have I striven through long years, so that Siggeir might have his deathdue in the end. Now my labour is finished and my purpose is achieved. I have no need of longer days, nor do I desire to live now. By compulsion was my life spent with Siggeir; now that I have free choice I shall die gladly with him. . . . Fare thee well."

So saying she kissed Sigmund and Sinfjotle, and hastening back to her husband she perished with him in the flames. . . . Thus was the death of King Volsung avenged.

[p. 298]

Sigmund was now free to return to his own land, and with his son he crossed the sea. A usurper sat upon Volsung's throne, but he was speedily overcome by the avenging heroes, and the glory that had departed from Hunaland was restored once again.

Footnotes

^295:1 One of Odin's ravens.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 299]

  

CHAPTER XXVII

  

Helgi Hundingsbane

Helgi's Youth--Hunding slain in Battle--Wooing of the Valkyrie Maid--Hodbrod, the Rival--How Sigrun was won--Dag's Vengeance--Helgi is slain--Sigrun's Curse--She sorrows for her Husband--Helgi's Ghost--Meeting with Sigrun--The Love Song at the Grave--Lovers born again.

SIGMUND became a mighty ruler, and he made Borghild his queen. In happiness they dwelt together, and they had two sons who were named Helgi and Hamund. At Helgi's birth norns came and foretold that he would achieve great renown, as indeed he did, for while, he was yet a youth he became a far-famed warrior, strong-armed and fierce, in battle prowness surpassing even his sire.

In time, Helgi was chosen to be chief leader of the army, and so fiercely did he fight against King Hunding that he was surnamed Hundingsbane.

Now Helgi in his boyhood had gone in disguise to Hunding's hall, where he was reared and trained in feats of strength. The day came when he was ready to wield arms against his country's foe, so he took his departure. As he left the Hall, he sent a message to King Hunding, making known whom he had fostered. The king was wroth, and he sent out warriors to slay the lad. But Helgi disguised himself as a bondmaid, and when his pursuers entered the house in which he had taken refuge they saw a woman grinding corn.

[p. 300]

"The bondmaid hath fierce eyes," they said. "She is not the daughter of a peasant. Her hands are more fitted for the sword."

So strong was Helgi, and so swiftly did he work, that the millstones were broken. It is not a warrior's task to grind corn.

In the war that followed a great battle was fought, and Helgi slew Hunding. Several of the king's sons fell by his sword in another battle, and those who survived vowed blood vengeance against him.

As Helgi left the battlefield he clad himself in a wolfskin, and in a forest he met a fair princess who was named Sigrun. She rode on a white horse and her maidens rode behind her. King Hogni, against whom Helgi had fought, was her sire, and she was a valkyrie and a swan maid.

The young warrior was heart-stricken with love for the fair princess, and he besought her to be his bride. But she told him that her sire had already promised her to Hodbrod, son of King Granmar; whereat Helgi vowed that he would go against his rival in battle. Then did Sigrun promise to be his bride when he had slain the hated Hodbrod.

So it fell that Helgi Hundingsbane warred against Hodbrod and his allies, the kinsfolk of Sigrun. He crossed the seas with Sinfjotle and a strong army; but a great tempest broke forth, and the ships would have been foundered had not the valkyrie maid come to protect them. After enduring great tribulation Helgi reached the kingdom of Granmar, where he fought a great battle. Sigrun hovered in mid-air, and gave her lover sure protection, and he prevailed over Hodbrod and slew him. Then was Hogni slain also, and all his sons fell with him save Dag.

Sigrun hailed her lover and gave him praise because

[p. 301]

that he had slain the mighty Hodbrod, yet did she mourn for her sire and her brothers.

Helgi comforted her, saying: "The norns have not given thee good fortune in all things. I have slain thy kindred. Thou couldst not choose otherwise, because it was thy doom from birth to be the cause of great bloodshed. For thy sake have warriors striven. Weep not, Sigrun; heroes must die at their appointed time."

Sigrun embraced her lover and said: "Although those who have fallen were still alive, I would love but Helgi."

Then Helgi reigned over the land which he had conquered, and Sigrun was his queen. With Dag he took vows of fellowship and spared his life; but Hogni's son deemed that the call of blood vengeance was stronger than the oaths he had taken, even although he had sworn by Hela's holy river, and he resolved in his heart to take Helgi's life.

Now it fell that Odin intervened. He gave to Dag his great spear Gungner, and as the youth went with the king through a forest grove, he drave the spear through Helgi's back, so that he fell dying upon the green sward. Thus was Hogni avenged.

But great was Sigrun's grief when Dag came to her with tidings that he had slain the world's best king. On his head she heaped curses, nor could she be consoled.

"May thine oaths smite thee," she cried: "all the oaths thou didst swear with Helgi by Hela's shining stream. May thy ship sink with thee, although fair winds prevail. May thy horse stumble when thou art pursued by thy foes. May thy sword in battle wound none but thyself. The death of Helgi must be avenged against thee, and thou shalt be a wolf in the forest. . . .

[p. 302]

[paragraph continues] Be thy life empty of all thou dost desire. May thy food be the flesh of dead men."

"Wouldst thou call down such ill upon thy brother?" Dag pleaded with her. "The hand of Odin hath been laid heavily on Helgi. I shall give to thee golden rings, and half of the kingdom for thyself and thy sons."

But Sigrun wailed in her grief: "Oh! never again can I be glad, neither by day nor by night. I love not life any more, for I shall ne'er behold my shining hero who was blithe in the hall and valorous in battle. High was Helgi above all other men as the ash tree is high above shrubs. . . . Never again can I see him alive."

A grave mound was raised over Helgi's body, and his spirit went to Valhal. Odin made him chief ruler, and he gave Hunding a bondsman's tasks, for he set him to hew wood, to leash the hounds, and groom the horses, and ere he went to sleep to give mash to the swine.

But Helgi could not be happy even in Valhal, because that Sigrun cried ever for him; as bitterly and oft as her tears fell his wounds bled afresh. By nighttime he rode to the grave mound with many followers. There was no rest for Helgi among the dead.

Sigrun's bondmaid beheld the ghastly warriors riding round the mound, and she cried to them: "Why ride ye forth, ye dead men? Can slain warriors return home again? Or hath the world's end come at length?"

"The world's end hath come not yet," the slain warmen made answer, "but dead heroes would fain return home. . . . The wounds of Helgi bleed afresh because of Sigrun's sorrow. Bid her come hither to stay the unceasing flow of anguish."

Then did the bondmaid go unto Sigrun. "Hasten thee to the grave mound," she cried. "Dead men are

[p. 303]

abroad, and thou mayest behold the king once more. Helgi is there; his wounds bleed ever because of thy tears, and he would fain that thou wouldst give him healing."

Sigrun's tears ceased falling awhile. "Glad am I to go forth even in darkness unto Helgi," she cried, "and may the dews never shine to the dawn. His cold lips shall I kiss; I shall embrace my dead hero."

So she hastened unto the grave mound, and there she beheld her lord. Wan and pale was he indeed, and sorrow-stricken and cold. Sigrun kissed him and embraced him, and cried:

"O Helgi, thy hair is white with rime; thou art drenched with the dews of death. Cold, cold are thy hands; they are dripping blood. How shall I heal thee, O my hero?

Helgi made answer: "Bright flower of the south, thy tears have made me wet; thy sorrow hath drenched me with the dews of death. Ere thou dost sleep, O gold-decked maid. thou dost ever weep most bitter tears, and they fall upon my breast; as drops of blood they fall: they are cold and they pierce me: heavy are they and sharp as is thine anguish. . . . Grieve not although life and kingdom be lost; sing not the dirge of mourning although my wounds are deep, for know that dead men have brides and kings' dead daughters are with them."

Sigrun spread out a smooth grave bed for Helgi, and said to him, speaking low:

"A bed without pain I have made for thee, Helgi in comfort thou shalt rest upon it, O son of the Volsungs. O my king, O my love, I shall lie in thy bosom. I shall take thee in mine arms as if thou wert still alive."

"White maid whom I loved," spake Helgi, "strange would it indeed be if the high-born daughter of King

[p. 304]

[paragraph continues] Hogni were laid while yet alive in a dead man's arms. . . . Now forth must I ride on the dawn-red road. I must climb, on my steed, the bridge of the gods, ere the shining cock of Asgard awakens the heroes in Valhal."

So they parted there at the grave mound, and Helgi, mounting on his steed, vanished in mid-air.

But when the day passed, and the night fell, Sigrun again returned to the grave mound of Helgi. She wept no tears and waited, but her hero came not nigh. All through the hours of darkness she waited, until the dawn broke faintly through the trees. Sitting there by her husband's grave mound, the love-lorn lady sang:

Ah! would that he came
   For fain would I greet him;
 He would come if he knew
   That I wait here to meet him;
 He'd come were he hearing--
   Heart-hearing my call,
 The son of great Sigmund,
   From Odin's high hall.

O Helgi, mine own,
 My fair one, my rare one--
 Helgi, mine own.

Now waneth my hope
   Of Helgi's returning,
 For the eagles awake
   And the dawn fires are burning;
 My love hath not heard me,
   He comes not to-night. . . .
 All the elf folk and death folk
   To Dreamland take flight.

O Helgi, mine own,
 My white one, my bright one--
 Helgi, mine own.

[p. 305]

The bondswoman soothed Sigrun, and 'twas thus she sang to her:--

Oh! hush thee. Oh! hush . . . who maketh thy moan,
             White Queen of the Southland,
 Fair Sigrun who waiteth in darkness alone,
             O loved one of Helgi;
 Thy heart should be filled, not with hope, but with dread--
 'T is well that dawn cometh and black night hath fled--
 More fearsome and fierce are the warriors dead
               In darkness than day-shine.

But Sigrun would not be comforted, and she died of sorrow, Sad minstrels, singing to harp music in the feasting hall, have told that Helgi and Sigrun were born to life again.

  

Clerk Saunders

Clerk Saunders and May Margaret
   Walked ower yon garden green;
 And sad and heavy was the love
   That fell thir twa between.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

It was about the midnight hour,
   When they asleep were laid,
 When in came her seven brothers
   Wi' torches burning red.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

Then up and gat the seventh o' them,
   And never a word spake he;
 But he has striped his bright brown brand
   Out through Clerk Saunders' fair bodye.

Clerk Saunders he started and Margaret she turned
   Into his arms as asleep she lay; [p. 306]
 And sad and silent was the night
   That was atween thir twae.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

The clinking bell gaed through the town,
   To carry the dead corpse to the clay;
 And Clerk Saunders stood at May Margaret's window
   I wot, an hour before the day.

"Are ye sleeping, Margaret?" he says,
   "Or are ye waking presentlie?
 Give me my faith and troth again,
   I wot, true love, I gied to thee."

"Your faith and troth ye sall never get,
   Nor our true love sall never twin,
 Until ye come within my bower
   And kiss me cheek and chin."

"My mouth it is full cold, Margaret,
   It smells now o' the ground;
 And if I kiss thy comely mouth
   Thy days o' life will no' be lang.

"O, cocks are crowing a merry midnight,
   I wot the wild fowls are boding day;
 Give me my faith and troth again,
   And let me fare me on my way."--

"Thy faith and troth thou sall na get,
   And our true love shall never twin,
 Until ye tell what comes o' women,
   I wot, who die in strong traivelling?"

"Their beds are made in heaven high,
   Down at the foot of our good Lord's knee,
 Weel set about wi' gilly flowers;
   I wot sweet company for to see.

[p. 307]

"O, cocks are crowing at merry midnight,
   I wot the wild fowl are boding day;
 The psalms of heaven will soon be sung,
   And I, ere now, will be miss'd away.

Then she has ta'en a crystal wand,
   And she has stroken her troth thereon;
 She has given it him out at the shot-window,
   Wi' mony a sad sigh, and heavy groan.

"I thank ye, Marg'ret; I thank ye, Margaret;
   And aye I thank ye heartilie;
 Gin ever the dead come for the quick,
   Be sure, Marg'ret, I'll come for thee."--

It 's hosen and shoon, and gown alone,
   She climb'd the wall, and followed him,
 Until she came to the green forest,
   And there she lost the sight o' him.

"Is there ony room at your head, Saunders?
   Is there ony room at your feet ,
 Or ony room at your side, Saunders,
   Where fain, fain I would sleep?"--

"There's nae room at my bead, Marg'ret,
   There's nae room at my feet;
 My bed it is full lowly now:
   Amang the hungry worms I sleep.

"Cauld mould is my covering now,
   But and my winding-sheet;
 The dew it falls nae sooner down
   Than my resting-place is weet.

"But plait a wand o' bonny birk,
   And lay it on my breast;
 And shed a tear upon my grave,
   And wish my soul gude rest.

[p. 308]

"And fair Marg'ret and rare Marg'ret,
   And Marg'ret o' veritie,
 Gin e'er ye love another man,
   Ne'er love him as ye did me."--

Then up and crew the milk-white cock,
   And up and crew the grey;
 Her lover vanish'd in the air,
   And she gaed weeping away,
                            --Scottish Border Ballad

 

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 309]

  

CHAPTER XXVIII

  

Sigurd the Dragon Slayer

Fate of Sinfjotle--Poisoned by the Queen--The Grey Ferryman--Sigmund woos Hjordis--Battle with King Lynge--Odin intervenes--The Heroes' Last Hours--How the Queen was rescued--Birth of Sigurd--Regin's Story--Sigurd avenges Sigmund's Death--Combat with the Dragon--The Language of Birds--Regin is slain.

WHEN Helgi won his kingdom and his bride, Sinfjotle returned again unto Hunaland. Thereafter he set to warring in distant realms, and he achieved widespread renown and won much treasure. Now it chanced that his eyes fell with love upon an alien maid of exceeding great beauty, and he sought to have her for himself. But she was also desired by the brother of Borghild, Sigmund's queen. So the two fought together, and Sinfjotle slew his rival and laid waste and plundered his land. Thereafter he returned home and brought tidings of his deeds.

Wrothful was Borghild, and she sought to drive her brother's slayer from the kingdom; but Sigmund would brook not such an evil doing. So he made offer of blood treasure to his queen, and she made pretence to be appeased, knowing well she could prevail not against the king's will. Yet in her secret heart she brooded over her brother's death and resolved to be avenged upon Sinfjotle. So she held a funeral feast, and went round with the mead horn among the war men who had gathered in the hall. When she asked Sinfjotle to drink, he feared

[p. 310]

to partake, and Sigmund seized the horn and emptied it. A second time was the horn filled by Borghild, and a second time Sigmund took it from his son. But the third time Sinfjotle must needs drain the horn himself, and when he did that he fell down and died, because the drink was poisoned. Thus did Borghild take vengeance on her brother's slayer.

Great was the grief of Sigmund when Sinfjotle was dead. The war-men in the hall feared that his sorrow would kill him. Loud mourning was heard there then at the funeral feast, and Sigmund, who had grown old, lamented long for his son. Then tenderly he took Signy's offspring in his arms--that Volsung of Volsungs--and bore him through the evening dusk towards the firth's grey beach with purpose to take him to the opposing shore.

He perceived a small boat. In it was a tall, old man, grave of aspect, grey bearded, and having but one eye. A round hat was drawn low on his forehead, and he wore a dim blue cloak mottled with grey. Men tell it was Odin, but Sigmund knew not who it was.

Unto him the grey ferryman spake, bidding him lay Sinfjotle's body in the boat; but he said there was no room for Sigmund, who must needs go round the firth end if he would reach the opposing shore. So Sigmund parted with him and hastened over the beach. Ere long he turned round to gaze upon the boat as it went over the waters. . . . Suddenly it vanished from his sight. . . . So passed Sinfjotle, son of Sigmund and Signy, whose grandsire was mighty Volsung of Odin's kin.

Sigmund turned homeward. He entered the hall sorrowing. He drave forth Borghild, remembering how Sinfjotle died, and she became an outcast, so that ere long she perished.

[p. 311]

Then Sigmund sought another bride. Hjordis, daughter of King Eylime, was comely in his eyes, and he sent messengers to her sire beseeching her for wife. Now King Lynge, son of King Hunding whom Helgi had slain, desired also to have the fair princess. Her sire would favour neither Sigmund nor Lynge, and gave the maid her choice; and she vowed she would wed the Volsung. 'Twas thus it befell, and a great marriage feast was held. Then Sigmund returned to Hunaland with his bride, and King Eylime went with them.

Wroth was King Lynge. Tidings he sent unto Sigmund that he would war against him and shatter the power of the Volsungs. So he assembled a great army and set forth to wreak his vengeance and capture Hjordis.

Sigmund feared the issue of battle, for the stronger force was with Lynge. But his courage faltered not. Great treasures have warriors gained, but Odin gave Sigmund a sword. Although he had grown old, his faith in Gram was strong. Yet he deemed it best that Hjordis should be concealed, and with a bondmaid, and bearing much treasure, the queen was given safe retreat in a deep forest.

A great shore battle was fought. Sigmund contended fiercely against overwhelming odds. None could stand against him, and for a time it seemed that Lynge could not prevail. Sigmund's arms were red with blood of his foeman, nor got he a single wound.

Then entered the field through Lynge's war-men an old and one-eyed man. He wore a blue cloak, and his round hat was drawn low on his brow. In his hand was a great spear, and he went against Sigmund.

That was the Volsung's fateful hour. Odin desired his death.. The god shook his great spear, and when Sigmund smote it the sword Gram broke in twain. There

[p. 312]

upon Lynge's war-men fell upon the hero and gave him his deathwound. King Eylime, who fought by Sigmund's side, was slain, and the Volsung army was scattered in flight. The shoreland was red with heroes' blood numerous as dead leaves were the bodies of the slain.

King Lynge waited not on the battleground. He pressed onward with his army towards Sigmund's hall; but when he reached it he could find not Hjordis nor any treasure. So search was made through all the kingdom, and although Lynge found not the bride he sought, he was made glad because that the Volsung power was ended and the. last of the line was slain. But he recked not of a hero unborn, and although he set an alien ruler over Hunaland the glory of the Volsungs was fated to return again in greater splendour.

Now when night fell, Hjordis went towards the battleground and found Sigmund where he lay grievously wounded and awaiting death.

She sought to give him healing, so that he might avenge her sire; but Sigmund told her that his wounds could heal not, for Odin desired his death, and his sword Gram was shattered.

"I have fought while Odin willed it," he said, "and now 'tis his desire that I should die."

Then he counselled Hjordis to keep the broken sword, so that it might be welded for her son unborn, and he foretold that the babe would grow up to achieve renown which would live through the ages.

"Now," said Sigmund faintly, "I am death-weary, and must go hence to be with my kin."

All night long Hjordis sat beside the dying king. She soothed him; she watched him tenderly, and when dawn was breaking golden in the east she dosed his eyes in death, and wept over him.

 

Click to enlarge
WOOD PORTALS FROM A CHURCH AT HILLESTAD, NORWAY
 Carved with scenes from the Volsung Saga. Sigurd is shown with his thumb in his mouth at the bottom of the left portal

 

[p. 313]

Then seaward she gazed and beheld a fleet of viking ships coming nigh to the shore. Hastily she bade her bondmaid change raiment with her, saying: "Henceforth thou shalt say that thy name is Hjordis."

The leader of the viking horde was Alv, son of King Hjaalprek of Denmark. He came ashore with his warmen. He spoke to Hjordis and her maid, and was told of the hidden treasure, and that he took speedily on board a war ship. The queen he took also and her bondmaid.

Then Alv returned to Denmark, and ever he deemed that the bondmaid was Sigmund's queen, but Hjaalprek's spouse, when she beheld the two women, suspected that the bondmaid was the nobler of the two.

To the king she spoke secretly thereanent, and Hjaalprek fell to questioning the pair. First he addressed her who pretended to be queen, and said:

"How knowest thou the hour of rising in wintertime when the stars are clouded over?"

The bondmaid answered him, saying: "It hath been my wont to drink heavily at dawn, and I awake athirst."

"A strange custom for a king's daughter," the king remarked.

Then Hjaalprek asked of Hjordis how she could tell when the hour of rising came, and she answered thus:--

"My sire gifted me a magic gold ring, and it turns ice-cold on my finger when the hour cometh to rise in the wintertime."

The king laughed. "No bondmaid's sire giveth gold rings. A king's daughter art thou. Of this thou shouldst have told us heretofore."

Then Hjordis made confession that she was indeed Sigmund's queen, and thereafter she was honoured and well loved in the Hall of Hjaalprek.

When her son was born, the name he received was

[p. 314]

Sigurd. A Volsung was he indeed. Bright were his eyes, and his face was kingly, and Hjaalprek took pride in him. He grew up to be strong and fearless; a warman's skill had he ever and Volsung pride, and he had great wisdom, and was eloquent of speech.

His foster father was Regin, the wonder, Smith, brother of the dragon Fafner, and he gave the lad instruction in many arts, and in the mystery of runes, and taught him many languages.

One day Regin asked the lad if he knew that his father had left great treasure, and that Hjaalprek guarded it; and Sigurd said it was guarded for him and he had faith in the king. Then Regin urged him to ask a horse from Hjaalprek, and when the lad did that the king bade him select the one he desired.

An old, grey-bearded man, with one eye, came to Sigurd, who knew not that he was Odin, and he chose for the lad a steed which was of Sleipner's race. Sigurd called it Grane because it was grey, nor was its equal  be found in the world.

Now Alv took Hjordis for wife, and they lived happily together.

Then a day came when Regin, perceiving that the lad grew to manhood's strength and wisdom while he was yet young, bethought to tell him of the treasure over which the dragon Fafner kept constant guard. He urged Sigurd to slay the monster.

"I am scarce more than a child yet," Sigurd said; "why dost thou urge me to do this mighty deed?"

Then Regin told the story of the treasure, and how Loke had taken it from the dwarf Andvari; how it was given to his own sire, whom his brother Fafner slew so that he might have all the gold for himself.

Sigurd heard him in silence, and when Regin said:

[p. 315]

"If thou shalt go forth to slay Fafner I shall forge a mighty sword for thee."

So the lad said: "Forge then a sword for me which shall be without an equal, for fain would I do mighty deeds."

Then Regin went to his smithy and made a sword; but the lad smote it on the anvil and it flew in pieces. A second sword he splintered also. [*1]

Thereafter Sigurd went to his mother and asked for the broken pieces of his sire's great sword Gram. Then he bade Regin forge it anew, and the Smith did that, although unwillingly. When it was made, the lad put the blade to test and clove the anvil in twain. Next he cut wool with it in the river, so keen was its edge. He was well pleased with Gram.

Regin then bade him promise to slay Fafner, and Sigurd said: "As I promised thee, so shall I do, but first I must set forth to avenge the death of my sire."

Stronger grew the lad, and he was of great stature [*2] and skilled in feats of arms. Ere he set forth to do deeds of valour he paid visit to Griper, his mother's brother, who had power to foretell what would come to pass. Sigurd desired to know what the norns had decreed regarding him, and although Griper was at first unwilling to tell him, he at last unfolded to the lad his whole future life.

[p. 316]

Thereafter Sigurd went to the king and besought that he should get ships and war-men to go forth against the tribe of Hunding, and avenge upon King Lynge the death of Sigmund. Hjaalprek gave him according to his desire. A great storm broke forth as he crossed the seas, and as the ships came nigh a headland a man beckoned to Sigurd and desired to be taken aboard. The young hero commanded that this should be done. His name was Fjorner [*1], and he carried out the behests of Urd. He sang strange runes regarding the battle that was to be. As he did so the storm passed away, and they drew nigh to the kingdom of King Lynge. Then Fjorner vanished.

Sigurd laid waste the country, and tidings were borne to King Lynge that fierce foemen had invaded the kingdom. A great army was collected to oppose them, but Sigurd was given victory, and he slew Lynge, and thus avenged his sire's death. With the sword Gram he clove the king in twain, and all the sons of Hunding who were there he slew also. So did Sigurd achieve great renown, and with the treasure he had captured he returned unto Hjaalprek.

Ere long Regin spake to him in secret, calling to mind his promise to slay the dragon Fafner.

"As I have promised," Sigurd said, "so shall I do."

Regin went forth towards the Glittering Heath with the young hero, whom he counselled to make a pit so that he might slay the dragon from beneath when it came out to drink.

"If the dragon's blood fills up the pit, how will it fare with me?" Sigurd exclaimed.

"Thou seem'st to be afraid," Regin said. "'Unlike thy kin art thou."

[p. 317]

Sigurd went towards the dragon's dwelling, but Regin waited at a distance. Then to the young hero came an old and grey-bearded man with one eye, and he gave counsel that he should dig many pits, so that the blood of the dragon might not drown him. [*1] Sigurd knew not that the man was Odin, but he did as he was advised: he dug many pits, and in one of them he concealed himself and waited for the dragon to come forth.

In time Fafner crawled from his lair, roaring and spouting venom. The earth shook, and Regin trembled in his hiding place. But Sigurd was not afraid. He waited until the monster was over the pit in which he stood, then he plunged his sword Gram through the dragon right up to the hilt. He drew it forth again, and the blood reddened his arms, and ran into the pits.

Fafner tossed in fury, and destroyed all things that were nigh him, but soon he knew well that he was wounded unto death. As he lay helpless and weak he beheld Sigurd coming forth.

Fafner spake and asked him: "Who art thou that feared me not? What is thy name, and what is thy sire's name?"

Sigurd answered: "My folk are strangers among men. My name is Lordly Beast. I have nor sire nor mother, and hither came I alone." [*2]

Fafner said: "Wilt thou lie to me in my hour of death) by saying that thou hast nor sire nor mother or other name than Lordly Beast?"

[p. 318]

Sigurd thereupon said: "My name is Sigurd, and I am Sigmund's son."

"Brave was thy sire," said the dragon, "but didst thou never hear that I was feared among men? Name thou him who urged thee to slay me."

Sigurd told not of Regin, and the dragon warned him that the gold would be a curse to him.

But the young hero said: "We can but keep our gold till life's end, and a man dieth once only."

Fafner then said: "By Regin was I betrayed. Thee too would he betray; he desires my death and thine."

Soon afterwards the dragon died, whereupon Regin came forth from his hiding place. He came humbly towards the young hero and spake words of flattery to him. Then he said: "But, alas! thou hast slain my brother, nor am I myself without blame."

Sigurd said angrily: "When I performed this great deed thou didst crouch like a coward in a bush."

"It was I who forged the sword with which thou didst slay Fafner," said Regin.

Then Sigurd answered: "Better in battle is a brave heart than a strong sword."

Again Regin said: "Alas! thou hast slain my brother, nor am I myself without blame."

Sigurd cut out the dragon's heart, and Regin drank the blood. Then the wonder smith bade the young hero to roast the heart for him while he lay down to sleep. The lad thrust a rod through it and roasted it over a fire. When the heart frizzled he laid his finger on the spot, lest the blood should come forth, and then he thrust his finger in his mouth. When he did that he at once understood the language of birds. [*1]

[p. 319]

One bird sang: "Why dost thou sit roasting the dragon's heart for another when thou shouldst eat it thyself and obtain great wisdom?"

Another sang: "Regin lies there with purpose in his heart to betray Sigurd."

A third sang: "Sigurd should slay Regin and possess all the treasure for himself."

The first bird sang: "Regin hath drunk of the dragon's blood and will become a wolf. Sigurd would be wise if he thought of his own safety. He who hath a wolf's ears will soon have the teeth of a wolf."

Another bird sang: "Sigurd will be less wise than I deem him to be if he spares the man who desired his -own brother's death."

Sigurd leapt up. "The day hath not come when Regin shall slay me," he said, and at once cut off the head of the wonder smith.

Then the young hero ate a portion of Fafner's heart, [*1] and took the rest with him. Thereafter he went to the dragon's lair and took forth the treasure--the rings, the awesome helmet, the sword Hrotte, gold armour, and many ornaments. In two chests he placed the treasure, and these he put upon the back of his strong steed Grane.

The birds sang to him.

"There is a maid most fair if thou couldst possess her.

"Green roads twine to the hall of Giuki, and thither

[p. 320]

is Sigurd led. The king hath a daughter and thou hast gold for her. . . ."

"On Hindarfell there is a high and gold-decked hall; it is girt around with fire. . . .

"There sleepeth on the fell a maid of war, a chosen of heroes; flames flash round her. Odin hath given her long and unbroken sleep, for she hath stricken down those whom he favoured. Brynhild's sleep is sure and lasting; thus have the norns decreed."

So Sigurd rode on. The birds sang to him and he heard with wonder. Nor rested he on the green-girt way until he came to Hindarfell, where Brynhild lay wrapped in a magic sleep.

 

Click to enlarge
SIGURD THE DRAGON SLAYER
 From the painting by E. Nielsen

 

  

The Sleeping Beauty

Year after year unto her feet,
   She lying on a couch alone,
 Across the purple coverlet,
   The maiden's jet-black hair has grown
 On either side her tranced form
   Forth streaming from a braid of pearl;
 The slumbrous light is rich and warm,
   And moves not on the rounded curl.

The silk star-broidered coverlid
   Unto her limbs itself doth mould
 Languidly ever; and, amid
   Her full black ringlets downward roll'd,
 Glows forth each softly shadow'd arm
   With bracelets of the diamond bright;
 Her constant beauty doth inform
   Stillness with love, and day with light.

She sleeps: her breathings are not heard
   In palace chambers far apart.[p. 321]
 The fragrant tresses are not stirr'd
   That lie upon her charmed heart.
 She sleeps on either hand upswells
   The gold-fringed pillow lightly prest:
 She sleeps, nor dreams, but ever dwells
   A perfect form in perfect rest.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

He comes, scarce knowing what he seeks:
   He breaks the hedge: he enters there:
 The colour flies into his cheeks:
   He trusts to light on something fair:
 For all his life the charm did talk
   About his path, and hover near
 With words of promise in his walk,
   And whispered voices at his ear.
                                              Tennyson.

 

Footnotes

^315:1 A similar story is told in the Highlands of Finn (Fingal), who shook sword after sword to pieces until the smith forged a matchless blade Which had to be tempered with the blood of the first living thing that entered the smithy in the morning. Finn slew the smith. Both stories are probably of common origin.

^315:2 The Highland Finn was 60 feet high, and Garry was a dwarf because he was but 40 feet in height. Sigurd did not attain such godlike stature, but he was, according to Saga statistics, nearly 20 feet high; for when his sword was girt on, the end of it touched the ears of growing rye. The sword was seven spans in length. Finn also avenged his father's death, but he never slew a dragon nor sought great treasure. His ambitions were those of a huntsman.

^316:1 One of Odin's names.

^317:1 It would appear that in making imperfect swords and advising the construction of only one pit, Regin desired to be rid of Sigurd when he had served his purpose.

^317:2 The reluctance shown by Sigurd is evidence of his belief in the magical power of names. He feared that the dragon could, by using his name, exercise an evil influence over him. Even at the present day certain peoples in these islands are charged with lack of courtesy because they refuse to give their names to strangers.

^318:1 Here again we have strong resemblance to the story of Finn. Black Arky, who slew Finn's father, Coul, caught a certain salmon and asked the lad to roast it without [p. 319] raising a blister. Then he went to sleep. A blister rose, and Finn pressed it down, and having burnt his finger he thrust it into his mouth. He touched a tooth, and it became his "Tooth of Knowledge". He then knew who Arky was and slew him. In some Gaelic stories Finn bites his thumb when he desires to know anything. There are no birds in the Finn story.

^319:1 Because of the cannibalistic belief that by eating an enemy he would obtain from flesh and blood whatever strength or wisdom the other possessed in life.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 322]

  

CHAPTER XXIX

  

Brynhild and Gudrun

Brynhild's Magic Sleep--Awakened by Sigurd--Lovers pledge their Troth--The Draught of Forgetfulness --Gudrun wins Sigurd--Gunnar's Wooing--How Brynhild was deceived--Quarrel with Gudrun--Sigurd is murdered--Gudrun's Sorrow--Brynhild dies on Sigurd's Pyre--Ride to Hela.

WHEN Sigurd came nigh to Hindarfell, in the land of the Franks, he beheld a blaze of light on the hill. Then he perceived that a stately castle was girt round with magic fire. Its roof was of shining gold. A banner on the highest tower floated in the wind.

He rode towards the castle. He went through the flames on the back of Grane. He dismounted and went within. There he beheld a beauteous battle maiden wrapped in magic sleep; golden was her hair, and she was clad in armour. . . . He went towards her and took off her gleaming helm, and her locks fell free. Yet her eyes opened not, so strong was the sleep spell that was upon her. . . . He drew his magic sword and cut through her armour so that it fell to pieces, whereat the maiden awoke. . . . Her wondrous eyes glowed upon him; her pale cheeks reddened and her lips opened.

"How long hast thou lain asleep?" asked Sigurd.

"Who art thou," the maiden sighed, "that hast shorn my armour asunder, and hath power to break the runes of sleep? . . . Art thou indeed Sigurd, the son of great Sigmund? Hast thou come at last with the helmet of darkness and the sword which slew Fafner?"

[p. 323]

Sigurd answered. "I am even Sigurd, the son of Sigmund, and my sword hath shorn thine armour asunder."

"None but a Volsung could have done the deed," cried Brynhild, for indeed it was she--the beauteous valkyrie whom Odin had punished by laying her in a magic sleep because that she had caused to fall in battle those whom he favoured.

"A Volsung am I," Sigurd answered, "and I have come to thee because thou art so fair and full of wisdom. Fain would I learn of thee."

Then Brynhild smiled. She threw back her golden hair, and gazed forth upon the world once more. She saw the bright sun and the fresh green ways, and like a dawn-awakened bird she raised her voice in song.

Long was my sleep, long was my sleep,
 Darkling 't was lone and dreamless and deep--
 Long as the evils that mankind endure,
         As long and as sure;
 Helpless in sunshine and starshine I've lain,
 Wrapped by the runes that bind like a chain--
         Helpless ye found me:
         Odin had bound me--
 Bound me in sleep where I lay. . . .
         Hail to the day!
      Hail to the sons of the light!
         All hail to the night!
 Hail and O hear, beholding us twain,
 And give what we hope now to gain. . . .
 Hail ye gods and ye goddesses dear,
         And Earth, the mother of all!
 Give us of wisdom and tenderness here,
 Hands that shall heal and hearts without fear
         Till death shall at length on us call. . . .

Then Brynhild told Sigurd how Odin had touched

[p. 324]

her with the sleep thorn, and said that never again would she be a chooser of the slain, but would lie in slumber until a lover came.

"But I vowed a vow," she said, "that I would never wed a man who knew what it was to be afraid."

Sigurd said: "Fain would I hear of thy wisdom, for which thou art famed."

"With gratitude can I speak to thee," said Brynhild, "but let us first drink mead together. May thou profit by what I shall teach thee, and may thou in after time remember what I now speak unto thee."

She filled a golden goblet and gave to Sigurd to drink.

"The mead," she said, "is mixed with renown and songs merry and sad, and with wise thoughts and tender heart thoughts and valorous speech. . . . Thou shalt grave war runes on thy blade, and twice shall Tyr be named. Runes of ocean shalt thou carve on stern and rudder and oar; thou shalt have peaceful sea-ways. . . . Runes thou shalt learn to ward off blood vengeance and doom. . . . Runes thou shalt learn to call fairy help when a son cometh, and runes for wound healing which thou shalt carve on trees whose branches are bending towards the east. . . . I shall teach thee runes of high-heartedness and valour--the runes of the gods, the runes of the elves, and the runes of the wise Vans. . . . I shall give thee runes that shall aid thee in all things until life ends. . . . Now thou shalt choose what thou dost desire to be and to have.

Sigurd spake: "I was born to be without fear. I shall forget thee never, and in my heart shall I treasure what thou givest unto me."

Then Brynhild gave runes to Sigurd, and she counselled him to give friendship for friendship, and to have forbearance so that he might win fame among men.

[p. 325]

[paragraph continues] "Take close account of what is evil," she said; "from a maiden's love and a man's own wife wrong may come. Give little heed to those who speak more harshly of others than they deem they do; take not advice from men of poor judgment. Ever be watchful of danger wherever thou farest; let not a woman enchant thee in the feasting hall. Heed not the unwise speech of a man who hath drunken deep. Keep the oaths thou dost swear. Trust not him whose kin thou hast slain. . . . I can read not of thy future right well, nor perceive clearly what shall befall thee, but may evil come not from thy wife's kindred."

Sigurd said: "None other but thee shall I have for my bride."

Brynhild made answer: "If it were given me to make choice among all the sons of men, thee alone would I desire to be mine."

Sigurd gave to the gold-haired maiden the magic ring which was in Fafner's hoard.

Then did they swear binding oaths together, vowing that they would ever be faithful one to another until life's last loop was spun.

Thereafter went Sigurd on his way, for he must needs travel unto the hall of King Giuki. Loving Brynhild, he went, but it was doomed that he should break his binding vows, and spurn the golden-haired maiden whom he had rescued from magic sleep. It was indeed fated that he should drink the draught of forgetfulness, so that new love might enter his heart, for he must needs suffer because of the treachery of another.

A warrior of noble seeming was Sigurd, and wondering eyes beheld him as he drew nigh to the dwelling of Giuki. Great was his height, and he had the shoulder-breadth of two men. Young was he, and very fair.

[p. 326]

[paragraph continues] His eyes were blue, and of such brightness that men quailed before him; his nose was high-ridged, and bent like to an eagle's beak; broad was his face from cheek bone to cheek bone. His hair was copper-brown, and hung over his shoulder gleaming in sunshine, and his beard was short and fair. All beholders gazed with mute wonder upon his great sword Gram.

He was withal fearless and high-hearted, one who loved his friends and was unafraid of any foe. Ever ready was he to give aid to kinsmen and allies. Such eloquence of speech was his that men were drawn towards him.

Those who played games round Giuki's hall ceased when Sigurd came nigh. King Giuki greeted him with welcome to his dwelling, and the treasure chests were taken from Grane's back and borne within.

The king had for wife the crafty Grimhild, who was a sorceress, and they had a beauteous daughter who was named Gudrun. Their three sons were Gunnar, Hogne, and Guttorm.

Now, when Grimhild beheld Sigurd, she was taken with desire that he should have her daughter for his bride, and ill-pleased was she when she found that his heart was filled with love for Brynhild.

It chanced that the two maidens dreamed dreams. Brynhild had a vision of Gudrun coming towards her, and on the day that followed Gudrun indeed came in a gold-decked chariot with all her maidens, for Gudrun had also dreamt a dream and desired that the wise Brynhild should solve it.

Brynhild, who was King Budle's daughter, dwelt betimes at her castle, and betimes at the Hall of Heimar, who had for wife her sister Baenkhild. Her brother was King Atle the Mighty.

[p. 327]

It was at Heimar's hall that Giuki's daughter found the fair battle maiden on that fateful day.

Gudrun told Brynhild of her dream. "It seemed," she said, "that we were together in a forest and saw a noble stag. Copper-coloured was its hair, and we both desired to possess it. But no one save myself alone could reach the stag, and I possessed it, and was made glad. Then thou didst come, Brynhild, and thou didst slay my stag, and I wept bitterly. Thereafter thou didst give me a young wolf which was red with the blood of my kin."

"Alas!" Brynhild sighed; "I can read thy dream. Thou shalt marry Sigurd, whom I desire for my lover. A magic drink he shall receive, and he shall turn from me. Then shall there be a feud, and he shall be slain, and thou shalt thereafter marry my brother King Atle the Mighty, whom thou shalt slay in the end."

Gudrun wept. "Terrible indeed it is," she said, "to have knowledge of these things."

So she left Brynhild and returned with her maidens to the hall of King Giuki, her sire.

Three years passed, and Sigurd remained with the king who had given him welcome. With Gunnar and Hogne he took oaths of fellowship, and they hunted together and made merry.

Ever did Queen Grimhild desire that Sigurd should take Gudrun for his bride, and at length she brewed a magic drink which would make him forget the battle maiden whom he had chosen for his bride.

A night came when they sat together in the feasting hall, and the queen rose and filled the drinking horn with the magic drink and gave it unto Sigurd, saying:

"It hath pleasured us to have thee abiding with us

[p. 328]

here. Thou shalt receive from us all thou dost desire. Drink thou from this horn the mead which I have prepared for thee."

Sigurd drank as she desired, and he forgot Brynhild and the binding vows he had sworn with her. The love he had for her passed away, and he saw that Gudrun was very fair.

Then the queen said: "King Giuki shall be to thee a sire, and his sons are thy brethren."

To the king in secret Grimhild spake, as she embraced him: "Give thou our daughter for wife unto Sigurd. Great is his wealth, and it would be well that he should ever be with us."

Giuki disdained to offer his daughter even unto Sigurd, but the queen constrained her son Gunnar to counsel the young hero to have the beauteous maid for his bride.

So it fell that Sigurd and Gudrun were wed in the Hall, and they dwelt happily together. They had a son, and his name was Sigmund.

Queen Grimhild next desired that her son Gunnar should have Brynhild for wife, and she said: "Go thou and woo the battle maiden, and Sigurd shall go with thee."

"That will I do right willingly," Gunnar made answer, "for I would fain have golden-haired Brynhild for my bride."

Then he rode forth towards the hall of Heimar, and with him went Sigurd. Grimhild had wrought a spell so that Brynhild would know not her former lover.

Gunnar besought of Heimar that he should have the battle maiden for wife, but Heimar said: "Brynhild shall only wed him whom she herself doth choose. To her thou must go. She dwelleth in a castle beyond,

[p. 329]

which is girt about with magic fire, and thou must needs ride through the flames to win nigh unto her."

Then Gunnar rode towards the dwelling of Brynhild, and Sigurd went with him. But when they came nigh to the fire-girt castle Gunnar's steed would go no farther, for it feared the flames.

Sigurd said: "To thee shall I give Grane, on whom to ride through the fire."

So he dismounted; but when Gunnar sat upon the back of Grane, the steed refused to move forward. None save Sigurd could go unto Brynhild; none could ride through the flames save Sigmund's noble son.

Then took Sigurd the semblance of Gunnar, and Gunnar the semblance of Sigurd, as Queen Grimhild had given each of them power to do, and Sigurd leapt upon Grane's back and rode through the magic fire.

Brynhild saw Sigurd coming towards her and said: "Who art thou who hast come through the magic fire?"

Sigurd answered: "My name is Gunnar, son of Giuki. Thee shall I have for my bride, because that thou didst vow to marry him who would reach thee through the flames."

"Thee shall I wed, Brynhild said, "if thou shalt promise to slay those who also desire to have me for wife."

"That shall I promise thee," answered Sigurd, and the battle maiden was well pleased.

Three nights he abode with Brynhild in the castle, and ere he left her she gave to him the ring that was once Andvari's, and had been taken by Sigurd from the hoard of Fafner--the ring of doom which was a bane to them both.

Through the flames once more went Sigmund's great

[p. 330]

son. With Gunnar he again changed shapes, and together they returned unto the hall of Giuki.

In time fair Brynhild left her fire-girt castle and went unto the dwelling of Heimar, to whom she told how fate had served her.

"Fain was I," she said, "that it had happened as aforetime--that Sigurd had come through the flames towards me instead of Gunnar."

"As it hath chanced," said Heimar, "so must it be."

Now Brynhild had a daughter, whose name was Aslog. A Volsung was she by birth, for her sire was Sigurd, and it was fated that she would be the last of her race. The battle maiden gave the child to Heimar, so that she might be nourished and fostered and kept free from harm.

When Brynhild did that she went with King Budle, her father, to the hall of Giuki. There was a feast of splendour held, and Gunnar and the battle maiden were wed. They drank mead together and made merry.

But if joy came to the heart of Brynhild, it speedily vanished when she beheld Sigurd with another bride. In secret she bewailed her fate, because that her first love who had awakened her from magic sleep had been taken from her by treachery and sorcery. Nor could such sorrow have long endurance. The treasure curse was upon them all; the shadow of doom was already darkening their days.

Ere long the pent-up grief storm broke forth in lamentation and feud; ere long there was shedding of blood and the heart call of vengeance.

It chanced that Brynhild and Gudrun bathed together in the river, and the battle maiden perceived that Andvari's doom ring was worn by Sigurd's bride. They fell to quarrelling one with another. Thereafter Brynhild

[p. 331]

went home; pale was her face and anger burned in her eyes: her heart was in torment.

On the morn that followed Gudrun besought Brynhild to sorrow not.

"Thy heart is evil," the battle maiden said; "it giveth thee joy to see me grieve. But thou shalt escape not thy due, for no longer can I endure to see thee with Sigurd."

"Thou hast Gunnar, my brother," said Gudrun; "a worthier lord is he than thou dost deserve. Well mayest thou take joy in him."

"Happy would I indeed be with one more noble," Brynhild answered.

Then Gudrun taunted her, and told how Sigurd had gone through the flames in the guise of Gunnar so that she might be beguiled.

There was no joy in the heart of Brynhild thereafter. Her days and nights she spent in lamentations, so that she was heard by all. Nor would she speak unto anyone, not even her husband; for when she wailed not, she lay like to one who was dead; alone in her chamber she lay; her face was white as winter's snow, and ice-hard and cold.

At length Gunnar besought Sigurd to go unto her, for to none had she spoken for many days, nor had she eaten or drunken aught.

But Sigurd feared that he could quench not the flames of her grief, and knew well that she fostered ill against him with dire intent. Yet was he constrained to speak to her. So Sigurd entered her chamber.

"Arise, O Brynhild," he cried, "for lo! the sun is bright; grieve no more, and make merry in our midst."

Brynhild opened her eyes, as aforetime she had done when Sigurd awakened her from magic sleep.

So," she spake, "thou art so bold as to come hither

[p. 332]

[paragraph continues] --thou who hast among all the others been most treacherous unto me."

"Speak not thus," said Sigurd for what reason dost thou sorrow so deeply?"

"Because the sword is not red with thy heart's blood," Brynhild answered.

Then was Sigurd moved to grief also. To Brynhild he spake tenderly and low. "Thee did I love better than mine own life, he said; "but alas! I was given to drink of the mead of forgetfulness, so that a spell was cast over me and I knew thee not. Yet did I sorrow when I came to know that thou, my heart's desire, wert wife to another. . . . Now be my doom fulfilled, for I desire not to live any more."

"Too late! . . . too late!" cried Brynhild. "It is too late to speak of thy sorrow. Now will greater scorn be turned against me than heretofore. . . . Women shall mock; none shall pity me."

Then Sigurd said he would put away Gudrun and nave her for wife, but Brynhild would hearken not.

"All things have changed," said the woman of sorrow, "and I would fain die. . . . I have been deceived. I desire thee not, and I desire no other."

In sore grief did Sigurd leave her; his head was bowed, his eyes were dimmed, and never again was there joy in his heart.

"I would fain die," Brynhild wailed. "I have been deceived. . . . Sigurd hath deceived me and death is his due. . . . I will not have him live with her who taunts me with scorn. Even now he telleth her of what hath passed, and she mocketh me."

When Gunnar entered Brynhild's chamber she spake:

"Thou shalt live not another night if thou dost not slay Sigurd.

[p. 333]

Nor aught else would she say unto him.

That was indeed a grievous speech to the ears of Gunnar--to be asked to slay one with whom he had taken binding vows. Yet did he love Brynhild more than Sigurd. So he went unto his brother Hogne and told him what had come to pass.

"If Sigurd is slain," Hogne said, "a noble warrior indeed shall be cut off, and doom and shame may be our dower."

So together they went unto Guttorm, who was young and had not sworn oaths with Sigurd, and he consented to do the will of Brynhild.

In the morning Guttorm entered the bedchamber where Sigurd and Gudrun lay fast asleep. He drew his sword. He thrust it through Sigurd's body and gave him his deathwound. Then he turned to make hasty escape.

Sigurd woke in his agony, and, seizing his sword Gram, he flung it at Guttorm and slew him.

Then Gudrun, who lay with her arms about her loved one, awoke to her sorrow; her body was wet with the blood that streamed from Sigurd's deathwound. Bitterly she moaned and wept.

"Grieve not too much," her husband sighed: "as the norns have decreed, so has it come to pass; my doom was hidden from me, and it has now fallen. . . . The hand of Brynhild is in this foul deed: she who loves me above all other men desireth that I should die. . . . Ah! had I not been stricken while I slept, many great men would have fallen ere I could be overcome . . . ."

Then Sigurd died. . . . Even while he spake he was taken from Gudrun, and she gave forth a loud and bitter cry that was heard throughout the Hall.

Brynhild laughed. . . .

[p. 334]

Said Gunnar: "Thou dost not laugh for joy, O monstrous woman, for thy cheeks have grown grim and death-white. . . . How wouldst thou feel now if thine own brother Atle were slain before thine eyes?"

"Vain is thy threat against Atle," Brynhild answered; "there shall yet be much bloodshed, but thou thyself must fall ere he shall die."

Gudrun cried: "Sigurd is dead; my kinsmen have slain him."

Nor other moan she made.

Brynhild sighed in secret: "One I loved, and no other, and he is laid in death."

All through the moonless night that followed the death day, Gudrun sat beside her husband's body. Her tears were dried; her cheeks were pale; she smote not her hands nor uttered any cry. Many sought to comfort her, but her heart was cold.

At length her sister came and drew the white sheet from off Sigurd's body, and said:

"Gudrun, turn thine eyes upon him thou lovest. Kiss his lips. Take him in thine arms as if he were still alive."

Gudrun looked in Sigurd's face. . . . His eyes were glazed in death; his lips were cold; pale were his cheeks, and his hair was red with blood.

She lay down beside Sigurd; she kissed his lips and wept.

Then spake her sister: "Never knew I of love like to the love that Gudrun beareth for Sigurd."

Gudrun said: "Like to a sword-lily among grass blades was Sigurd among the sons of Giuki, my brothers.

I whom he raised up am now but a leaf cast to the winds. . . . Never more by day or by night shall I hear his voice most sweet. . . . Upon me have my

[p. 335]

brothers wrought this sorrow; my brothers have made me grieve with bitterness. Their oaths are broken, and they are brought to shame, and their kingdom shall be laid waste. Never shall they have joy in the treasure which they desire; it shall be their bane and drag them down to death."

Brynhild came and saw Sigurd's body. She stood apart and spake not, but her eyes burned with grief fire.

Then went she unto Gunnar and cursed him and all his kin, because that the vows of friendship were broken and he and they had conspired against Sigurd and her heart's desire.

"Together we plighted our troth," she cried, "and to the grave shall I follow him."

Gunnar desired not that Brynhild should die, but Hogne said: "She hath ever been a bane to us. 'Twere better that she died now."

Ere yet Brynhild sought death, she caused to be slain Sigmund, the son of Gudrun. But Gudrun could find not greater deeps of sorrow than she had already reached.

A great pyre was built, and on it-were laid the bodies of Sigurd and his son. When it was set ablaze, Brynhild rode towards it upon her white steed, and cried:

"Gudrun would have died with Sigurd had she a soul like to mine."

Then she leapt amidst the flames, and was burned with him she loved so well.

So Brynhild passed from the world of men, an she rode the darksome ways towards Hela to search for Sigurd.

At Hela bridge the giant maid, who keeps watch, stood before her and said:

[p. 336]

"Thou shalt pass not by this way. O gold-haired maiden, thy hands are red with the blood of heroes. . . . On Giuki's hall thou hast brought sorrow and scaith."

"Blame me not Brynhild answered; "my life was robbed of love; my vows were despised; by treachery was this evil done upon me, and I was mocked at and put to shame. . . . Sigurd was betrayed, and I was betrayed by Sigurd, whom I love, and now seek in death."

Then golden-haired Brynhild sang, swan-like and sweet, her death song on Hela bridge.

Ah! but for battle never ending
   Are mortals made alive,
 Ah! but to live o'er long to sorrow--
   To sorrow and to strive;
 Yet Sigurd and I shall live in Hela,
   As fain we'd lived before--
 Our fame shall echo through the Ages
   Ever and evermore.

Spurring her white steed she cried: "Sink down, O giant maid!" and rode on to Hela's glittering plains.

 

Click to enlarge
BRYNHILD
 From the statue by Bissen
 Photograph by Vilhelm Tryde

 

  

"Gudrun's Sorrow" [*1]

Home they brought her warrior dead:
   She nor swooned, nor utter'd cry;
 All her maidens, watching, said,
   "She must weep or she will die."

Then they praised him, soft and low,
   Call'd him worthy to be loved, [p. 337]
 Truest friend and noblest foe;
   Yet she neither spoke nor moved.

Stole a maiden from her place,
   Lightly to the warrior stept,
 Took the face-cloth from the face;
   Yet she neither moved nor wept.

Rose a nurse of ninety years
   Sat his child upon her knee--
 Like summer tempest came her tears--
   "Sweet my child, I live for thee.
                                             Tennyson.

 

Footnotes

^336:1 Although the Volsunga saga version of Sigurd's death is followed, a fragment of song pictures the tragedy in a grove from which the warrior's body was carried to Gudrun. Clerk Saunders was slain in bed also, and this ballad suggests the existence of an early version of the Volsung story ere the Helgi lays were introduced. Tennyson's beautiful poem appears to have been suggested by a version of the Gudrun story.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 338]

  

CHAPTER XXX

  

The Last of the Volsungs

Brynhild's Daughter--Escape to Norway--Her Protector murdered--Why she was called Krake--The Princess Thora--Her Dragon--like Serpents--How Ragnar won his Bride--The Northern Cinderella--Wooed by the Viking--The Slave becomes a Queen--Story of Svanhild--Wife of Jormunrek (Ermenrich)--Bikki (Sibech) the Accuser--Fate of Gudrun's Daughter.

Now when Brynhild died, Heimer feared that Giuki's vengeful sons would slay Aslog because that she was the last of the Volsungs, and might rear up a son who would come against them. So he prepared to take flight. He made a harp, in which he concealed Brynhild's child with certain of her treasures, and voyaged to Norway, where he made pretence to be a minstrel. He went to a house in Spangerejd and dwelt in it. He revealed not there the secret of the child's concealment. But one day the housewife perceived that there was treasure in the harp, for the door of Aslog's harp-chamber was not closed, and a portion of rich cloth protruded from it. Then was Heimer murdered in his sleep, and Aslog was taken forth with the treasure that was hers.

The child grew up in the strange household, and her foster-parents were not only poor but cruel and harsh; the high-born girl was made a slave, and was set to work at menial tasks. As the years passed by her beauty shone forth, and her captors, fearing that blame would fall upon them for doing evil, kept her clad in rags, and

[p. 339]

smeared her face with soot and tar, so that no eye might gaze upon her with wonder. Then was she nicknamed Krake, which signifies "the crow".

Thus did Aslog abide with harsh and strange folk until the coming of the great viking Ragnar Lodbrog, who had fame not only on the high seas for deeds of valour, but also because he had slain the venomous serpents which were the bane of King Heroth's kingdom.

It chanced that the king had gone hunting in the woods, where he found two young snakes; these he bore home with him to his daughter Thora, by whom they were fed until they grew so large that she dreaded to approach them. Each then began to devour an ox daily; and they both became so powerful that they laid waste the countryside, and killed men and beasts with their venomous breath.

King Heroth feared to contend against the serpents, but he offered his daughter in marriage to the man who would slay them. Now Thora was fair to behold, and many heroes went forth to fight the monsters; but they suffered death one after another, and the affliction grew greater, so that all people were in constant fear and peril.

The day came when Ragnar heard of Thora, whom he desired for wife, being set up as a reward for serpent-slaying, and he resolved to win her by mighty deeds. So he bade that a mantle and breeches of wool be fashioned for him, and when they were ready he gave King Heroth to know that he would make attack on the serpents.

It was the season of winter, and he dipped his woollen attire in a stream and it was soon frozen hard. Clad thus, he was protected against the venom, so he girt on his sword and took a spear in his right hand and a shield

[p. 340]

in his left and went forth to fight, so that Thora might be his bride.

A great serpent came against him, but he feared not, and prepared to combat with it. Then another great serpent hastened to the aid of the first, and he was soon in dire peril. They spouted venom upon Ragnar, but his frost-bound clothing protected him; and they smote him with their tails, but he stood firm. Terrible was the conflict which was waged, and the king and all who were with him were filled with alarm, and sought high and narrow hiding places, fearing that Ragnar would be overcome.

The serpents were enraged, and they made ferocious attack with monstrous jaws agape, but Ragnar raised his shield against them each time they sought to bite. He was indeed sore pressed and greatly wearied; but at length he cast his spear at them and it went through their hearts, so that they were both slain.

A great shout was raised by those who were in hiding, and the king came forth to honour Ragnar. He laughed to see the strange attire of the hero, and nicknamed him "Lodbrog", which signifies "shaggy-breeches".

Then was a great banquet given. Ragnar was attired ill splendour, and he was given Thora for wife. But when she had borne him two sons she died, although young and fair, and her husband mourned for her.

Ragnar then plundered on the high seas and raided Scotland and Pictland. He set a new king over the Orkneys, and went against Norway.

It chanced that he came one day to Spangerejd, and there he sent men ashore to procure bread. When they returned with the food he was made angry because that it was burned. The men told him that they had gone to

[p. 341]

a house in which there was a beautiful maiden: they could refrain not from gazing upon her, and so the bread was burned.

Now Ragnar bethought him to have such a maiden for his bride, so that he might forget his grief for Thora. He sent to her a message bidding her to come unto him. Desiring to put her wisdom to test, he told his messengers to ask her to come not on foot nor yet driving; not attired and yet not naked; not feasting and yet not fasting; not with anyone and yet not alone.

Aslog, who was named Krake in her poor dwelling, came towards the great sea king neither driving nor on foot but riding upon a goat with her feet trailing upon the ground; she came without attire, but yet not naked, because her hair was so long and bountiful that it covered her body, and she drew a net about her; she came not feasting nor yet fasting, because she held an onion to her lips and tasted of it; she was not alone, because her dog walked by her side. [*1]

Ragnar, who was now a great king, took beauteous Aslog, the daughter of Sigurd and Brynhild, for his bride, and their sons were named Ingvar and Ubbe. [*2]

After Sigurd's death Gudrun had a daughter who was named Svanhild. She was given for wife to Jormunrek, [*3]

[p. 342]

[paragraph continues] King of the Gauts. Like to a sunbeam was she in the hall of Giuki, and there was great sorrow when she went forth with her bondmaids. Much treasure was she given, but the curse of Andvari's gold followed her. It fell that she was falsely accused by Bikki of unfaithfulness with a prince, and so greatly enraged did the king become that he ordered that she should be put to death by being trampled under the hoofs of horses.

Then was Svanhild bound and left lying on a plain; but although the horses ran over her they injured her not, some say because of her surpassing beauty, and others because of the brightness of her Volsung eyes.

The king deemed that his fair bride was innocent, because she had escaped injury, but Bikki, her accuser, poisoned the king's ear, and persuaded him to command that Svanhild should be laid upon the ground with her face downward. Then were the horses driven over her again, and she was trodden deep down into the earth by the multitudinous hoofs. So perished Svanhild, daughter of Gudrun, while Aslog, daughter of Brynhild, reigned as Ragnar's queen in a northern land. In Norway, s royal line alone doth the blood of the Volsungs flow.

The young prince, who was Jormunrek's son, was condemned to death by his sire and was hanged. [*1]

 

Click to enlarge
KRAKE
 From the painting by M. E. Winge

 

Footnotes

^341:1 So did Grainne come to Diarmid in the Highland Fian tale. Grimm also gives a version of the story with numerous references to similar tales in other languages than Gaelic and German. In Saxo (Book 9) there is a more sordid account of Ragnar's wooing of "a certain young woman" who became the mother of Ubbe. Like Odin, when he wooed Rhine, Ragnar made use of female attire. Our version is from Ragnar's saga. The Volsunga saga drops Aslog at the point where she became Krake.

^341:2 Here we meet history. By one authority Ingvar and Ubbe are said to be the northmen who murdered King Eadmund of England. Others identify them as the avenging sons who carved an eagle on the back of King Ella in Yorkshire, because he had driven their half-brother Ivar from the throne. Krake is a northern Cinderella, sung of in Norway and Denmark. She was a link between Odin and the Norse kings, who prided themselves in their descent from the Asa-god.

^341:3 Ermenrich (Hermanric) of the Ostrogoths.

^342:1 Saxo gives an account of a sham execution, but in the Dietrich story he is actually put to death. Bikki is Sibech.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 343]

  

CHAPTER XXXI

  

Gudrun's Vengeance

Gudrun's Flight--Grimhild follows her--The Reconciliation--Wooed by King Atle--Doom Dreams--The Fafner Hoard--Coveted by Atle--Invitation to Gudrun's Brothers--Fateful Journey--Treachery--A Fierce Conflict--How Hogne died--Gunnar among Vipers----Queen slays Atle--Becomes Bride of Jonaker--Her Sons--Svanhild is avenged.

WHEN Sigurd and his son were burned with Brynhild on the pyre, Gudrun refused to be comforted, nor could she abide to remain in the Hall of Giuki among the oath-breakers, her brothers, who had brought her husband to his death. So she went forth alone to wander in the forest with desire that wolves should devour her. Five days she journeyed in her sorrow, knowing not whither she went, until she came to the Hall of King Alv. There was she received with pity and tenderness, and she had for companion Thora, daughter of Hakon, King of Denmark. She was well loved, and with Thora she sat and embroidered on fair tapestry the deeds of Sigurd and Sigmund.

Three summers went past and four winters ere Queen Grimhild came to know where Gudrun had her dwelling. She desired that her daughter should return again, because King Atle the Mighty, the brother of Brynhild, sought her for his bride. So Grimhild gave much treasure to her sons, and went forth with them to appease Gudrun with gifts of gold, so that the blood

[p. 344]

feud might have end. Five hundred war-men rode with Grimhild and Gunnar and Hogne, and they greeted Gudrun and made offer to her of the treasure which they bore with them. Then did Gunnar give to Gudrun a golden goblet filled with the drink of forgetfulness, which Grimhild had brewed, so that she might put past old sorrows and hate. Gudrun drank and her grief faded.

Thereafter Grimhild told her daughter that King Atle desired her for wife, and said that she would be given more treasure when she was wed to him.

"I desire not another husband," Gudrun said; "nor could I live happily with the brother of Brynhild."

"If thou wilt wed Atle," said Grimhild, "thou shalt have sons, and it shall seem to thee that Sigurd and Sigmund are: again in life."

"I seek not nor hope for gladness any more while I live," Gudrun answered.

But her mother pleaded: "Atle is foremost among kings. A nobler husband thou canst not find. May thou never he wed to any man," she added, "if thou shalt spurn this mighty ruler."

"Alas!" sighed Gudrun; "bid me not wed the brother of Brynhild, for he will bring great evil upon our kin, and be the death-bane of Hogne and Gunnar. By my own hand must he fall in the end if I become his bride."

Grimhild wept, nor listened to what Gudrun said. "I shall give thee lands and many war-men," she told her daughter, "if thou wilt take Atle to be thy husband. Thou shalt have joy with him until thy life's end. Besides, by marrying him thou wilt bring great honour unto thy kin."

"Alas! I must then be wed to him," said Gudrun, "although my heart desireth him not. But there is no

[p. 345]

gladness in store for me, for he will be a bane to my kin."

Grimhild rejoiced because that she at length worked her will, and soon a great company set forth towards the kingdom of Atle the Mighty. They travelled for seven days by land, and then for seven days they voyaged over the sea, and thereafter they travelled by land again for seven days 'ere they came unto the Hall of the King. A great banquet was held, and King Atle and Gudrun were wed. But the bride's heart was sad within her, nor did she ever have joy in the Hall of Brynhild's brother.

One morning when Atle woke from sleep he was greatly troubled because of the dreams he had dreamed. He spoke to Gudrun, saying: "It seemed that thou didst thrust a sword through my breast."

"To dream of iron," the queen said, "is to dream of fire."

"And I dreamt also," continued the king, "that two water-reeds grew up in my hall. By the roots were they pulled up, and they dripped red blood; of them was I asked to partake. . . . Then it seemed that two hungry hawks flew from my wrist, and they went to Hela. Hearts had they steeped in honey, and I ate them. . . . Thereafter I dreamt that two cubs gambolled at my feet; of these did I also partake."

"Thy dreams forebode much ill," Gudrun said; "verily, thy sons are nigh unto life's end. Black grief is at hand."

Weeks passed and then years, and the doom dreams faded from the king's memory. Yet was there more unhappiness between the ill-mated pair.

Then a time came when Atle spoke much of the accursed treasure which Sigurd had found when he

[p. 346]

slew Fafner. Well he knew that Gunnar and Hogne had kept from Gudrun the greater part, so that they could boast of immense riches. In his heart Atle coveted the hoard, and desired it for himself; so he took counsel with his nobles, and decided to invite Gunnar and Hogne to visit his Hall. A trusted messenger, whose name was Vinge, was sent forth with a company of war-men to make promises to the brothers and induce them to journey to Hunaland. Gudrun knew well that there was evil intent in her husband's heart, so she carved runes of warning upon a gold ring and gave it to Vinge as her gift to Hogne. But Atle's messenger changed the runes so that they seemed to convey a speedy welcome from the queen.

When Vinge reached the Hall of Giuki he made his mission known. The brothers consulted one with another, suspecting treachery and Atle's lust for gold; but Gudrun's ring reassured them, and after they had drunk mead with the messengers, they promised to go forth with them.

But Hogne's wife, Kostbera, made keen scrutiny of Gudrun's ring in her bedchamber, and she saw that the runes had been altered from warning to welcome. To her husband she spoke thereanent. She had also dreamt an ominous dream, in which she saw the Hall overthrown by a rising flood.

But Hogne chided her for thinking ill of Atle. He had given his promise to Vinge to fare forth with him, and scorned to break it.

Gunnar's wife had also dreams of warning. She saw her husband pierced by a sword, while wolves howled about him.

"Little dogs will bark at us," Gunnar said.

"Methought I also saw," his wife continued, "a

[p. 347]

battle maiden of sad visage entering the hall. She seemed to be a valkyrie."

"A man must die at his appointed hour," Gunnar said; "besides, it is not good to live over long."

Now Gunnar, who was king, for Giuki had departed hence, was well loved by his people, and in the morning they clamoured about him, beseeching that he should not leave them.

But he bade them to feast with him. "We may never again drink mead together," he said, "but no man can escape his fate."

Gunnar's wife spake unto Vinge. "Methinks," she said, "that ill fortune will come to our kind from this journey."

But Vinge swore many oaths, saying that no evil was intended. "May I be hanged," he said, "if a sign of treachery is shown against Gunnar and Hogne in the kingdom of Atle."

There were tears and lamentations when the warrior sons of Giuki went forth never again to return to the kingdom of their sires, although great glory would be theirs by reason of valorous deeds and unflinching courage.

Gunnar's wife embraced her king, and Kostbera embraced Hogne, saying: "May days of gladness be thine."

"Forget not to make merry," Hogne said, "no matter what befalls us on our journey."

When they had voyaged over the sea, there were dumb foretellings of their doom. So swiftly and hard did the oarsmen ply their blades that rowing pins snapped and half the ship's keel was shorn off upon the beach. They leapt ashore and feared not. Gunnar and Hogne went inland towards Atle's stronghold with armour and

[p. 348]

full war gear and all their men. Two sons of Hogne were with, them, and valorous Orkning, the brother of Kostbera, who had fame for mighty deeds.

They rode together through a dark wood, and when they approached the stronghold of Atle they perceived that the gate was closed against them. A great army was assembling to receive the guests.

Hogne raised his battleaxe and smote the gate asunder, for he must needs enter with dignity becoming his rank.

"Thou hast done wrong," Vinge snarled; "'twere more fitting that thou shouldst wait until I bring the gallows on which ye shall all hang. By smooth words have I induced ye all to come hither; ere long shall ye die together."

"Thy boasts affright me not," answered Hogne; "we shrink not from conflict, if conflict there must be. Yet hast thou wrought us ill, so take thy reward."

As he spake, Hogne swung his battleaxe and slew Vinge with a single blow.

Boldly rode the sons of Giuki until they came to the Hall of Atle. There was a strong army drawn up in line of battle.

King Atle came forth, and spake to the brothers.

"I bid ye welcome," he said, "but unto me must be now given up the great treasure which Sigurd won when he slew Fafner, and is now mine by right of Gudrun."

So fell the treasure curse upon them all in that hour of doom.

Gunnar spake. "Thou shalt never possess our riches," he said, "and if thou dost battle against us, we shall make of thee and thy kin a feast for the eagle and the wolf."

"Long have I desired," said Atle, "to punish ye

[p. 349]

for the slaying of Sigurd. That indeed was a shameful doing, for his equal was found not among men."

Hogne spake boldly: "Long then hast thou brooded over that matter. A wonder it is that thou didst not sooner set thyself to the task."

Then began the battle, and against one another they cast their spears.

Tidings were borne unto Gudrun of hard fighting, and she hastened forth in great anger. She cast from her the royal robe, and rushing into the midst of the fray embraced her brothers and kissed them.

But in vain did she intervene. The time for peace was past, so she armed herself and fought beside Gunnar and Hogne against the war-men of Atle.

Bravely fought the brothers. The king's three brothers were slain, and Atle cried:

"Now am I the last of my kin, and by thee was Brynhild slain."

"Thou shalt have thy faring in time," answered Hogne; "the gods have decreed thy punishment."

Fiercer grew the conflict, for Atle rallied his war-men and urged them to battle. But he was driven back into his Hall, which soon streamed with blood. Great were the deeds of the valorous Giukings.

But at length Gunnar and Hogne were pressed hard and overpowered. Then were they bound in fetters.

Atle was wroth when he perceived that so many of his war-men were cut down, and he scowled upon Hogne.

"He hath cut down a host of my heroes," he said; "so let his heart be cut out."

"Do thy will," answered Hogne, "for I fear not. So grievously am I wounded that I may as well die."

But the king delayed taking vengeance. He desired

[p. 350]

first to know where the Fafner treasure was concealed, so he had the brothers cast into separate dungeons.

Gunnar was first brought before him. "Thy life shall be spared," Atle said, "if thou wilt reveal where the treasure lies hidden."

Gunnar answered him. "Ere I speak," he said, "Hogne's heart must be brought unto me."

Then did Atle seek to practise deceit with much cunning. He had a thrall seized, so that his heart might be held up before Gunnar. The man screamed with anguish ere yet the knife touched him, for he desired not to miss constant fare and good, nor leave his well-loved swine.

The coward heart was cut out, and it trembled before Gunnar.

"That is not the valorous heart of my brother," he said, "but the heart of a thrall."

So Hogne had to be slain. He laughed when his enemies fell upon him, and they marvelled at his valour.

Then was, the hero's heart plucked forth, and when Gunnar saw it he said:

"That indeed is the heart of great Hogne. See how it still beats without fear. I wavered while my brother was yet alive, but now can I die well satisfied, Atle, for thou shalt never know where the treasure lies hid. Yet thou, O King, shall escape not thy doom, and the Rhine river shall keep the secret of the gold."

Atle was wroth; his brow darkened and his eyes burned fire.

"Take hence the prisoner," he growled, and as he bade his men so did they do. [*1]

[p. 351]

Gunnar was bound and thrust into a loathsome dungeon which swarmed with vipers. But Gudrun sent unto him a harp, and he played upon it with his toes, making such sweet music that all the vipers were charmed into a magic sleep save one, which gnawed his breast until it reached his heart to suck his life's blood. Great torture did Gunnar suffer ere he died.

Men have told that the viper which killed the hero was the mother of Atle, who was a sorceress.

The king boasted before Gudrun, because that he had triumphed over her brothers.

"Gunnar and Hogne are indeed no more," the queen said, "and unto me is given a heritage of vengeance."

Atle liked not her speech, so he said: "Let peace be made between us. Thee shall I give much treasure as atonement for the loss of thy kin."

Gudrun would accept not of blood payment, but she desired that a funeral feast be held for Gunnar and Hogne.

The king gave ready consent, and then was the dread work of vengeance begun. Gudrun slew her two sons. Of their skulls she made drinking cups, and she had their hearts cooked in honey for the king. In his wine she mixed their blood.

When the feast was over, Atle desired that his sons should be brought before him.

"Thou hast given me dark sorrow," Gudrun said, "by slaying my brothers. Now hast thou thy reward. Thou didst eat the hearts of thy sons, and their blood hast thou drunken in thy wine from these their skull cups.

"Vengeful woman," cried Atle, "a great cruelty thou hast done by slaying thine own children."

"There shall be still greater cruelty yet," she answered him.

[p. 352]

"Thou shalt be burned alive for this," Atle cried fiercely.

"Thine own death thou dost foretell," she said, "as well as mine."

Now a son of Hogne was left alive. He was a Niblung. [*1] With him did Gudrun conspire. When Atle had drunken deep, and slumbered, his wife went with Hogne's son to his bedchamber, and she thrust a sword through him.

Atle woke up and cried: "Who hath given me my deathwound?"

Gudrun made known herself, and said she had taken vengeance for her kin.

Atle pleaded that he would have stately burial, and the queen promised him a great pyre. When he died she set fire to the hall, and all that were within it were burned. In the darkness the war-men sprang one upon the other, and many fell fighting ere the end came.

Gudrun made escape, but she desired not to live any more. She hastened towards the shore and cast herself into the waves, so that her days might have end.

There are those who tell that she died thus, but others say that the waves bore her over the sea and cast her upon the beach nigh to the stronghold of King Jonaker.

A strong warrior was he. When he saw the queen's beauty he desired to have her for bride, and when she

[p. 353]

was nourished and comforted the twain were married and they dwelt happily together.

Gudrun had three sons, and they were named Hamder, Sorle, and Erp. It is told that when they became full warriors she sent them forth against King Jormunrek to avenge the death of Svanhild. But Erp, it was deemed, was unwilling to go forth, so his brothers slew him.

Then Hamder and Sorle set forth. Their mother charmed their bodies against steel, and when they reached Jormunrek, Hamder cut off his hands and Sorle smote off his feet.

"If Erp were here," one said to the other, "he would have taken the king's head."

Many strong and well-skilled warriors fought against the sons of Gudrun, but without avail, for they could not wound them.

Then in the midst of the fray appeared a wise old man who had but one eye. He was Odin, but they knew it not. He counselled that the warriors should cast stones against the twain, who were protected by spells. As he advised, so was it done. Many stones were flung at Hamder and Sorle, and they were speedily slain.

So endeth the northern tale of the Volsungs and the Giukings.

Footnotes

^350:1 A similar legend regarding a secret is current in the Highlands. Neil Munro gives a spirited version in his picturesque tale "The Secret of the Heather Ale" in The Lost Pibroch.

^352:1 The Giukings were originally the Nibelungs (Hniflungs) who possessed the hoard guarded by Andvari (Alberich). That is why Hogne's son is called a "Niblung". The reference is a survival from one of the older versions of the legend. In the next chapter the Nibelungs are dwarfs (elves) and the Giukings are the Burgundians. How myth and history commingled in endless variations is illustrated by the Dietrich stories. Similarly, myths which had a common and remote origin, and developed separately in various districts, were also fused by wandering minstrels.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 354]

  

CHAPTER XXXII

  

Siegfried and the Nibelungs

The Hero's Youth--His Service with Mimer--Wieland overcome--Forging the Sword--The Dragon Regin--The Combat--How Siegfried became invulnerable--Language of Birds--Mimer is slain--Prince journeys to Isenland--Queen Brunhild--Combat with Giants--The Dwarf Alberich--Cloak of Obscurity--The Nibelung Hoard--Quest of Kriemhild.

SIEGFRIED [*1] was a great and noble prince whose fame, by reason of his mighty deeds, hath endurance through the Ages. His sire was King Siegmund of the Netherlands and his mother was named Sigelinde. Ere yet he had reached the years that are mellowed by wisdom, Siegfried was of proud and haughty spirit and brooked not restraint. Great was his strength, and if his playfellows obeyed not his will in all things, he smote them harshly, so that they hated as much as they feared him. Wild and wilful was the prince as a lad may be.

Of Siegfried's doings complaint was made unto the king, who resolved to set him to work among strong and skilful men. Accordingly the prince was sent unto

 

Click to enlarge
THE NIBELUNGENLIED
 From the fresco by Professor E. Ille

 

[p. 355]

[paragraph continues] Mimer, the wonder smith, who dwelt in a deep forest, so that he might acquire such knowledge of how weapons were made as would serve him well in aftertime. Mimer gave the lad heavy tasks to perform, and kept him working at anvil and bellows from morn till even. Skilful in time he became, and his strength increased beyond knowledge.

The years went past, and the lad endured the burden of servitude and the blows of his elders with humility. But one day he fell upon Wieland, the strongest and most cunning smith that was in Mimer's service, and dragged him by the locks through the smithy. Mimer was wroth, but Siegfried had discovered the full measure of his might and he commanded haughtily, as befits a prince, that a strong sword should be forged for him. The master smith realized that he must needs obey, however unwilling he might be; so he drew from the furnace a bar of glowing iron, and bade the lad to beat out for himself a worthy blade.

Siegfried swung high the great hammer and struck a blow which shook the smithy. The iron was splintered to pieces, the hammer snapped asunder, and the anvil was driven deep into the ground.

Mimer spake with anger, but Siegfried smote him heavily, and the other assistant he smote also.

Then the lad demanded to be given a sword equal to his strength. Mimer made promise to forge it for him. But in his heart he vowed to be avenged. First he went through the forest to the place where dwelt his brother Regin, who had been, by reason of his evil doings, transformed into a dragon. Mimer roused the monster to anger and bade him lie in wait for Siegfried. Thereafter he returned to the smithy and asked the lad to hasten through the forest unto the dwelling of the

[p. 356]

charcoal-burner, so that be might procure sufficient good fuel with which to forge the promised sword.

Siegfried seized his club and went forth. He came to a forest swamp which swarmed with venomous snakes and great lind-worms and toads; but he had more loathing than terror. When he reached the charcoal-burner he besought him for fire, so that be might destroy the reptiles.

"Alas, for thee!" the charcoal-burner exclaimed; "for if thou dost return again by the way thou didst come the dragon Regin will come forth to devour thee."

The prince scorned to be afraid, and snatching a fiery brand he returned through the forest and set in flames the trees and shrubbage of the swamp, so that all the loathsome reptiles were destroyed.

Then came forth the great dragon, bellowing loud and spouting venom. The earth trembled as he came. But Siegfried was not afraid. Thrice he smote the monster with his club and thus slew it. [*1]

Perceiving that the dragon was dead, the prince cut it up, and a deep stream of blood issued forth. He dipped his finger into it, and marvelled to find that the skin had become hard as horn.

Now shall I render myself invulnerable against battle wounds, he said.

So he cast off his clothing and plunged into the hot stream. His whole body was then made horn-hard, save a single spot between his shoulders, to which a gummy leaf had adhered.

Siegfried was well pleased. He clad himself and cooked pieces of the dragon's flesh, so that he might receive a meed of its strength. As he watched the flesh

[p. 357]

broiling, he tasted a portion to discover if it were ready. When he did that the forest was filled with magic voices, for he could understand the language of birds.

Marvelling greatly, he listened to the birds as they sang:

If Siegfried knew what we know,
   What we know this day,
 He would seek, O, he would seek
   The wonder smith to slay;
 For Mimer sent him to the wood
   To be the Dragon's prey.

Let Siegfried know what we know,
   And ponder o'er our song . . .
 The wonder smith would fain, O fain,
   Avenge his brother's wrong--
 Smite to live, or wait his blow
   And live not long.

Siegfried heard with understanding, and his heart was hardened against the wonder smith. He cut off the dragon's head, and, hastening unto the smithy, he flung the trophy at Mimer's feet, bidding him to eat thereof. Wieland and his fellow fled, fearing greatly the prince's wrath, but Mimer sought to appease him with flattering words, and at length made offer, for life ransom, of the steed Grane, which was of Sleipner's race.

Siegfried accepted the gift, and then, remembering what the birds had sung, he smote Mimer with his club and slew him.

Then returned the young hero unto his sire, King Siegmund, who reproved him for killing the master smith, but he took pride in the lad because that he had slain the dragon.

Soon afterwards Siegfried was given arms and armour, and became a complete warrior. A banquet was held,

[p. 358]

and beakers were drained, when, with loud acclamations, the prince was hailed as heir to the kingdom of the Netherlands.

Thereafter Siegmund's strong son went forth to will renown in distant lands, and northward he bent his way towards Isenland. On the shore of the Netherlands a ship awaited him. A great gale blew, and the master mariner feared to go forth. But Siegfried would brook not delay, and crossed the stormy seas without fear, despite the peril he endured.

He landed in safety and journeyed towards the castle of Queen Brunhild. The gates were shut and bolted, but he broke them open. Then did the knights who were on guard rush against him, and they began to fight. But Brunhild came forth and bade that the combat should cease, and she gave the prince right courtly welcome.

Now Brunhild was very fair, and was a battle maiden of wondrous strength and prowess. Many wooed her, but no knight came nigh who was worthy her skill; those who encountered her were slain one by one. Maid attendants she had, too, and they were clad in armour and bravely were they wont to fight for their queen.

Siegfried saw that Brunhild had great beauty, but he had no desire to win her by combat against her knights or by vying with her in feats of strength.

"She whom I shall have for wife," he said, "must be gentle and womanly. I love not the battle maiden."

Yet he departed not without display of prowess, for he seized a boulder and flung it so great a distance that all who saw the feat performed wondered greatly. [*1]

The prince then went on his way until he came to the land of the Nibelungs. It chanced that the king had died, and his two sons, Nibelung and Schilbung, disputed

[p. 359]

over the treasure hoard. Unto Siegfried they made offer of a wondrous sword, which had been forged by the dwarfs, if he would make just division of their father's riches. He did as they desired, but they sought to repay him with treachery. For when he was given the sword, which was named Balmung, they said that he had kept back part of the treasure for himself. A quarrel was stirred up, and it waxed fierce. Then the king's sons called forth twelve giants, so that the prince might be overcome and bound, and thereafterwards imprisoned in the treasure cavern of the mountain.

But Siegfried feared not any foe. He fought bravely against the giants.

Then spells were wrought, and a thick mist gathered in the place of conflict; but the sword Balmung was wielded by Siegfried to such good purpose that he prevailed. A thunderstorm raged; [*1] the mountains resounded with dread clamour and the earth trembled. Yet did the prince fight on, until he had slain giant after giant and none remained alive.

Thereafter the dwarf Alberich came forth against him, seeking to be avenged. A cunning foeman was he, and not easy to combat against, for he had power to become invisible. He possessed a cloak of obscurity, and when he put it on Siegfried must needs combat with menacing nothingness. Long they fought, and in the end the prince had the dwarf in his power. [*2]

Although Siegfried put to death the two sons of the

[p. 360]

king, he spared Alberich, from whom he won the Cloak of Obscurity, which could, when he wore it, render him invisible. For he followed the dwarf as he fled towards the mountain cavern in which the treasure was concealed. Then did the masterful hero possess himself of the hoard, and he made Alberich the keeper of it when he vowed to obey his commands.

The Nibelung people acclaimed Siegfried as their king, but he tarried not long in their midst. He took with him twelve bold war-men, and set sail again for the Netherlands. His fame went speedily abroad, and his deeds were sung of by gleemen in many a hall.

A right valiant and noble prince did Siegfried become; all men honoured him, and by women was he loved. Many a fair maiden sighed because he sought not to win one or another. But he rejoiced in warlike feats and in games, and his heart was moved not with desire for any damsel.

There came a time, however, when gleemen sang of the beauty and grace of the Princess Kriemhild, the daughter of the King of Burgundy. In the wide world there was none fairer, and Siegfried loved her in secret ere yet he beheld her, for he knew that she was his heart's desire, and he resolved that he would woo her right speedily.

He spake to his knights thereanent, and they told both king and queen of Siegfried's bold intent. Siegmund and Sigelinde sought to repress his desire, but the prince would not be restrained.

The king warned his son that the warriors of Burgundy were fierce in war, and among them were Gunther and strong and vengeful Hagen.

"What I shall obtain not by fair request," Siegfried said, "I may win in battle."

 

Click to enlarge
SIEGFRIED
 From the Painting by F. Leeke. By permission of Franz Hanfstaengl

 

[p. 361]

His sire made offer of a great army, but the prince said he would go forth as one of twelve knights. He scorned to win Kriemhild by force, and vowed he would woo her by reason of brave deeds.

Then were preparations made for the journey, and the queen caused rich and gorgeous apparel to be fashioned for Siegfried and his men, and when they rode forth they were indeed of noble seeming.

Siegmund and Sigelinde sorrowed greatly when their son kissed them farewell.

"Grieve not," Siegfried said, "for no evil shall come nigh me."

Then rode he away, the noble prince, to share his meed of joy and meet his doom.

Footnotes

^354:1 Siegfried is the hero of the Nibelungenlied, the great Upper German poetic romance (see Introduction). He is identical with the northern Sigurd of the Eddic poems and Volsunga saga. The various versions of the popular tale developed from an older legend. The Nibelungenlied is here introduced by a summary from Thidrek saga, a Norse poem composed about the middle of the thirteenth century, which was based on the Lower German version of the legend and the Dietrich poems. Our introduction gives a consecutive narrative. The Nibelungenlied opens abruptly by introducing Kriemhild, who takes the place of the Norse Gudrun. Siegfried's early exploits are afterwards referred to briefly.

^356:1 The necessity for more than one blow recalls Thor's conflicts with the Midgard serpent in Hymer's boat and at the Ragnarok battle.

^358:1 He resembles the boulder-flinging mountain giants.

^359:1 Thor is suggested here.

^359:2 There is a curious Banffshire story of two mountain fairies who fought for the love of a fairy lady. One was dark and the other was white. The former had power to render himself invisible, but when he did so in the duel a red spot remained. The white fairy saw the red spot floating in the air, and shot an arrow through it. The dark fairy was slain because the red spot was his heart. This story is not of a common type, and is evidently very old. The fairies occupied opposing hills, as if they were the usual Scottish mountain giants. Of course, giants and fairies have much in common.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 362]

  

CHAPTER XXXIII

  

The Promise of Kriemhild

The Fair Princess--Her Dream and her Desire--Arrival of her Lover--Hagen's Warning--The Year of Waiting--War declared--Siegfried's Great Deeds--Two Kings taken captive--Lovers meet--A Vision of Beauty--The Worthy Knight--The Kiss and the Vow--Gunther desires Brunhild--Siegfried's Reward.

THE Princess Kriemhild was of great beauty, nor could her equal be found in any land. Many a gallant knight came to death seeking to win her. When her sire, the King of Burgundy died, she was guarded by her three brothers, Gunther and Gernot and Giselher. The queen mother, who was named Ute, had much wealth, and dwelt with her three brave sons and fair daughter in a splendid and stately palace at Worms.

Now it chanced that, ere Siegfried came, Kriemhild dreamt a strange dream, and in the morning she spake regarding it to her mother, saying:

"Methought that I did possess a falcon which was strong and of noble seeming. It was faithful to my will, but there came two fierce eagles and slew it before my eyes. I wept; never did I endure greater sorrow."

The wise old queen said: "I can read thy dream, my child. Thou shalt have a strong and noble husband, but early shall he be taken from thee."

"Dear mother mine," pleaded the princess, "speak not to me of a husband. I desire not the love of any

[p. 363]

man. My heart's wish is to be ever fair, and to live with thee as I live now until death comes. I seek not the sorrow that love doth surely bring."

"If ever thou shalt have surpassing joy in this life," Ute said, "it shall be given thee by a husband's love. Ah, Kriemhild, thou wouldst indeed be a comely bride! May God send hither a knight who is worthy thee."

Kriemhild blushed. "Speak not again in such wise, mother mine," she said softly. "Full oft is it found by women that their bliss but leads to great sorrow. Neither shall I seek, so that I may avoid all misfortune."

But although the fair princess was long thus minded, the time came when she knew the love of a noble knight, to whom in the end she was wedded. But even as the falcon of her dream was slain, so was her husband. He fell by the hands of her own kinsmen, and so great was her desire for vengeance that many found death ere it was fulfilled.

Siegfried and his knights came riding towards the palace at Worms. Many marvelled greatly to behold them, so noble were they and so richly apparelled. Their raiment flashed with gold, and gold-decked were their bridles. In shining armour they came; high were their helms, and their shields were new and bright. On proudly stepping steeds they rode their stately way, with clink of sword and spear and clang of armour. Siegfried led them on. Nor ever was beheld a fairer knight; on his shield a crown was painted, and he wore the great and matchless blade Balmung, which men gazed upon with wonder.

Tidings were borne to the palace of the prince's approach. King Gunther wondered who he might be, so he bade Hagen to survey him from a window.

Hagen did so and said: "Never have I gazed upon

[p. 364]

Siegfried, but methinks this noble knight is him and no other. Surely he cometh hither to seek some new enterprise. . . It was this same prince who overcame the Nibelungs and possessed himself of their treasure. For he fought against giants and slew them, and wrested from the dwarf Alberich the Cloak of Obscurity. Never was there a greater hero. He killed the dragon of the forest and bathed himself in its blood, so that no weapon can wound him. Let Siegfried be given welcome, O king. Worthy is he indeed of the friendship of brave men."

The king went forth from the palace. He welcomed the prince. Then he spoke to him saying:

"Why hast thou come hither unto Worms?"

Siegfried made bold answer. "The fame of thy brave knights," he said, "hath gone abroad. I would fain combat with them and with thee for all thy lands and thy strongholds."

But the king spoke words of peace, and sought to have the prince for his ally. In the end his will prevailed, and Siegfried and the knights drank wine together with Gunther.

Thereafter they held games, and Siegfried outshone all others by reason of his strength and skill, for there were none who could throw boulders or shoot arrows like to him. When the knights tilted in the courtyard the eyes of many fair maidens were turned upon the stranger knight.

Fair Kriemhild peered forth from a palace window. She was well content to watch the noble prince. Siegfried beheld her not, but he knew that his loved one was gazing upon him. Yet at heart was he sad, and he wondered how he could win her.

Next day the king and all his men went forth to

 

Click to enlarge
KING GUNTHER WELCOMES SIEGFRIED
 From the painting by Schnorr von Carolsfeld

 

[p. 365]

hunt. Siegfried went with them, and Kriemhild fretted alone. Heavy, too, was the heart of the prince.

The weeks went past and the months; the knights hunted oft and vied one with another at sports, but the lovers met not. Nor did Siegfried ever once behold the fair lady he sought for his bride. So was a long year of waiting endured by the twain.

Now it chanced that two kings, who were brothers, desired to war against Gunther and invade his kingdom. Namely were they Ludger of the Saxons, and Ludgast of the Danes. They sent envoys to Worms to make demand of the tribute which was paid aforetime; but Gunther, having taken counsel of Siegfried and his knights, answered them "Nay", and called forth his war-men and made ready for conflict.

Ere long the armies met in battle array. The Danes and Saxons were in number forty thousand, and the strength of the Burgundians was not nigh so great. But great were the deeds of Siegfried, and on the field there was not his equal.

Ere the battle began the prince challenged King Ludgast to single combat, and fiercely did they fight one against the other. Hard were the blows that Siegfried dealt with his sword, Balmung, and in the end the king yielded and was taken prisoner. Ludgast's knights sought to rescue him, but the prince slew thirty, so that but one escaped.

Hagen guarded the royal prisoner, and Gernot rushed into the fray with but a thousand men. Bravely fought the Burgundians. But Siegfried was their strong arm that day. Thrice he drave through the mass of foemen, and the blood of slain men ran behind him like to the Rhine waters. At length he came nigh to Ludger, whom he sought. The Saxon king knew well that his brother

[p. 366]

of Denmark had been taken captive, and he was wroth thereat. He deemed that Gernot had done the deed. But soon he discovered the truth. Not long did he combat with the heroic prince when he beheld upon his shield a shining crown.

"Cease fighting," the king cried to his men, "for the devil hath sent against me bold Siegfried, the son of Siegmund."

So the Saxon banner was lowered, and King Ludger was Siegfried's prisoner. Five hundred valiant knights were taken captive also, and were led to Worms by Hagen and Gernot.

Now a trusty messenger bore unto Kriemhild secret tidings of the battle, and when she heard of Siegfried's mighty deeds her face reddened like to the rose, and her heart rejoiced not only because he had won great renown, but for reason that he had suffered no hurt in battle.

The two captive kings were brought before Gunther, and they made offer of much gold for life ransom.

Then did Gunther speak nobly. "Thou shalt go free," he said, "but first let there be a peace treaty betwixt us."

Readily did the royal prisoners pledge themselves, and they were honoured as guests. The wounded knights were tended with care, and those who sought not to depart from Worms ere they were healed, remained as friends. The war was ended and there was peace, and Siegfried prepared to return to the Netherlands; but Gunther pleaded with him to tarry yet awhile. That the prince consented to do because of the love he bore for Kriemhild.

A great banquet was held thereafter. From far and near brave knights assembled to rejoice because that

[p. 367]

victory was given to their arms. All the high-born ladies were bidden as guests, and Queen Ute came with a hundred maidens. Many knights awaited the coming of that fair company, hoping that their eyes would be gladdened by sight of the beauteous princess. Siegfried hoped and waited also.

Then appeared the fairest of the fair. Like to the rose-red dawn beaming amidst murky clouds she came before them all. . . .

Ended was then the trouble of one who had long brooded over her; at last did he behold his heart's desire in all her beauty. Many gems were sparkling on her garments. Her cheeks were rose red and shining with love. . . . None who was there did ever before gaze upon such beauty. As the cloud-girt moon excelleth the stars, so did Kriemhild surpass in splendour all the women who were about her. . . . Gallant knights and gay were stirred with reckless desire to display their prowess before that fair lady.

The chamberlains made clear a path before her, yet did the love-lorn war-men press eagerly to gaze upon Kriemhild.

Siegfried was gladdened and made sorrowful. "How, ah, how can I win thee!" he sighed. "Alas, my hope is vain! I dare not draw nigh to thee. . . . Would I were dead."

His cheeks by turns were red and white. . . . Peerless he stood apart, the great son of Siegmund; noble was his bearing, and as fair was he to look upon as if he were, painted upon parchment by a cunning master. Truly was it said that eye did never behold a lordlier warrior.

The busy chamberlains bade the knights to stand aback, and they gazed with gladness upon the fair ladies, richly robed, who came following Queen Ute.

[p. 368]

Then Gernot besought King Gunther that Siegfried be presented unto fair Kriemhild, and the prince was brought before his heart's desire, so that she might greet him. His sadness was swept from him, like dew before sunlight.

Modestly did the maiden greet the brave prince, and her cheeks reddened when he was nigh to her.

"Sir Siegfried, I bid thee welcome," she said; "a valiant and noble knight art thou."

His heart rejoiced thereat; he no longer despaired when he heard her voice, and, bowing low, he kissed her white hand. Then met their eyes, which were filled with secret love. The prince pressed her hand softly, and their hearts did beat together.

Never again had Siegfried such gladness of soul as at that sweet moment, when he turned to walk by her side. . . . All eyes were upon them, and one to the other said that never was there a knight worthier such a prize.

They went before the king, who bade Kriemhild to kiss the noble prince. . . . Nor did Siegfried conceive ere then that life had such joy in store for him.

King Gunther said: "Thus is Siegfried greeted because that many valiant men have fallen by his sword. . . . God grant that he shall never take leave of us."

So was the ceremony ended ere the banquet began. Kriemhild parted a little while from her lover. She went forth in radiant beauty amidst all her fair maidens; there were none like to her--none.

Ere long the lovers met again. The prince waited not for mass; he sought his heart's desire. So they spoke one to another, and she praised him sweetly, thanking God the while for his valour in battle.

 

Click to enlarge
SIEGFRIED AND KRIEMHILD
 From the painting by Schnorr von Carolsfeld

 

[p. 369]

Siegfried bowed low and said: "Thee shall I serve all my days, because that I love thee so."

For twelve days did the rejoicings continue, and each day the prince walked beside Kriemhild. . So was royal honour bestowed upon him. The guests made merry; they tilted in the courtyard, they feasted and drank wine together; but at length the time came for them to depart.

One by one they took leave of Ute and Kriemhild, as did also Siegfried, who was plunged thereat in despair.

"Never can I win her," he sighed. . . .

He went forth and called his men; his steed was quickly saddled, and he turned to ride homeward.

But Gunther, hearing of his sudden purpose, sent Giselher to plead with him to remain, saying: "Here thou canst ever see the fair maidens at will."

"Unsaddle the seeds," the prince commanded. "I thought to go forth but Giselher hath prevailed upon me to tarry yet a time."

Because of his love he remained there; nor could he have been happier elsewhere, for he spake to Kriemhild each day. . . . So time passed, but heavy was his heart with love. For love he tarried but to sorrow, and in the end he died for love.

Now it chanced that King Gunther desired greatly to have Brunhild for his bride. He spake with Siegfried thereanent. It was told that Brunhild had vowed to woo not any man who surpassed her not in feats. Great was her strength. First she flung a spear, and her wooer must needs excel her with his. Then cast she a stone, and leapt as far. The knight who failed in either trial was speedily slain. Many sought to woo her, and many died because of their boldness.

[p. 370]

Gunther boasted that never was there a woman born whom he could not vanquish. But Siegfried warned him, saying:

"Thou knowest not Brunhild, who hath the strength of four men. Go not unto her if thou dost prize thy life."

"So great is her beauty," the king said, "that I must needs try to win her."

Hagen counselled that he should take Siegfried with him; whereat the king offered the prince reward of honour and service if he would aid him to win Brunhild.

Siegfried said: "If thou shalt give me Kriemhild for wife, thee shall I serve in this thy enterprise. Nor other reward do I seek."

Gunther said: "Thine shall Kriemhild be when I return unto my kingdom with Brunhild for wife."

So they took vows together, and made plans for their journey. The king desired to have an army with him, but the prince prevailed upon him to go forth with only the brothers Hagen and Dankwart and himself. Then Siegfried said that he would take with him the Cloak of Obscurity, which he had won from the dwarf Alberich.

To Kriemhild went Gunther and the prince, and besought her to have fashioned for the four knights raiment both rich and goodly, and the king said they must needs have three changes for four days.

The fair princess set her maids to work, and she herself did cut out each garment. Snow-white silk from Araby and Zazamanc, and silk, green as clover, did the princess bring forth, and silks also from Libya and Morocco. With rare gems was the rich attire adorned, and wrought also with embroideries of gleaming gold. The black-spotted ermine was spared not, and linings were made of bright fishes' skins.

[p. 371]

When the king and his three brave knights were all apparelled, each one vowed that their equals were never before beheld.

Kriemhild pleaded with Gunther to go not forth upon his perilous enterprise, but he would not be changed in his intent. The princess wept when farewells were spoken, and to Siegfried she said:

"To thy care do I commend my brother, King Gunther."

Siegfried answered her: "Sorrow not, nor have any fear. If I die not, I shall bring him back again in safety to the Rhineland."

Kriemhild gave him thanks, and was comforted.

Then were their shields of gold and bright weapons and armour carried to the shore. They went aboard--Gunther, the king; Siegfried, Prince of the Netherlands, and the valiant brothers, Hagen and Dankwart.

The white sail was spread; a fair wind filled it, and the ship went down the Rhine.

Many fair maidens watched from windows. Kriemhild wept as the ship fared on.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 372]

  

CHAPTER XXXIV

  

How Brunhild and Kriemhild were won

Brunhild's Domain--The King and his Vassal--Wooing the Amazon--Her Challenge--Misgivings--Siegfried aids Gunther--Spear and Boulder Contests--Brunhild is won--Fears of Treachery--Siegfried's Secret Mission--Adventure in Nibelung--The Army--Return to Burgundy--Wedding Feast--Brunhild's jealousy--Struggle in Darkness--Invitation to Worms.

FOR the space of twelve days the ship voyaged across the sea, and then drew nigh to a strange shore. Siegfried had beheld it aforetime, and knew that it was Isenland, but Gunther and his knights gazed with wonder on the green lands and the many castles towering upon the headlands.

"He who did cause these strongholds to be built," the king said, "must indeed be a mighty monarch."

"Thou dost now behold the many towers and the fair domain of Queen Brunhild, "said Siegfried. "Yonder is the great castle of Isenland."

The ship was steered into a safe haven, and the prince warned his fellows to have care of their doings in presence of the queen. "Thou shalt say," he counselled them, "that I am but a vassal to King Gunther."

They went ashore and mounted their steeds. Siegfried held the stirrup to the king; the twain were clad in snow-white silken raiment which glittered with bright jewels. Hagen and Dankwart were apparelled in black.

Tidings of their approach were borne unto Queen Brunhild. A courtier spake unto her, saying:

[p. 373]

"There cometh hither, O queen, four goodly knights, and one is like unto Siegfried. With him is one of less noble seeming, but he rideth in front, and must therefore be a mighty king indeed. The other two resemble not one another. The first is black-browed and sullen, and fierce are his eyes; his fellow is fair to look upon and is yet of fearless bearing."

A force of knights bade the strangers to deliver up their arms. Unwilling was Hagen to do so, but Siegfried said that such was the custom of the country. Ill at ease were Gunther and Hagen and Dankwart when they beheld the queen and all her maidens coming towards them in midst of five hundred knights with drawn swords.

Brunhild spake to Siegfried only. She bade him welcome to her kingdom.

Then she asked of him: "Why dost thou come hither now with these goodly knights?"

Siegfried made answer: "I thank thee, O Queen, for thy greeting. This noble knight whom I serve is King Gunther. I have followed him because such is his will, else I should not have come hither. He desireth with all his heart to have thee for his bride."

"If such is his desire," Brunhild answered coldly, "the king must needs contend against me in the lists. If he proves to be the stronger, I shall be his bride; but if he fails, then must he and those who are with him be put to death."

Hagen said: "The king shall for certain prevail, because he doth so greatly desire to wed thee."

Brunhild answered him, saying: "Then must he cast the stone and leap to the spot where it falls, as I shall do, and he must also contend with me at spear-throwing. Be not too certain of his success. Consider well my challenge."

[p. 374]

Siegfried whispered to Gunther, saying: "Fear not, for I shall give thee mine aid."

Then the king spake boldly unto Brunhild. "For thy dear sake," he said, "I shall risk my life, contending against thee even as thou dost desire."

Brunhild was made angry, and so fierce was she of aspect when her armour was put on, that Hagen and Dankwart feared for the life of the king.

Meanwhile Siegfried had hastened towards the ship. He donned the Cloak of Obscurity, which gave to him the strength of twelve men. Then he returned to the lists unseen by any who were there.

A ring was made, and Brunhild's seven hundred knights stood round it fully armed with naked swords.

Then the great queen came forth. Four men carried her shield, and when Hagen beheld that he cried: "Alas! King Gunther, she is the devil's bride. We shall surely be slain."

Three men carried Brunhild's mighty spear. Gunther began to be afraid, and wished that he were back again in Burgundy.

"Not even the devil could escape her," said he.

Dankwart lamented that their arms were taken from them. "Had Hagen and I but our swords," he said, "Brunhild's war-men would be less arrogant." Hagen spake likewise, and the queen, who heard what was said, bade that their armour and weapons be returned to them.

Then was a boulder carried towards the queen by twelve knights. . . . The men of Burgundy were stricken with fear . . . . . "Would indeed that the devil had her," groaned Hagen.

Brunhild made ready to cast the stone. Gunther watched her with mute amaze. His heart sunk within

[p. 375]

him. Then it was that Siegfried, wrapped in the Cloak of Obscurity, stole to his side and touched his arm. . . .

The king started. He looked behind him, but saw no man. "Who laid his hand upon my arm?" he asked hoarsely.

"Hush!" whispered Siegfried. "I have come to help thee; so be not afraid."

First Brunhild flung her great spear against Gunther. He would have perished then, but Siegfried warded off the blow, yet not without hurt to himself.

Without delay the prince hurled back the spear, so that the haft struck the queen, for he desired not to slay her. She was felled to the ground. . . . Angrily she arose, but she praised the king for this prowess.

Thereafter Brunhild seized the mighty boulder with both hands, and, having flung it a great distance, she leapt beyond the place where it fell.

Gunther then went towards the boulder with the invisible prince. By the king did it seem to be lifted and thrown, but the mighty deed was accomplished by Siegfried, who cast the stone farther than Brunhild, and leapt farther with Gunther in his arms. [*1]

Wroth was the queen because that her feats were surpassed, but she spake to her knights, saying:

"Now is Gunther made king over ye all."

Her, face was flushed; her heart thirsted for vengeance.

[p. 376]

The warriors of Isenland came towards the King of Burgundy and laid their weapons at his feet. They deemed not that it was Siegfried who had accomplished the mighty deeds and saved Gunther's life.

Meanwhile the prince hastened from the field and returned to the ship, in which he concealed the Cloak of Obscurity. Thereafter he came towards the castle and spake to Gunther, asking him when the trial of feats would begin. So did he deceive Brunhild and her people.

The queen delayed her departure from Isenland, and began to assemble a mighty army. Fearing that she meant ill towards them, Siegfried spake to Gunther and said that he must needs hasten to the kingdom of the Nibelungs and bring back with him a thousand knights, who would be their sure defence. The king was made glad thereat.

Once again did Siegfried assume the Cloak of Obscurity. Then he entered a boat and made it sail swiftly over the waves. Many gazed seaward with wonder, thinking that the boat was driven by wind and tide, for they saw not the prince.

Night had fallen black when Siegfried reached the Nibelung kingdom. He went towards the door of the great mountain in which the treasure hoard was concealed. He knocked loudly, demanding admittance as a weary traveller. In a strange voice he spoke, and the giant porter, who was moved to anger, seizing his shield, opened the door.

"Darest thou with thine evil clamour to awake our people?" the porter growled, and then struck a savage blow. Siegfried parried, but the giant smote again. He came nigh to overcoming the prince, who was greatly alarmed, and yet at heart proud of his strong servant.

[p. 377]

[paragraph continues] For a time they fought hard together, but at length Siegfried threw down the giant and bound him.

Then came against him Alberich, the dwarf, clad in full armour; he fought with a mace which had seven balls on chains. The prince was for a time in great peril, but he overcame the dwarf also, and bound him.

Alberich then cried: "Had I not already vowed to serve another knight, thy slave would I be. Who art thou?"

Said the prince: "My name is Siegfried. Knowest thou me not?"

"Glad am I it is thee and no other," the dwarf said. "Worthy indeed art thou to be King of the Nibelungs."

Then Siegfried unbound the dwarf and the giant, and gave order that a thousand knights be brought forth to do him service. Alberich awakened the heroes who were within, and thirty thousand hastened to obey the ruler. He chose from among them a thousand, and they all sailed forth together in many fair ships towards Isenland, where Brunhild reigned as queen, and Gunther and Hagen and Dankwart awaited their coming.

When three days had passed, Brunhild and her maidens saw, looking from the castle windows, the white sails of many fair ships coming over the sea towards Isenland. The queen was stricken with alarm, fearing a sudden invasion, but Gunther told her that the vessels bore his vassal Siegfried and certain of his own warriors whom he had left behind.

Brunhild went to the beach, and the first she greeted as aforetime was Siegfried. He was clad in gorgeous raiment, and noble was his bearing. . . . Thus was Gunther rescued from peril once again by the Prince of the Netherlands.

The queen then realized she must needs depart from

[p. 378]

[paragraph continues] Isenland, and, having chosen her mother's brother to be chief ruler, she sailed towards Burgundy with Gunther and his knights. But she refused to be wed until she had reached the palace at Worms.

A swift and easy voyage was made, and when they were nigh to home Siegfried was sent ahead as envoy to Worms, so that Queen Ute and the Princess Kriemhild might know how the king had prospered.

Giselher beheld first the prince's approach, and he told his mother and fair sister that Siegfried was nigh. . . . Their hearts were filled with dark forebodings, but soon did the prince make them to rejoice with his glad tidings.

Siegfried sat by Kriemhild's side. Her face was rose-red with love, and it was her heart's desire to kiss him. . . .

"Gunther entreats thee to come to the shore, the prince said, "so that thou mayest welcome Brunhild hither."

Kriemhild went gladly with all her maidens, and Giselher led forth a great force of war-men. Brunhild was well pleased because that Gunther was a mighty ruler, and Kriemhild and she kissed one another with love. Together then they all made their way towards the stately palace at Worms.

A great banquet was held, and Gunther and Brunhild were wed. Thereafter in secret did Siegfried speak unto the king, saying:

"Hast thou no memory of thy vow? Thou didst swear that when Brunhild came hither I would be given Kriemhild for wife. . . . Well have I served thee."

Gunther said: "I forswear not my oath. What I can do that shall I do now."

So the king called Kriemhild before him and said:

 

Click to enlarge
BRUNHILD'S ARRIVAL AT WORMS
 From the painting by Schnorr von Carolsfeld

 

[p. 379]

[paragraph continues] "Thee did I promise unto Siegfried, and if thou wilt have him now my heart's desire will be fulfilled."

The princess answered: "Him I shall wed with great joy."

Then were the oaths sworn betwixt them. Proud and happy was the noble prince; maidenly and demure was the beauteous princess.

They all sat down to feast together. Brunhild was at Gunther's side. Her face was pale and cold, and when she beheld Siegfried and Kriemhild together she began to weep bitterly.

The king spake to her and asked: "Why dost thou sorrow? 'Twere more seemly to make merry, for thou art now Queen of Burgundy."

"I weep," Brunhild said, "because that thy sister hath been wedded to thy vassal. . . . Great is my shame thereat."

Gunther told his queen then that Siegfried had lands and castles that were his own. "Great riches hath he," said Gunther, "and therefore am I glad that Kriemhild hath wedded with him."

But Brunhild still sorrowed, and refused to be comforted.

When the feast was over they all returned to their chambers, but Brunhild said she would not be as a wife to the king until he told her all concerning Siegfried and Kriemhild. Gunther was wroth, and answered not, seeking to appease her with caresses, but she laid hands upon him so that he was overpowered. Then, binding the king with her waist girdle, she hung him on the wall.

Next morning Gunther told Siegfried what had happened, and the prince promised once again to be his aid. So, when night fell, he assumed the Cloak of Obscurity and entered Gunther's bedchamber, where he

[p. 380]

wrestled with the queen. A fierce conflict it was, and Brunhild deemed that her opponent was none other than her husband. In the end Siegfried prevailed, and he took from her the silken waist girdle which she wore, and drew from her finger unawares a ring of fine gold. [*1]

Thus was Brunhild subdued; after that hour she had but the strength of other women.

Siegfried gave unto Kriemhild the girdle and the ring which had caused many knights to die in the lists at the castle of Isenland.

When the rejoicings came to an end the guests went their ways. Siegfried returned unto his own land, and Siegmund and Sieglind kissed and embraced him and his beauteous bride.

"Henceforward," Siegmund said, "my son shall reign as king." So spake he unto his people, and they rejoiced because that Siegfried was a mighty warrior.

Ten years went past, and a son was born to Kriemhild. He was named Gunther. At the same time Brunhild had a child, and he was called Siegfried.

All went well until Brunhild, who thought of Kriemhild with jealous heart, prevailed upon Gunther to invite Siegfried and his queen to a feast at Worms.

Gary went forth with the king's message, and was received with gladness by Siegfried and Kriemhild, and they bade him tell unto Gunther that they would both attend the feast.

When Gary returned to Worms, Brunhild asked of him: "Is Kriemhild still as fair as she was aforetime?"

[p. 381]

The envoy answered her "Yea," and she brooded over it.

Brunhild still regarded Siegfried as a vassal to King Gunther, and she was angry because that he did not make payment of yearly tribute nor visit Worms to do homage, as befitted a subject ruler.

Footnotes

^375:1 The stone-throwing contest is reminiscent of the duels of Scottish bill giants and giantesses, who contend one against the other from height to height. Sometimes a battleaxe and sometimes a stone hammer, but most often a boulder, is thrown. In Wales a mountain giant flings a quoit. In Ross-shire a giantess contends against a giant and wounds him on the forehead. Giantesses are often island dwellers like Brunhild, whose northern origin is not disputed, even by German folklorists. The Queen of Isenland was evidently a Hag heroine of a people among whom Matriarchy lingered as late as it did in the Pictish areas of Scotland. The wooing of Scathach by Cuchulainn is of similar character to the wooing of Brunhild. In the subsequent duel between Cuchulainn and his son, the latter throws his spear blunt end foremost.

^380:1 Evidently her strength was due to the magic girdle. The dwarf Laurin, in Der Kleine Rosingarten, has a girdle which gives him the strength of twelve men. When Dietrich of Bern, wrestling with him, snatches it off, he has the dwarf in his power.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 382]

  

CHAPTER XXXV

  

The Betrayal of Siegfried

The Rival Queens--Their Quarrel--Brunhild plots against Siegfried--Hagen's Vow--The Tragic Hunt--How Siegfried was deceived--The Death Wound--Last Words--A Sad Homecoming--Kriemhild's Sorrow--Scene in Church--Blood Testimony--Gunther pleads for Forgiveness--Treasure taken to Worms--Where Hagen concealed it.

SIEGFRIED and Kriemhild went riding with a gay company towards Worms. There was joy in every heart, but it was fated to end in heavy grief. Prince Gunther journeyed not with them; never again did he behold his sire or his mother.

The aged King Siegmund rode forth with his son; he had desire to meet with Gunther and his knights, but had he known what sorrow was in store for him he would have fared not from the Netherlands.

Gunther gave to all of them right hearty welcome. The queens greeted one another with affection, but from that hour Brunhild could forbear not watching Kriemhild with jealous eyes. . . . When she beheld the twelve hundred knights of Siegfried, she said: "Never was there a subject king who had greater wealth." . . . The queen, however, gave meet entertainment to her guests; but ere long jealousy overcame love; the heart of Brunhild grieved because that Siegfried and his queen were so rich and powerful.

It fell that on a day when the knights tilted in the courtyard Kriemhild lauded her husband's prowess.

[p. 383]

"Siegfried," she said, "excelleth every other knight as the moon doth the diminishing stars. For good reason take I pride in him."

"Valiant he may be," answered Brunhild, "yet thy brother Gunther surpasseth him, for he is the greatest of all kings."

"My brother is indeed a noble knight," Kriemhild said, "yet is my husband his equal."

Said Brunhild: "Did not the king surpass me in feats of strength in Isenland, what time Siegfried remained in the ship? He is but my husband's vassal. From his own lips I heard him confess it."

"Were Siegfried but a vassal," Kriemhild retorted, "thinkest thou that my brother would have given me unto him for wife? I pray thee to repeat not what thou hast said."

"That indeed I shall, said Brunhild. "Siegfried is our subject, and his knights await to do us service when called upon."

Angry was Kriemhild. "No service canst thou claim," she said. "My husband is greater than thine. If he were not he would have to pay tribute, and never hath he done so. I pray thee to cease thine annoyance.

"Boast not with empty pride," Brunhild cried angrily; "I am honoured far above thee."

"Know now," retorted Siegfried's queen, "that my husband is no vassal to thine, and is indeed a greater monarch. The kingdom of the Nibelungs he won by his strong right arm, and he hath inherited the Netherlands from his sire. To no man doth he owe allegiance. I am indeed a free and a mighty queen. Dare not to chide me. Thou shalt see when I enter church in thy company that I shall not walk behind."

[p. 384]

"If thou art not my subject, then shalt thou go by thyself, nor walk in my train," Brunhild said.

In anger did Kriemhild leave the Queen of Burgundy, and she bade her maidens to put on their richest attire.

Many wondered to behold the queens walking apart. . . . It was doomed that many should sorrow because of that in aftertime.

When they met before the church Kriemhild went forward to enter first, and Brunhild forbade her. "Thou art my vassal," she said; "walk not before me."

"'Twere better that thou shouldst hold thy peace," retorted Kriemhild; "how can a vassal's paramour walk before a queen?"

"What dost thou mean?" Brunhild asked angrily. "Whom dost thou call a paramour?"

"None other than thee," answered Kriemhild. "Did not my husband win thee for thine? Thou didst prefer him thou now callest a vassal, forsooth. . . . Speak not to me any longer. Thou knowest the truth now."

Then Kriemhild entered the church, and Brunhild followed her, weeping sore. There was deadly hate betwixt them, and for that reason many a goodly knight went to his grave.

When the service was over, Brunhild confronted Kriemhild, saying: "Thou didst call me a paramour. I demand thee now to prove thy words."

"'Twere easy to prove them," retorted Kriemhild proudly, showing her rival the ring and the girdle which Siegfried had taken from her.

"A paramour to Siegfried thou wert indeed," she said.

Brunhild bowed her head with shame, weeping bitterly; and when Gunther asked her why she sorrowed she told him what Kriemhild had said.

 

Click to enlarge
KING GUNTHER AND BRUNHILD
 From the painting by Schnorr von Carolsfeld

 

[p. 385]

Then was Siegfried brought before Gunther, and in Brunhild's presence he swore that he had never uttered what Kriemhild had boasted of.

"I grieve that my wife hath made Brunhild to sorrow," he said.

The knights who were there spake one to another. "Would that women might cease their gossip," said one. "Forbid your wives to boast about ye, else there will be strife and shame among us all."

But Brunhild was not comforted. It chanced that Hagen came nigh to her and found her weeping. He asked her why she did grieve so, and when she told him what Kriemhild had said, he waxed wroth because he had sworn allegiance unto Brunhild and served her faithfully, guarding her honour and her life.

"For this insult," he said fiercely, "Siegfried shall pay with his heart's blood. I shall avenge thee, O queen, or die."

Hagen spake to Gunther and the other knights in like manner, and he roused them all to enmity against Siegfried, who reeked not of their secret plotting.

Hagen first contrived that certain knights should visit Worms, making pretence that they came as envoys from King Ludgast declaring war against King Gunther. Siegfried made offer of his service, and Kriemhild was proud thereat, yet did she fear that ill would befall him because that he was reckless and overdaring in battle.

Hagen spake with her treacherously, and she told him that when her husband bathed his body in the dragon's blood a leaf covered, a spot betwixt his shoulders, and that if he were wounded there he would surely die. Brunhild's knight rejoiced in secret, but he promised to defend Siegfried, and counselled Kriemhild, that she should mark the spot by sewing a small red cross upon his clothing,

[p. 386]

so that he might know where to defend her loved one.

Then Hagen spake to the king, and Gunther arranged that they should go through the forest on a great hunt which would last many days.

Go not forth, Kriemhild pleaded with her husband. "I dreamt that thou wert given chase by two wild boars, and I saw the forest flowers made red with blood."

"Fear not for me, my heart's love," Siegfried said; "I go not a-hunting with foemen, but with thine own kin."

Kriemhild wept bitterly. "Alas! I fear for thy life," she cried. "But yesternight I did dream that thou wert caught betwixt two hills, which fell upon thee, and thou wert lost to my sight. . . . Stay with me here, Siegfried, else I shall sorrow without end."

Siegfried kissed and embraced her with tenderness, and then hastened to join the hunt.

She watched him through her tears as he went from her. Never again did she behold her dear one in life.

There was none like to Siegfried at the hunt. Many wild animals he slew, and he caught a bear alive and bound it, and when he set it free they all gave chase, but it would have escaped but for his valour.

They afterwards sat down to feast together. Food there was in plenty but no wine. Siegfried made complaint thereat, for he was grievously athirst, and he vowed he would never again hunt with them. Little did he dream that a plot was laid to accomplish his death.

Hagen said that there was a clear spring near by, from which they could take refreshment, and he challenged Siegfried to race with him thither for a wager.

Hagen stripped off his clothing, but Siegfried ran in full armour, carrying his shield and spear and his bow and quiver, and yet he reached the spring first. But the hero

[p. 387]

drank not. He cast off his armour, and laid his weapons on the grass to await the coming of Gunther, the king, so that he might have refreshment before any other.

Dearly did he pay for his courtesy. When the king had taken his fill, and Siegfried stooped down to drink, Hagen drew away stealthily the sword and the bow, and then plunged the spear through the hero's back at the spot where Kriemhild had embroidered the cross. He drew not forth the weapon, but made hurried escape. Never before did he run so swiftly from any man. Siegfried sprang up in anger, the spear sticking fast in his back, and sought for bow or sword to take vengeance on Hagen. But he found his shield only, and flung it after the traitor. It smote him to the ground, and the forest echoed the blow. Had Siegfried but his sword, in that hour Hagen would have been slain.

Snow-white grew the cheeks of that sore-wounded man, the lordly guest of Gunther: he sank to the ground; his strength went from him; death was in his face. Alas! many a fair woman wept tears for him in aftertime.

Among the flowers lay Kriemhild's noble husband, and they were made red with his life blood.

He spake faintly, bitterly reproaching those who had plotted treacherously against him. He called them cowards all. "I have served ye well," he said, "and thus am I repaid. The children yet unborn shall suffer for this foul deed."

Gunther wept. "Weep not for treachery, thou from whom treachery hast come," Siegfried said.

"Now is all danger past," cried Hagen; "I rejoice that he is brought low."

"Boast not, murderous man," Siegfried warned him; "in fair conflict I had naught to fear from thee. . . . Oh,

[p. 388]

[paragraph continues] Kriemhild, Kriemhild, my deepest grief is for thee! . . . Would that our son had never been born, because he must bear from his enemies the bitter reproach that his kinsmen are murderers and traitors."

Gunther he reproached for his ingratitude. "I have saved thy life," he said; "I have been the guardian of thine honour. This foul deed is my payment . . . . If thou hast any honour left, protect my wife, thy sister . . . ."

He groaned, for his wound afflicted him sore. Again he spake saying: "In days to come ye shall suffer for this monstrous deed; yourselves have you slain when ye slew me."

He spake no more. Among the blood-steeped flowers he struggled with death. . . .

They laid his corpse upon a golden shield and bore it towards Worms, and in the darkness they left it at the door of Kriemhild's dwelling.

In the morning, when the fair queen was going forth to prayers, she saw the dead body of Siegfried.

"My husband is dead," she cried. "Brunhild hath desired that he should be slain, and by Hagen was he murdered." Heavy was her heart with grief unutterable, nor could she be comforted.

Old King Siegmund embraced his dead son and wept bitterly.

Tenderly was Siegfried's body lifted and borne within; his wounds were washed; in grave robes was he dressed and laid upon a bier.

After three days of mourning the body was borne to the church, and many assembled there to gaze with sorrow upon the dead hero.

Gunther came and said that Siegfried had been slain by robbers. "I sorrow because that he is dead," he told Kriemhild.

[p. 389]

"If there was sorrow in thine heart, she answered him, "my husband would not now be laid in death. Would I were dead and he were still alive!"

When Hagen approached the body of Siegfried the spear wound bled afresh. Thus was it proved to all who were there that he was indeed the murderer.

Great was the mourning on the day of Siegfried's funeral. Many wept in the streets. Kriemhild went to the grave, and or ever the coffin was covered over she besought to gaze once again upon the face of her husband. Her desire was granted her, and she lifted up that fair head in her white hands and kissed the death-cold lips of Siegfried. Then fell she in a swoon, nor did she open her eyes again until next morning.

Siegmund departed soon afterwards and journeyed to his own land. But Kriemhild would not return with him, because she desired to be avenged for her husband's death. She was ever mourning, but Brunhild cared not in her pride.

At length Gunther sought her forgiveness, deeming that she had mourned overlong. Kriemhild said: "I shall forgive him with my lips but never with my heart." Yet was she at length constrained to pardon all who had plotted the death of Siegfried, save Hagen, whom she could not suffer to look upon.

Hagen spake to Gunther of the Nibelung treasure, which he could not but think over, and the king contrived that Kriemhild should send for it. So came it to pass that a strong army was sent unto Siegfried's kingdom.

The dwarf Alberich lamented the loss of the Cloak of Obscurity; yet did he deliver up the vast treasure, in the midst of which was a magic rod which would give to the one who possessed it anything that might be wished for. But none knew its virtues.

[p. 390]

Thus was all the wealth of the Nibelungs brought unto Kriemhild. She distributed gold to rich and poor, and many adventurous knights paid visit to Worms to share of her bounty. Wages she gave to a great number, so that ere long she had a strong force of war-men at her service.

Hagen was greatly alarmed thereat, and spoke unto the king of Kriemhild's doings. He counselled that the treasure should be taken from her; but Gunther refused to do any harm unto his sister because of the vows he had sworn. Then did Hagen seize the hoard by force, and carried it away. He sank it in the Rhine at Lochheim, with hope to enrich himself in after-time.

So was Kriemhild's immediate hope of vengeance cut off. She took her departure from Worms and went to dwell with her mother at Lorsch. There she embroidered tapestry with pictures of Balder, who had by his brother been slain.

There she tarried for many years, biding the hour of vengeance. Tidings at length came from beyond the Rhine which brought nearer the fulfilment of Siegfried's dying words: "Yourselves have ye slain when ye slew me."

 

Click to enlarge
THE DEATH OF SIEGFRIED
 From the painting by F. Leeke. By Permission of Franz Hanfstaengl

 

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 391]

  

CHAPTER XXXVI

  

The Nibelungen Tragedy

Kriemhild weds Etzel--Her Desire for Vengeance--The Festival--Invitation to Gunther and his Knights--Hagen's Bravery--The Doom journey--Dietrich and Hildebrand--How the Guests were received--Treachery of the Queen--Scene at Banquet--Its Tragic Ending--Dietrich intervenes--Hall in Flames--Unconquered Heroes--Gunther and Hagen overcome--Gladness ends in Grief.

IT fell that thirteen years after Siegfried's death Queen Helche of the Huns died, and King Etzel [*1], who was a heathen, sought another bride. Rudiger, the rich margrave, surnamed "The Good", was sent as envoy to Worms to win Kriemhild; whereat Gunther was made glad, because Etzel was a mighty monarch, but grim Hagen grew angry, fearing that the widow of Siegfried would stir up enmity against them. Kriemhild ceased not to grieve for him whom she had loved, but her brothers and Queen Ute urged her to be wed to the mighty monarch of the Huns, and at length she gave her consent. Then sent she to Hagen for the Nibelung treasure, which she desired to distribute among the Hun warriors; but he refused to give it up saying: "She shall not give it unto those who are my foemen."

Kriemhild was made wroth thereat. Yet had she a portion of the treasure left, and she gave great gifts to the knights who came with Rudiger.

The widowed bride had lost not her great beauty

[p. 392]

despite her long and deep sorrow, and when she came to the Court of Etzel, the courtiers vowed that she was even more fair than was Queen Helche. She kissed the king, and when she was wed she was kissed by twelve noble knights, among whom was Bloedel, the brother of Etzel, and the great warrior king, Dietrich of Bern, who had taken refuge at Etzel's Court when his uncle, Ermenrich, had by treacherous doings possessed himself of the kingdom of the Amelungs. So it came that Kriemhild had friendship and service from many strong war-men. Great was her power. All the treasure that Hagen had left her she gave to the knights, and at length she said unto herself:

"Now am I made powerful, and can strike against the enemies of Siegfried, for whom my heart still calleth."

As the days went past, and the years, her desire for vengeance grew stronger. There was not a Hun knight who would not do her willing service. Yet none did conceive of her fierce intent.

A son was born to King Etzel, and his name was Ortlieb. Like was he in countenance to fair Kriemhild, and the king loved her more dearly because of her child. So at length when she craved of him a boon he said that he would grant it willingly; and the queen besought him that he should send envoys to Worms and invite, unto a festival at his Court, Gunther and all his knights. As she desired, so was it done. Kriemhild spoke in secret to the envoys and bade them not to leave Hagen behind.

Gunther received the message gladly, nor suspected aught of Kriemhild's evil desire; but Hagen warned the king in counsel with his knights, saying: "We dare not go from here unto the Court of Etzel. Our lives ane in peril, for Kriemhild forgets not who slew her husband Siegfried. . . . Her memory is long."

[p. 393]

Thereupon Gunther's brothers taunted Hagen. "Thou knowest thine own guilt," one said; "therefore thou hast need to protect thyself well. 'Twere better thou didst remain at Worms, while those who fear not sojourn among the Huns."

Hagen was made wroth. "No man among you feareth less to venture forth than I do, and with thee shall I go if ye are determined to visit the Court of Etzel."

So it was arranged that they should set out forthwith, and Hagen spake after that of their journey as "the death ride".

Queen Ute had great desire that her sons should tarry in the kingdom. "I have dreamt an evil dream," she said. "Methought that all the birds in fair Burgundy were slain."

"He who is led by dreams," said Hagen, "is without honour and no hero. Let us unto the festival of Kriemhild."

Many women wept when they set forth. With Gunther rode a thousand and sixty knights, and his army did number full nine thousand men. When they reached the Danube River they found it to be high and running swift. Hagen sought for the ferryman, who desired not to take them across unless he were given rich reward. While searching, he saw bathing in a brook certain water fairies. He went stealthily towards them and possessed himself of their vestments. They had need, therefore, to make known to the fierce knight how he and all who were with him would fare upon their journey. One did promise that they would prosper and win great honour, but another said: "Twere better to turn back. . . . Ye are all doomed. Who rideth unto the Court of Etzel rideth to death. Nor shall one return again unto Worms save the priest."

[p. 394]

Then Hagen met with the ferryman and slew him for his boldness. He seized the boat, and, returning unto Gunther, he ferried across the knights and all their followers. As he crossed with the last company of men he beheld the priest among them, and remembering the prophecy of the water fairy, he seized him there and flung him overboard. But, although the man could not swim, he was driven over the waves and reached the shore in safety. When Hagen saw that the priest could return unto Burgundy, he knew that the foretelling of the water fairy was true, and said unto himself: "These, our warriors, are all dead men."

When they landed, Hagen splintered the boat in pieces. He was resolute indeed, and made certain that no man should turn back. The Bavarians came against them to avenge the ferryman's death, but they were beaten back, and Gunther and his war-men marched forward until they came unto Bechlaren, where Rudiger the Good gave them generous and hospitable entertainment and many gifts.

Tidings of their approach were borne unto Kriemhild. "The day of reckoning is at hand," she said unto herself. "Fain would I now slay the man who did destroy my happiness. . . . He shall pay dearly because that he hath made me to sorrow."

Aged Hildebrand spake unto Dietrich of Bern of the coming of the Burgundians, and counselled that he should ride forth to greet them. Hagen was a dear war friend to Dietrich aforetime, and there was good will. betwixt them. So the fierce knight of Burgundy gave his friend warm greetings.

Dietrich was made glad, yet did he inwardly grieve, when he beheld the warriors from Worms.

"Know ye not," he said, "that Kriemhild hath

[p. 395]

ceased not to sorrow for Siegfried? . . . This very day I did hear her lamenting because that he was dead."

Gunther reasoned that Etzel had bidden them thither with right royal welcome, and that Kriemhild had also sent warm greetings, but Hagen knew well that sorrow awaited them.

The Hun king knew not that his queen plotted against his guests, and his welcome was hearty and frank; but Kriemhild was haughty and cold. She kissed but her brother Giselher, who had no part in Siegfried's death. Unto Hagen she spake, saying:

"Hast thou brought hither the hoard of the Nibelungs which thou didst rob from me?"

Hagen answered: "I have touched it not. It is hidden below the Rhine waters. There shall it lie until the Day of Judgment."

"So thou hast brought it not," she said coldly. "Many a day have I grieved for it, and for the noble knight whose possession it was."

"I have brought but my weapons and my armour," said Hagen defiantly.

"I need not gold," Kriemhild sighed; "but I would fain have recompense for murder and robbery."

Then were the Burgundians, at the queen's desire, asked to lay down their arms; but Hagen made refusal for himself and the others, saying that it was the custom of the Burgundians to be fully armed on the first three days of a festival.

It chanced that soon afterwards Kriemhild urged certain of her knights to slay Hagen; but they forbore, fearing as they did his dark brows and quick-flashing eyes.

When night fell the guests were conducted to their dwelling. Grim Hagen and Volker, the minstrel, fearing the treachery of Kriemhild, sought not to take rest.

[p. 396]

[paragraph continues] They clad themselves in their bright armour. Then they took their swords and shields and stood outside the door to guard their companions. After a time Volker took his fiddle, and, sitting upon a stone within the porch, he played merry airs which gladdened the hearts of those who were within, and they forgot their anxieties. Then he gave them soothing music and sweet, so that they were lulled to sleep. Thereafter he took up his shield again and stood beside Hagen at the door to guard the Burgundians against Kriemhild's war-men.

In the midst of the night the fierce Huns made stealthy approach; but when they beheld the knights keeping guard they turned away. Volker desired to challenge them to combat, but Hagen forbade him, and Volker cried out to the followers of Kriemhild: "Cowards, would ye venture hither to slay men in their sleep?" They answered him not. Kriemhild grieved because that her plan had failed, but she ceased not to plot against the guests.

A tournament was held in Etzel's courtyard, and Volker slew a Hun warrior. But for the king, vengeance would have been taken for that cause. "He hath been slain without intent," Etzel said; "let my guests go forth unharmed."

Kriemhild then spake to Dietrich of Bern and old Hildebrand, beseeching their aid to encompass the death of Hagen.

Hildebrand answered: "One man is not sufficient to overcome him." And Dietrich, answering her, said: "Speak not of this again, O Queen, I pray thee. These, thy kinsmen, have never done aught against me. 'Twill bring thee shame if thou dost any hurt to them, because they are now thy guests. It is not for me to avenge the death of Siegfried."

[p. 397]

Thereafter did Kriemhild plead with Bloedel, King Etzel's brother, making him promise of rich reward, and he promised to achieve her purpose. He went forth to attack Gunther's men with a thousand of his followers. Dankwart was in command when Bloedel fell upon them without warning, and fierce was the conflict.

Meanwhile Gunther and Hagen and other knights sat at feast with King Etzel. Kriemhild caused her son Ortlieb to enter and sit nigh to Hagen, and the king said: "Lo! here cometh my only son to be among his kinsmen."

Hagen loved not the lad. "He hath a weak face," he said. "I could never be a guest at his Court."

Suddenly Dankwart rushed into the feasting hall. He alone of all the war-men had escaped the sword of Bloedel, whom he slew; his body was red with the blood of foemen. "Why dost thou tarry thus, brother Hagen?" he cried; "our men are slaughtered in their dwelling."

"Guard the door," cried Hagen, and seizing his sword be smote off the head of Prince Ortlieb before his father's eyes. Then he slew the lad's tutor and cut off the right hand of a minstrel who had borne Kriemhild's message unto Worms. Volker drew his blade also and made slaughter. In vain did the three kings, Etzel and Gunther and Dietrich, make endeavour to subdue the fray. Many Hun knights were slain, for the Burgundians were seized with battle fury and sought dire vengeance. They cut their way up and down the hall, and there was none who could stand against them.

Then did Kriemhild plead with Dietrich of Bern, beseeching his aid, what time he watched, standing upon a bench, the doughty deeds of his old war comrade Hagen.

"Save me and King Etzel from this our dire peril," cried the queen.

[p. 398]

"I can but try," Dietrich answered. "Not for many years have I beheld such fierce fighting."

Then he uttered forth a great shout, and his voice was like to the blast of a war horn. Gunther heard him, and called upon his men to pause in the fray. "Mayhap," he said, "we have slain knights of Dietrich."

"No harm have ye done me or mine," Dietrich said, "but I ask of thee that I and those with me may have thy permission to go forth in safety."

"Thy wish is granted," answered Gunther.

Then did Dietrich clasp the fainting Queen Kriemhild with one arm and took King Etzel's with the other. Thus did he leave the hall with six hundred of his knights. Rudiger went also with five hundred. Neither sought to take part in the fray.

Thereafter was the conflict waged again with great fury, nor did it pause until not a Hun was left alive in the hall.

The Burgundians rested awhile; then they threw out the bodies of their foemen. Kinsmen of the slain mourned greatly.

King Etzel seized his shield and desired them to combat against the stranger at the head of his men; but Kriemhild warned him that he could not withstand the blows of fierce Hagen. But his knights had to hold him back by force, and, seeing this, Hagen taunted the king.

"The darling of Siegfried and her new husband are faint-hearted," he cried. "Ha, Etzel! Siegfried had thy lady to wife before thee. I slew him. Why, then, shouldst thou be angry with me?"

Kriemhild heard with anger. "Much gold shall I give, and castles and land," said the queen, "unto the knight who shall slay Hagen."

Volker shouted defiantly: "Never before beheld I so

[p. 399]

many timorous knights. Cowards all! ye have taken of the king's substance and in his hour of trial ye desert him. I cry shame upon ye all."

Many bold warriors rushed against the knights of Burgundy. Stranger knights who were there fought also. The nimble Iring of Denmark struck mighty blows, and in the end he wounded Hagen. Queen Kriemhild praised him when he returned weary from the fray, and prompted him to return again. When he renewed the conflict, however, Hagen slew him.

So fell many brave men, and the long summer day ended and darkness fell. The tumult ceased.

Then the Burgundians besought King Etzel that they should be permitted to leave the hall and fight in battle, but Kriemhild forbade it.

Her brother Giselher spake to the vengeful queen saying: "I deserve not death at thy hands. I was ever faithful unto thee. I came hither because that I did bear thee love and thou didst invite me. Thou must needs now show mercy unto us."

"Can I show mercy who hath never received it?" she answered him. "The vile Hagen slew my child, so those who stand by him must suffer with him. But this I shall promise thee--if Hagen be now delivered up a truce will be granted forthwith."

Gernot answered: "Never shall thy wish be granted. Rather would we die than ransom our lives with a single knight."

"Then must we die indeed like to brave men, Giselher said.

"My brother Hagen is not without friends," cried Dankwart; "ye who have refused quarter shall not receive it. Not at our hands."

In the midst of the night Kriemhild bade her,

[p. 400]

followers to set fire to the hall. That they did right gladly. The flames raged furiously, and one of them within cried: "Woe is me! we are doomed to die. Rather would I have fallen in battle."

Great was the heat, and the knights were tortured with thirst. Then did Hagen bid one of them to drink the blood of the slain war-men. One who suffered much knelt beside a corpse and drank the blood. The draught made him strong again. "Better is it than wine," he said.

The others did likewise, and were all refreshed so that they were able to endure their sufferings amidst the flames. Burning faggots fell upon them, but they protected themselves with their shields. Terrible was the heat. Never again shall heroes suffer as did these that night.

"Stand close to the walls," Hagen commanded; "your armour shall protect ye; let the blood quench the flaming brands."

When morning broke, the Huns wondered greatly to behold Hagen and Volker again standing on guard at the hall door.

Fierce attack was again made by the Huns, but they were beaten back. Nor did the conflict have pause until the last of Etzel's great knights was slain.

Then did Kriemhild and the king make appeal to Rudiger to aid them, but he desired not to attack the brave Burgundians.

"Shall I slay those whom I did entertain in my own house?" he exclaimed. "I forget not past friendship."

Yet was he constrained to fight, and he mourned his lot with the Burgundians.

"Would that I had a strong shield like thee," Hagen said; "mine own is hewn and battered sore."

 

Click to enlarge
THE FIGHT ON THE STAIRS OF ETZEL'S PALACE
 From the painting by Schnorr von Carolsfeld

 

[p. 401]

Rudiger gave Hagen his own shield ere he fought at Etzel's command with those whom he loved. Fierce was the conflict and long, and in the end Gernot and Rudiger slew one another.

Then did Wolfhart, the bold knight of Bern, lead on the followers of Dietrich to avenge the death of Rudiger. One by one they were cut down by Gunther's heroes, save Hildebrand, who slew Volker. But Hagen made vengeful attack and wounded him. The old warrior fled. He hastened unto Dietrich, and cried: "All our men are slain, and of the Burgundians but Gunther and Hagen remain alive."

Dietrich was wroth. He sorrowed for his brave knights. No longer could he withhold from the fray. So he put on his armour and went unto the Hall. He first bade Gunther and Hagen to surrender; but they defied him.

Dietrich drew his sword and fell upon Hagen, whom he speedily wounded.

"Battle-weary art thou," Dietrich cried; "I shall slay thee not."

As he spake thus he caught Hagen in his arms and overpowered him. So was the valiant hero taken captive.

Dietrich led him bound before Queen Kriemhild, and her heart rejoiced. "Now is all my sorrow requited," she said "thee, Dietrich, shall I thank until my life hath end."

The Prince of Bern said: "Slay him not. He may yet serve thee, and thus make good the evil he hath done."

Hagen was cast into a dark dungeon, there to await his doom.

Dietrich then fought against Gunther, who. was more

[p. 402]

fierce than Hagen had been. Indeed he came nigh to slaying Dietrich. But he was at length borne down, and taken prisoner and bound.

When the King of Burgundy was taken before Kriemhild, she said: "I welcome thee, O Gunther."

He answered her: "If thy welcome were made with love, I would thank ye, but I know well that thou dost mock."

Dietrich pleaded with the queen that Gunther and Hagen should be spared, but his words fell upon ears that heard not.

Kriemhild went unto Hagen and demanded that he should return unto her the treasure he had stolen.

The knight answered her: "Vows I took not to reveal where the hoard is hidden so long as my king liveth."

Then did the queen command that her brother should be slain. With her own white hand she held high by the hair before Hagen the dripping head of Gunther.

"Now all thy brothers are dead," Hagen cried. "Where the treasure is concealed is known but to God and myself alone. . . . Thou devil, thou shalt never possess it!"

So wroth was Kriemhild that she seized a sword and smote off the head of Hagen.

"Alas," cried King Etzel, "the boldest knight who ever fought in battle hath fallen by a woman's hand!"

Old Hildebrand, recking not what would happen him, drew his sword and smote the queen. A loud cry broke from her lips, and ere long Kriemhild died.

So ended the festival of King Etzel, as gladness must ever end in grief.

What befell thereafter I can tell not. Knights and

 

Click to enlarge
DEITRICH OVERCOMES HAGEN
 From the painting by Schnorr von Carolsfeld

 

[p. 403]

soldiers, wives and maids, were seen weeping, and heard lamenting for their friends.

So ends the Nibelungenlied.

.       .       .       .       .       .

Minstrels, singing the sorrowful lay of the death of Siegfried, and the fall of the Nibelungs, have told that Queen Brunhild and Queen Ute sat side by side embroidering on tapestry the death of Balder.

Again and again did Brunhild say to the mother of Gunther: "Each time I picture Balder, his face grows like unto that of Siegfried."

Soon tidings were brought to them of the death of Gunther and all his men. Brunhild wept not. She went out into the darkness, nor ever returned again.

When search was made, she was found lying dead in the grave mound of Siegfried, whom she had loved.

Footnotes

^391:1 Attila, "the scourge of God".

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 404]

  

CHAPTER XXXVII

  

Dietrich of Bern

Hildebrand's Pupil--Alberich the Dwarf--Grim and Hilde--The Magic Sword--Conflict in the Cavern--Giant and Hag are slain--Great Sigenot--Dietrich taken Prisoner--In the Dragon's Lair--Hildebrand put to Shame--Giant overcome--Heime's Challenge--Wieland's son Witege--Fierce Combat --Dietrich in Peril--Peace Terms.

DIETRICH was the son of great Dietmar, King of Bern, whose brother was the fierce King Ermenrich. He was but seven years old when there came to his father's Court the battle hero, Hildebrand, far famed for valorous deeds. Unto that great warrior was given the care of the young prince, so that he might gain manly wisdom and skill in feats of arms. Fast friends they became ere long, and faithful were they one to another in after years, until death did thrust them apart.

It chanced that when the lad grew strong, and had desire for daring adventure, a giant and a giantess, whose names were Grim and Hilde, ravaged the land with fire, and did slaughter many goodly subjects. Dietmar raised a mighty army and went out against them, but he could discover not the hiding place of the monsters, who ever came forth unawares to work their evil designs.

Now Dietrich had great desire to combat with the giant and giantess, for he was brave as he was strong, and he sought most of all to win a warrior's renown.

[p. 405]

[paragraph continues] With Hildebrand he hunted one fair morning in a deep forest. They came to a green and open space, when suddenly a dwarf started up and ran to escape them. The lad gave speedy chase, and soon he had the little man in his power. His name was Alberich, and he had fame as a cunning robber and a wonder smith. Dietrich desired to slay him, but the dwarf cried out:

"Kill me not, O Prince of Bern, and thou shalt have for thyself the great sword which I forged for Grim and Hilde. It is called Naglering, nor is its equal to be found in the world. I shall also guide thee unto a cavern where much treasure lies hidden."

Dietrich promised to spare the life of the dwarf if his promise were fulfilled, and Alberich said: "Thou must needs combat with Grim, who hath the strength of twelve men, and also with Hilde, who is even more to be feared, ere thou canst possess thyself of the treasure."

Binding vows were then taken by Alberich, who promised to return at eventide with the wondrous sword. As the dwarf promised so did he do. He met Dietrich and Hildebrand close to a great mountain cliff, and delivered up the shining sword, Naglering. Proud was the lad of that wondrous weapon, which brought him, as it befell, great fame in after years.

The dwarf then vanished, and Hildebrand and Dietrich went towards the cliff. Ere long they found the secret door and opened it. The sunlight streamed within, and they beheld, lying beside a fire, gaunt Grim and Hilde, who both at once sprang up angrily and desired vengeful combat. The giant sought for his Naglering, but found it not. Cunningly indeed had the robber dwarf taken it from him.

The giant then seized a burning log and leapt at Dietrich. Fast and ferocious were his blows, and the

[p. 406]

lad would full surely have been slain but for the sword he wielded.

Hilde sprang at Hildebrand and wrestled with him. Long and fierce was the struggle, because the warrior had great strength, but the giantess held him tightly round the neck, until, gasping for breath, Hildebrand fell to the ground. So was he completely overcome, and the end of his days seemed to be very nigh.

In vain the old warrior called upon Dietrich, who waged desperate conflict with the giant. But at length the lad prevailed. Leaping aside to escape a mighty blow, he smote Grim with Naglering and cut off his head. So perished the ferocious giant, who had laid desolate a great part of the kingdom of Dietmar.

Hildebrand was meanwhile in sore distress. Hilde began to bind him, so that he might be put to death by torture, but Dietrich smote her so great a blow that he clave her body in twain. But she relaxed not thereat her ferocious embrace of the swooning warrior. Such was her power that she united her severed parts before the lad's eyes, and caused herself to be made whole again. So Dietrich smote her the second time right through the middle, and yet again she was joined together as before.

Hildebrand cried faintly: "Leap thou between the Hag's severed body when thou dost strike next, and turn thine eyes from her."

As the warrior bade, so did Dietrich do. He cut Hilde in twain, and immediately separated her body with his own, nor did he look round.

That was the end of Hilde. [*1] No longer could she work her evil will. So she cried:

[p. 407]

"If Grim had fought with Dietrich as well as I have fought with Hildebrand, we should ne'er have been overcome.

Then life went from her, and Hildebrand was set free. The old warrior embraced the prince, praising his valour and skill, and the glory of battle gleamed in the eyes of Dietrich.

Great was the treasure which was concealed in the cavern. Dietrich took for himself a wondrous shining helmet. It was named Hildegrim, after the giant and the giantess, and it gave more than a mortal's strength to the hero who wore it.

The prince put the helmet on his head. He triumphed in the power it gave him. Then with Hildebrand he returned unto his sire, King Dietmar, who rejoiced greatly because of the valorous deeds of his son, and he made him a full knight before all the people.

There lived among the mountains to the west a great giant whose name was Sigenot, and he vowed to be avenged upon Dietrich because that he slew Grim, his uncle, and Hilde, his aunt, and possessed himself of their treasure, and especially the helmet Hildegrim. One day Dietrich rode forth alone to hunt in the deep forest, and in the midst of it he found Sigenot lying fast asleep. Proud was the lad of his strength, and overconfident withal, and he desired greatly to combat with the giant. So he dismounted and went fearlessly towards him and kicked his body. Sigenot leapt up in anger.

"At last thou art come," he cried. "Long have I waited for thee, Prince of Bern, so that I might take vengeance for the slaying of my kinsman Grim.

The giant seized his great spear, and Dietrich drew his sword Naglering. But unequal was the combat.

[p. 408]

[paragraph continues] The giant smote but a single blow with the spearhaft and felled the prince, whom he speedily bound. Then he bore Dietrich through the forest, and cast him into a dark, underground cavern, which was a dragon's lair. Snakes crept about and hissed in the darkness; the prince had need to combat with them.

Meanwhile Hildebrand went through the forest searching for the prince. He wondered because he could not hear his huntsman's horn, and when he found his horse bound to a tree, he feared greatly that Dietrich had been slain. Great was the grief of Hildebrand. . . .

Suddenly he heard heavy footsteps coming through the trees, and ere long the great Sigenot confronted him.

"Who art thou, and whom dost thou seek?" the giant bellowed.

"Hildebrand is my name," answered the bold warrior, "and I seek for Dietrich, Prince of Bern."

The giant thrust his spear at him, but Hildebrand fought fiercely with his sword. Ere long, despite his valour, the warrior was disarmed, and Sigenot caught him by the beard, and dragged him through the forest, bellowing the while:

"Follow me, Longbeard, follow me; now are Grim and Hilde avenged. Soon shalt thou find thy Prince of Bern."

Now never before had a foeman dared to lay hands upon Hildebrand's beard, and for that reason he was more wroth with than afraid of the giant. As the warrior was being thus ignobly dragged to the cave in which Dietrich lay bound, he saw the sword Naglering lying on the ground. Nimbly he clutched it ere his captor was aware, and, striking fiercely, he wounded the giant, who suddenly relaxed his hold so that the warrior

 

Click to enlarge
DIETRICH
 From the statue in the Church of the Franciscans at Innsbruck

 

[p. 409]

leapt free. Then did fearless Hildebrand smite Sigenot and slay him with a single blow. So perished the kinsman of Grim when he deemed proudly that his vengeance was complete.

Deep was the underground cavern in which Dietrich was kept captive. The prince heard the voice of Hildebrand calling to him, and entreated him to make haste.

"Many vipers still remain alive," he said, "although not a few have I slain and devoured."

Hildebrand cast off his clothing, and each garment did he tear in shreds; then he made a rope which he lowered into the dark, snake-infested cavern, so that the prince might have release from his torture and unceasing conflict.

Dietrich seized the rope; but when Hildebrand began to pull him up, it snapped asunder.

'Twas then that the dwarf Eggerich came nigh, rejoicing because that Sigenot was slain. He speedily procured a rope ladder, and it was lowered to Dietrich, who was thus given escape from the dragon's cave and the hissing snakes that swarmed there.

The prince embraced his rescuer, but Hildebrand did chide him much because that he had ventured forth in the forest alone.

Then they took leave of the dwarf Eggerich, and returned together unto Bern. When the people came to know that the giant Sigenot was slain, they rejoiced greatly, and acclaimed Hildebrand and the fearless son of Dietmar.

Now there was not in all the kingdom a young warrior who was Dietrich's equal. His fame went far and wide, and bold knights came riding to Bern so that they might win his favour with challenge to feats of arms. Those who were worthy and of high birth did

[p. 410]

the prince choose to be his followers. In time he had thus command of many valorous knights. Among these were Witege and Heime, who had great fierceness and daring, and were so gloomy and cruel of heart that in peace as in war they were dreaded and shunned. Men they smote and women they hated and scorned; many young warriors they slew in conflict. Churls were they both, and how they came to be honoured by Dietrich must now be told.

Heime came first unto Bern. Dwarfish was he in stature, but his heart was full of valour, and he had strength beyond his years. He feared not the prince, despite his mighty fame. Unto him did his sire Studas, who was a breeder of war steeds amidst the mountains, give a swift grey horse, which was named Rispa, and the sword Blutgang.

When he rode boldly into the courtyard of the castle at Bern, Heime challenged Dietrich to single combat. The prince was made angry thereat. Hastily did he put his armour on and the shining helmet Hildegrim; then with his spear in one hand, and in the other his great red shield on which was pictured a golden lion, he charged the bold and low-born stranger. Terrible was the shock. Heime's shield was pierced through, but Dietrich's horse stumbled so that he came nigh to being thrown. Both their spears were broken in twain.

Then did the young warriors, leaping to the ground, cast aside their spearshafts and draw their shining swords. Fiercely did they combat one against the other. But Blutgang rang faintly against Naglering. Heime had skill and valour, but ere long his sword was cloven and shattered so that he was placed at Dietrich's mercy. But the prince was drawn towards him by reason of his prowess, and slew him not. He honoured, in generous

[p. 411]

mood, the surly stranger, and gave him place among his knight followers.

Ere many days passed another young warrior, seeking adventure, challenged the son of Dietmar to combat. His name was Witege, and he did hie from Denmark. The prince was moved with wrath against him, for he grew weary of the conflicts with each bold stranger who sought to put his skill and valour to test. But in that fierce Dane he met a knight who was more than his equal.

Now Witege was the son of Wieland, the wonder smith, a cunning and far-famed worker in iron. Skilful was the lad with bow and arrows, as was Eigel, his uncle.

He scorned to work at the forge, and desired to seek adventures, so that he might win renown as a warrior. Of the fame of Dietrich he heard one day, and he resolved to challenge him to single combat.

Wieland could not prevail upon him to remain at home, so he fashioned for Witege a suit of shining armour, a great helmet, dragon-mounted, a spear of much strength, and a white shield on which was painted a hammer and tongs. Unto the lad he also gave a wonder sword of great sharpness, named Mimung, which he had aforetime forged by compulsion for a tyrant king.

Witege then set out to journey towards Bern in the land of the Amelungs. On his way he met Hildebrand and Heime, who were also riding to Dietmar's Court with a stranger knight. Witege waited them not, for they sought to rest awhile.

Soon he drew nigh to a strong castle in which twelve robbers had their dwelling. These, when they did behold the young knight coming towards them, spake one to another, saying--"His shining armour shall we take from him, and his right hand shall we cut off, and then send him homeward."

[p. 412]

So they sallied forth against Wieland's strong son. Two rode in front and bade the lad surrender; but Witege drew the sword Mimung and slew them right speedily. The others charged against him and waged fierce and unequal conflict.

'Twas then that Hildebrand and Heime and the strange knight came nigh. Hildebrand urged his companions to hasten to Witege's aid, but Heime said: "Help him not; his pride is great; now let his valour be put to proof."

But the old warrior would suffer not that the robbers should slay the youthful hero; so he rode forward and the others followed him. Against the fierce band did they all battle together, save Heime, who looked on, and ere long seven lay dead on the ground, and the others were making swift escape.

Witege gave thanks unto Hildebrand, and together they took vows of knightly fellowship to be ever brotherly and true in after-time.

"Whither goest thou, valorous youth?" asked the elder warrior.

"I ride towards Bern," the son of Wieland made answer, "for it is my desire to meet with Dietrich in single combat."

Hildebrand cared not to hear speech so bold from that valiant young hero. Indeed he feared for Dietrich's safety. So when night fell, and the Dane lay fast asleep, he drew from the lad's scabbard the sword Mimung and placed in it his own.

At morningtide Witege called upon Dietrich to display his valour. As the tale has been told, Dietmar's son waxed wroth, because that the Dane was of lowly birth, being, indeed, but the son of a smith.

[p. 413]

In vain did Hildebrand warn him of the youth's prowess and skill at arms.

"The time is at hand," Dietrich said, "when peace must prevail in the kingdom. I shall allow no churlish stranger to challenge me to conflict. Heavily shall he pay for his boldness."

"It may be," Hildebrand said, "that thou shalt not prevail against this valorous youth."

"Him shall I have this day hanged outside the gates of Bern," answered the prince.

"Ere thou art able to accomplish that," Hildebrand said, "thou hast a fierce battle to fight. I bid thee success, but not without fear."

Never before did Dietrich meet a doughtier war-man. Strong and rapid were the blows which Witege gave. He smote the prince heavily on the head, but the helmet Hildegrim resisted the edge of Hildebrand's sword, and the Dane cursed his sire Wieland because that his sword was of so little avail.

"Had I but a sword worthy my strength," he cried, "victory would speedily be mine."

Dietrich pressed him hard. With both hands he grasped the sword Naglering, and made daring onslaught with purpose to smite off the head of Wieland's son. But Hildebrand went between the warrior youths and called a truce.

"Spare thou his life," he cried to Dietrich, "and thou shalt have still yet another brave knight amidst thy followers."

"The dog shall die this day," the prince made angry retort; "stand thou aside, so that his life may have end." The old knight was angry. He drew from his scabbard the sword which Wieland fashioned, and gave it unto Witege, saying:

[p. 414]

"Thine own sword Mimung I return unto thee. Now defend thyself as befits thy valour."

Glad thereat was the heart of Wieland's son. "Alas," he cried, "that I did curse my sire! Behold, O Dietrich, the sword Mimung; now have I as great desire for battle as a thirsty man hath for drink and a hungry dog for its food."

'Twas then the swords sang loud. Mimung clove armour and shield as they were but cloth. The son of Wieland indeed struck mighty blows, and in time he wounded Dietrich, Indeed, five wounds did he give unto the prince, so that he was forced to call upon Hildebrand to put end to the fray. But the old warrior was wroth with Dietrich, and did heed him not.

King Dietmar then called upon Wieland's son to cease fighting, and promised him great gifts and a noble bride; but Witege waxed in battle fury, and sought for naught else but the death of that arrogant prince. Blow after blow he gave, until at length he split asunder the helmet Hildegrim, so that Dietrich's golden hair appeared.

Hildebrand desired not the prince's death. His wrath was melted when he perceived he was in peril, and he leapt forward and ended the fray. Then besought he Witege, because of the vows they had taken one with another, to swear fellowship with Dietrich and become his knight.

As the old warrior desired him, so did Witege do. He sheathed his sword and took oath of service to the prince, and they became fast friends. Together they went into the castle and drank wine.

But ill-pleased was Dietrich because that he was not the victor as aforetime, and he made resolve to go forth to seek further daring adventure, so that his fame might not be sullied in the land of the Amelungs.

Footnotes

^406:1 When Hercules fought with the nine-headed Hydra, each head, save one, which could not be hurt, grew again as fast as it was cut off. Then his nephew assisted him by searing the wounds with a torch. See Classic Myth and Legend, page 103.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 415]

  

CHAPTER XXXVIII

  

The Land of Giants

Maidens of Jochgrimm--The Storm Giant Ecke--His Search for Dietrich--Combat in Dark Forest--Giant slain--The Well Nymph--Maiden in Flight --Ecke's Brother Fasold--Overcome by the Prince--The Beast--Arrival at Castle--Giant's Treachery--The Knights who quarrelled--Heime becomes a Robber.

DIETRICH rode along through the forest in thick darkness. He journeyed towards Jochgrimm mountain, where dwelt the beauteous princesses who had heard of his fame and desired greatly to behold him. The prince dreamed not of their treachery, or of the perils that he must needs pass through.

Now there were three young giants who wooed the maidens. They were brothers, and their names were Ecke and Fasold and Ebenrot. Ecke, which signifies "The Terrifier", was but eighteen years old. He had already won fame as a warrior in single combat; but having slain one foeman he could find not another who dared to contend against him. Oft had he heard of Dietrich's valour and great deeds, and he vowed that he would lay him low. Unto Ecke was promise made in the land of giants that if he slew Dietrich he should have for wife Seburg, the fairest of the three princesses in Jochgrimm.

Ecke had wondrous strength. Twice seven days and twice seven nights he could fast and travel onwards, nor ever feel faint; from hill to hill he could leap like a

[p. 416]

leopard. He required no steed, nor was there one that could carry him.

When the strong giant came to know that Dietrich was to ride forth from Bern, he prepared to go against him. . . . The Princess Seburg clad her lover in bright armour and wished him well. He made swift departure. . . . When he entered the forest the birds fled terrified before him; branches were bowed down and rudely shaken as he passed; trees swayed and groaned, and those that he smote crashed down and were uprooted. . . . So rushed Ecke upon his way until he reached Bern, where he was told that Dietrich had gone towards Jochgrimm by another way.

Without pause the giant followed after the valorous prince. So swift was his pace that he came nigh to him ere night fell. He beheld four knights lying on the ground. But one alone was alive, and he was grievously wounded.

"Seek not the Knight of Bern," the wounded man said; "like to lightning is his sword stroke."

Ecke went onward; raging furiously he went. He feared not Dietrich; his heart's desire was to combat against the arrogant hero. Night fell as he went through the trees.

In the blackness he heard a horseman coming nigh.

Who art thou, he cried, "that rideth through the darkened forest?"

A deep strong voice made answer: "Dietrich of Bern."

"Thou shalt fight with me," Ecke cried, for he was impatient to win renown.

But Dietrich desired not to combat with any foeman in the darkness, and rode on.

Ecke strode beside the Knight of Bern, and made boast of his armour.

 

Click to enlarge
RETURN OF VICTORIOUS TEUTONS
 From the painting by P. Thumann. By permission of Franz Hanfstaengl

 

[p. 417]

"By Wieland, the wonder smith, was it fashioned," Ecke said; "nor can thy blade Naglering cleave it. Bright and sharp is mine own sword Ecke-sax. 'Twas forged by him who made Naglering; of gold is the hilt, and it is inlaid with gold. Of fine gold is my girdle also. Much booty will be thine if thou canst overcome me."

But Dietrich could not be tempted to fight for sword nor treasure in the forest blackness.

Ecke was made angry. "Thee shall I proclaim as a coward," he cried, "because thou art afraid. . . ."

"When day breaks," Dietrich said, "I shall combat with thee. Here in the darkness we can behold not one another."

But Ecke, confronting him, refused to wait. "Thou shalt have the Princess Seburg for thy bride if thou art ready now for combat. Fairest is she of all maidens upon earth."

Dietrich leapt from his horse. "By the gods," he cried, "I shall fight thee now, not for thy treasure nor even thy sword, but for Seburg the fair one!"

On stones did they strike their swords. . . . The firesparks flashed bright, and they beheld one another in the blaze and began to fight. Nor was there darkness then, for their swords glowed like flames as they smote together and flashed in the blackness. The clamour of battle roared like thunder through the forest; the heavens heard the clash of their shields. . . . The night was filled with terror; the trees were scorched about them; the grass was trodden under the ground by their feet.

Long they fought, nor did one wound the other. Then Ecke bounded against the prince with all his strength; their shields were interlocked, and Dietrich stumbled and fell. Ecke held him down and said:

"If thou wilt permit me to bind thee, thy life shall

[p. 418]

[paragraph continues] I spare. Fain would I deliver thee thus unto Seburg with thine armour and thy steed."

"Death is better than shame," Dietrich made answer.

So they wrestled one with another in the darkness. In vain did Ecke strive to overcome the Knight of Bern, who at length clutched the giant's great throat, and sought to roll over him. Long and terrible was that fierce struggle. Nor would one make peace with the other although they were of equal strength.

In vain did the prince beseech Ecke to swear oaths of fellowship with him.

Dietrich's steed at length broke free. It heard his cries and ran towards him in the night. Falke was its name, and it loved the prince better than life. Now it came to his aid, and, rearing high, the bold steed leapt upon the body of Ecke and broke his back.

Dietrich leapt to his feet, and seizing the giant's great sword he struck fire, and in the sudden blaze he smote off his foeman's head. Then was there silence in the forest.

When dawn broke through the trees Dietrich clad himself in the giant's shining armour; he girded on the mighty sword Ecke-sax, then rode on his way with the head of Ecke dangling from his saddle bow.

He had no great joy in his victory, because he feared that he would be accused of killing Ecke in his sleep. [*1]

Dietrich rode on until he came to a forest spring and beheld a water nymph lying beside it wrapped in soft slumber. He laid hands on her, and she awoke. Then

[p. 419]

did the nymph heal the prince's wounds, and he became strong again. She pointed out to him the path which led unto Jochgrimm mountain, and gave warning of the dangers which would beset him. Then did Dietrich mount his steed again and ride towards the land of the giants.

As he went through the forest a beauteous maid came running towards him. Swift were her steps, and her face was pale and terror-stricken, because that she was pursued by the giant Fasold, Ecke's brother, and his fierce hounds. [*1]

Dietrich gave the maiden his protection, and went against the giant who pursued her. When Fasold beheld the prince clad in Ecke's armour, he cried:

"Art thou my brother Ecke riding hither on a steed?"

Dietrich made answer: "I am not thy brother; him have I slain."

"Thou dog of death," bellowed Fasold, "thou hast murdered Ecke whilst he lay in sleep, else would he never have been overcome."

"I fling thee back thy falsehood," Dietrich answered. "Thy brother challenged me to fight in darkness for the sake of fair Seburg. Had I known he was of such great strength I should ne'er have crossed swords with him."

Wroth was Fasold, and he rushed against Dietrich. Stronger was he than Ecke. In combat he scorned to strike more than one blow; never before was a second required. Fiercely he smote his brother's slayer, and Dietrich fell from his horse and lay in a swoon. The

[p. 420]

giant then turned away and went towards the castle. He deemed that the prince was slain.

Dietrich lay not long upon the ground. His strength returned to him; he rose up; he leapt upon his horse; he hastened after the giant, for he desired to be avenged.

Now Fasold had vowed never to combat with any foeman who survived his first blow, but Dietrich taunted him, saying: "Thou art afraid to stand against me. A coward is Fasold, else would he combat with his brother's slayer."

The giant turned fiercely, for no longer could he endure the prince's words. Swiftly were their swords drawn, and hot but not brief was the conflict. Thrice was Dietrich wounded, but five times had he wounded with Ecke-sax the giant Fasold, who at length cried out for mercy.

"If thou wilt but spare my life," Fasold said, "thee shall I serve, and ever be thy faithful henchman."

"Had I not slain thy brother," answered Dietrich, "I would have thee gladly for my knight; but I can claim not the service of one whose kin I have wronged. Yet shall I take oaths of fellowship with thee. Let us pledge ourselves now to help one another in time of need, and be like unto brothers before all men."

So they swore oaths of knightly brotherhood, and went together towards Jochgrimm mountain.

A great beast came out against them, and men say that it was like unto an elephant. Fasold would fain have let it pass, but Dietrich dismounted and made fierce attack with Ecke-sax. Yet, although he gave the monster many wounds, he could not slay it. The beast came nigh to treading him underfoot, but once again did. his steed Falke come to his rescue; it broke free; it leapt against and kicked the monster, which turned from the

[p. 421]

prince a while. Then Dietrich crouched under its stomach and stabbed there with the keen sword Ecke, making nimble escape as the beast fell to die. [*1]

Then Dietrich and Fasold went on their way. They next beheld a great dragon flying towards them. It was flying very low, and in its jaws it carried a knight, who called loudly for help.

Dietrich struck at the monster, but even Ecke-sax could not pierce it. Whereat the knight said: "By my sword alone can the dragon be slain, but it lies within the monster's mouth."

The Prince of Bern thrust his hand between the dragon's jaws. He pulled forth the sword.

"Wound me not when thou dost strike," the knight cried.

Dietrich smote the monster with the keen-edged sword and slew it, and the captive knight was drawn forth.

"Thy name and lineage?" the prince demanded of him.

"My name is Sintram," answered the knight, "and kinsman am I to Hildebrand at Bern. I was journeying towards Bern, so that I might become a follower of Prince Dietrich. The dragon came upon me while I slept, else would it not have carried me away."

Dietrich's heart was made glad, and he restored unto Sintram his wondrous sword, saying: "I am he whom you seek to serve, even Dietrich, Prince of Bern."

So they went together on their way with Fasold. Then, as they drew nigh unto Jochgrimm mountain, the giant forgot his vows, and sought to take flight. But

[p. 422]

[paragraph continues] Dietrich would not have him go free until he reached the castle in which the princesses had their dwelling.

Ere long they reached a great castle. Two giant statues stood on each side of the door, and Fasold led him in. But when the prince came between the statues their arms fell, and had he not made swift escape he would have been slain by their stone clubs.

Dietrich was made wroth. He turned upon Fasold forthwith, and slew him because of his treachery. Then he entered the hall, and the three princesses and their mother, the queen, came towards him, for they deemed he was Ecke.

"'Twas your desire," the prince said, "to behold Dietrich of Bern. He now greets thee thus."

So saying, he flung at their feet the head of the giant Ecke, and then turned from them. . . . He hastened without, and, mounting his steed, rode with Sintram towards Bern.

Heime came forth to meet Dietrich and greeted him with such warmth that Dietrich gave unto him the sword Naglering, which Alberich [*1] had forged for the giant Grim. Ecke-sax he did keep for himself.

Witege was ill-pleased because that his fellow knight was thus honoured.

"I forget not," he said unto Heime, "that when I was beset by robbers thy sword remained in its sheath."

"Evil is thy tongue, thou self-sufficient man. Fain would I have it silenced," Heime said.

Both knights drew their swords to combat one against the other. Dietrich was wroth and stepped between them. Then he spake to Heime saying:

"Rash knight, thou shalt now go hence. 'Twas

[p. 423]

unseemly that thou didst not aid thy fellow when robbers came against him. . . . When by thy deeds thou hast proved thyself a hero, thou mayest return again unto Bern."

"With the sword thou hast given me," Heime said, I shall win more than any man can take away."

He went forth alone. He waged war against the robbers and slew them, and became chief of a robber band. Many a wayfarer fell by his sword, and he was dreaded by valiant knights. He re, turned not unto Dietrich again until he was possessed of much treasure by his evil doings.

Against many giants did the prince combat, but never was he in greater peril than when Laurin, the dwarf, had power over him and his knights and held them all in captivity.

Footnotes

^418:1 This story was  a storm myth, in which Dietrich was Thunor (Thor), and Ecke a tempest. The three princesses are the giant maids of a Tyrolese folk tale, who brew storms on Jochgrimm mountain. A Highland hag is also a storm-brewer. She is associated with the first week of April which is called "Cailleach". At Cromarty an April hag causes the south-westerly gales and, according to a local saying, still current, "harries the crooks" (empties the pots) of the fisher-folk who can't go to sea.

^419:1 Another nature myth. So do the maidens of the Boyne, Tay, Ness, and other rivers flee before the outraged well demon, who may be a giant, a dragon, or a kelpic, because they had neglected, when drawing water, a ceremonial observance, or had committed a theft. Probably the Severn story, as related by Geoffrey of Monmouth, was originally of similar character. There are also Greek parallels.

^421:1 So was the dragon in Beowulf and the Fafner dragon, which Sigurd stabbed, put to death. The underpart only can be mortally wounded.

^422:1 Alberich was called in French legend Auberon. Spenser introduced him to this country as Oberon. Alberich signifies "elf King".

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 424]

  

CHAPTER XXXIX

  

The Wonderful Rose Garden

Dietleib the Dane--How he became a Knight--Kunhild stolen by the Dwarf King--Knights to the Rescue--The Garden laid waste--Laurin's Vengeance--Witege overcome--Combat with Prince--The Invisible Combatant--Laurin is spared--Visit to Mountain Dwelling--The Banquet--Knights made Prisoners--Dietrich's Fiery Breath--Battle with Dwarfs and Giants--The End of Strife.

FIRST be it told of the lady Kunhild's brother, Dietleib the Dane. He had fame in his own land for strength and prowess, and great and glorious were the deeds of his sire, the brave Yarl Biterolf. It chanced that when the three journeyed towards Bern they were set upon by Heime and his robber band in the midst of a forest. Boldly fought the Danes, and the robbers were all killed, save Heime alone, whom Dietleib, with his sword Welsung, wounded on the forehead and put to flight.

Thereafter the young Dane became a servant unto Dietrich, making pretence that his name was Ilmenrik. It chanced that the prince paid visit to the Court of Ermenrich, and there was his Danish servant taunted by Walter of Wasgenstein. Dietleib was wroth, and he challenged the arrogant knight, wagering life against life, to prevail against him in performing feats of strength. All the Court assembled to behold the sport, and the knight was boastful and proud. But great was the might of Dietleib the Dane. He could putt the stone

[p. 425]

and throw the hammer so that men marvelled to behold, nor could Walter of Wasgenstein prevail against him.

Then did King Ermenrich pay life ransom in money for the boastful knight, and the Dane gave a great feast to which his master did invite many valorous war men.

Proud was Dietrich of his servant, and he made him a knight. Heime, who had returned, was present at the feast, and Dietleib sat beside him, and ere long he spake, saying:

"On thy forehead is an evil scar, Heime. How came thou by it?"

Heime made answer: "I shall tell thee in secret, Ilmenrik. Wounded was I in combat with Dietleib the Dane. I shall rest not until my shame be wiped out with his life blood."

"Know then," the new knight whispered, "that I am he whom thou didst attack with thy robber band. Look in my face. . . . I am no other than Dietleib. Fast was thy horse, else thou hadst not escaped me. But I seek not now to denounce thee before Dietrich. Let this secret be kept between us."

It chanced upon a day thereafter that fair Kunhild, Dietleib's sister, danced with her maids upon a green meadow. She went towards a linden tree; then suddenly she vanished from sight. The King of Dwarfs, whose name was Laurin, had long loved her for her beauty, and desired to have her for his bride. So he came secretly towards the maiden, and below the linden tree he cast over her his Cloak of Obscurity; then did he carry fair Kunhild away towards his castle among the Tyrolese mountains.

The heart of Dietleib was filled with sorrow, because that he loved his sister very dearly. He hastened unto

[p. 426]

[paragraph continues] Hildebrand, who dwelt in his castle at Garda, and besought his aid, saying:

"The castle of Laurin is in the midst of a Tyrol mountain, and in front of it he hath a wondrous Rose garden."

Many a life may be lost ere Kunhild is rescued,

Hildebrand said; "but let us unto Dietrich and his knights, so that we may take counsel with them."

When that the knights came to know that Kunhild was taken away by the dwarf king, Wolfhart spake boldly, as was his wont, and said:

"Alone shall I ride forth and rescue this fair maid."

Dietrich heard the boast, nor made answer. He spake to wise old Hildebrand, saying: "Knowest thou aught of Laurin's Rose garden?"

"'Tis told," Hildebrand said, "that it hath four gates of gold. But no wall shields it. Round the Rose garden is drawn a silken thread, and he who breaks it shall have his right hand and left foot cut off. Laurin, King of Dwarfs, ever keeps watch o'er his wondrous garden, which is of exceeding great beauty."

Witege spake: "Laurin can punish not an offender who entereth his garden until he doth prevail against him in single combat."

"Then shall we fare forth," Dietrich said. "We seek but Kunhild, and need not despoil the Rose garden."

So the Prince rode towards the Tyrol mountain in which Laurin, King of Dwarfs, had his dwelling. With him went Hildebrand, Heribrand's son; Witege, Wieland's son; Dietleib the Dane, and Wolfhart, Hildebrand's kinsman.

Dietrich and Witege rode in front, because that Hildebrand had taunted the prince, as was his wont,

[p. 427]

for he had been his master. "Were I not with thee," he said, "thou couldst not overcome the dwarf."

So it fell that Dietrich and Wieland's son were first to reach the wondrous Rose garden. Witege broke to pieces a golden gate, and they entered together. Fair were the roses, and of sweet and refreshing fragrance; their beauty gladdened Dietrich's eyes, and he was loath to despoil them. But Witege sought to defy the dwarf, and he rode through the blossoming shrubs, trampling them ruthlessly underfoot. Soon was the fair garden made desolate as a wilderness.

Wroth was Laurin, King of the Dwarfs. He rode forth on his steed, clad in full armour; his spear was in his hand. But three spans high was he, yet had he wondrous strength and skill in conflict.

"What evil have I done thee that thou shouldst thus destroy my roses?" he cried bitterly. "Thy right hand and thy left foot I now demand, and must needs obtain."

Witege defied the dwarf with laughter and scorn. He deemed not that he was endowed with magical power. Diamonds sparkled upon Laurin's armour; these made it swordproof and spearproof. He also wore a girdle which gave him the strength of twelve men. On his head was a shining crown, and therein was his weakness. Golden birds sang forth from it as if they were alive.

Witege lowered his spear. Laurin charged fiercely, and at the first thrust swept him from the saddle. In great peril was Wieland's son, for the dwarf bound him; but Dietrich made offer of gold to atone the evil he had done.

"Thy roses," he told Laurin, "will bloom again in May."

[p. 428]

The dwarf made answer that he possessed already gold in abundance, but that his roses could not be restored unto him.

Witege taunted Dietrich. "Fearest thou to tilt with him?" he said; "must I die because thou dost shrink from Laurin?"

The prince was wroth, and he challenged the dwarf king forthwith to single combat, taking upon himself the blame for the evil which his knight had accomplished.

'Twas well for Dietrich that old Hildebrand then rode up with Wolfhart, his kinsman, and Dietleib the Dane. The old warrior counselled the prince to tilt not with the dwarf. "Rather shouldst thou fight him on foot with sword against sword," he said. "His armour thou canst not pierce, for by reason of the diamonds it is charmed against all weapons. Smite thou him upon the head."

As Hildebrand counselled, so did Dietrich do. He leapt from the saddle and challenged Laurin to combat with swords. Fierce was the conflict. The prince smote upon the dwarf's head blow after blow, so that he was made faint. But Laurin drew round him his Cloak of Obscurity and fought then unbeholden by the Prince of Bern.

Many wounds did Dietrich receive; but he waxed in battle fury and suddenly took the unseen dwarf in his arms and wrestled with him. From the prince's mouth issued forth flames of fire, but without avail; he could not injure Laurin.

"Snatch off his waist girdle," Hildebrand cried.

Ere long Dietrich possessed himself of the magic girdle, which gave to the dwarf his great strength. Then the prince had him in his power. He cast the

[p. 429]

little king on the ground and tore off the Cloak of Obscurity.

Laurin feared that he would be put to death, so he called upon Dietleib, Kunhild's brother, who pleaded for his life, for the young Dane desired most of all to discover where his fair sister was held in captivity. Thus did the dwarf king escape the vengeance of Dietrich. He gave thanks unto Dietleib, and when he had sworn oaths of brotherhood with him, he invited the prince and all his knights into his mountain castle.

They went together over a pleasant plain, and through a fair forest. A great linden tree was there, and many fruit trees whose odours were sweet. Birds sang merrily in the branches, and Dietrich was glad of heart. He began to make answer to the birds; but old Hildebrand warned him not to whistle until he had left the wood. All the knights were lighthearted save Witege. He had bitter memory of how the dwarf had prevailed against him, and suspected treachery. Wolfhart taunted him, but Wieland's son rode in front. He was first to reach the castle entrance. He saw there a bright golden horn suspended on a chain. He blew a loud blast upon it. When he did that the door opened wide and they all went within. An iron door was opened; it closed behind them. Then through a door of shining gold they went; it was shut fast like to the other.

Soon Dietrich and his knights found themselves in a bright and spacious hall. Hundreds of dwarfs were there. They made merry; they danced and they held tournaments. Delicious wine was given unto the strangers, and even Witege forgot to be suspicious, and made merry with the others. Then did Laurin begin to work his evil designs. He cast a spell upon Dietrich and his knights, so that they could behold not one

[p. 430]

another. They saw but the merry dwarfs and the glories of the mountain dwelling.

At length fair Kunhild appeared. She had been made Laurin's queen, and wore a gleaming crown. Many maidens came with her, but she was fairest of them all. Dwarfs playing harps, and dancing and performing strange feats, skipped before her and around. In her crown shone a bright jewel. It dispelled the magic mist, and the warriors beheld one another again.

Then was a great feast held. Kunhild sat with Laurin, and Dietleib, whom she embraced tenderly, she took beside her. They spoke in low voices one to another. Great was her desire to leave all the splendour and wealth that was there, and return once again to her own kin.

The dwarf persuaded all the knights to lay down their arms. So merry were they that they did so without fear.

Evening came on, and Laurin led Dietleib to a chamber apart, where he made offer to him of rich treasure if he would desert Dietrich and his knights. But the young Dane refused resolutely to be a traitor, whereat the dwarf vanished and the door was locked securely. Dietleib was made blind.

Then were the strangers given wine, which caused them all to fall into a deep sleep. The vengeful king Laurin thus had them in his power. He caused them to be bound, and they were all cast together into a deep dungeon, so that vengeance might be wreaked upon them, because that the Rose garden had been despoiled. There they lay helpless and blind.

Kunhild wept for them. When the dwarfs were all asleep she stole in secret to her brother's chamber and gave to him a golden ring which dispelled his magic

[p. 431]

blindness. Then did the young Dane secure possession of his weapons and those of his fellow knights.

Meanwhile Dietrich woke up. Wroth was he when he found that he was fettered. The dwarf's girdle restored his sight, and flames issued from his mouth, which melted his bonds of iron, so that he rose up. He went towards each of his companions and set them free one by one.

Dietleib then came with all their weapons, and with the prince he fought fiercely against the dwarfs. At length Dietrich wrenched from one of them a golden ring. He gave it unto Hildebrand, and his sight was restored. Then did the old warrior enter the conflict. The dwarfs fell fast before them. Thousands were put to death, for there was none in Laurin's castle who could prevail against the three great warriors.

At length Laurin rushed without. He blew a great blast upon his horn, and five giants armed with clubs came to his aid.

Wolfhart and Witege were still blind, but they could rest not while the clamour of battle raged about them, so they rushed into the fray and fought bravely. Then gave Kunhild unto them jewelled rings, and their blindness was dispelled.

The five giants fought against the five knights, and long and terrible was the struggle which ensued; but one by one the monsters were slain, and Dietrich and his knights were . The heroes waded knee deep in blood, so great was the slaughter which they accomplished in the kingdom of Laurin.

Then was the dwarf king made prisoner and Kunhild set free. Dietrich and his knights possessed themselves of much treasure, and they returned unto Bern, taking with them Laurin and Dietleib's fair sister.

[p. 432]

Laurin was laughed at and put to shame, and he brooded over his evil lot, desiring greatly to be avenged upon Dietrich and his victorious knights. So he sent a secret message unto his uncle, Walberan, who was king over the giants and dwarfs in the eastern Caucasus, and besought him to come to his rescue.

He spoke secretly thereanent unto Kunhild, whereat she made promise that if he swore oaths of friendship with Dietrich, she would return with him to his mountain dwelling and be his queen once again.

So she prevailed upon Laurin to do her will. "My Rose garden", he said, "I shall plant again that the roses may bloom fair and fragrant in the sunshine of May."

The dwarf king drank wine with the prince of Bern and made peace, vowing to be his lifelong comrade and helper.

As they sat together at the feast, a message was borne unto Dietrich from King Walberan, demanding all the treasure and all the weapons that were in Bern, and the right hand and left foot of every knight who had wrought destruction in the Rose garden. Defiantly did the prince make answer and prepared for battle.

Dietrich and Walberan challenged each other to single combat, and they fought with great fierceness. Numerous were their wounds, nor could one prevail over the other. It seemed as if they would both be slain.

Then did Laurin ride forth, and, embracing his uncle, he prevailed upon him to make peace. Hildebrand pleaded likewise with Dietrich, and the combat was brought to an end. Together they then sat down to feast and drink wine, and they vowed oaths of friendship, so that there might be lasting peace between them.

Kunhild returned with Laurin unto his mountain

[p. 433]

dwelling. The Rose garden was planted once again, and it bloomed fair in the sunshine of May.

Herdsmen among the hills, and huntsmen who wend thither, have been wont to tell that they could behold on moonlight nights Laurin and fair Kunhild dancing together in the green forests and in the valleys below the Tyrolese mountains. Dietleib's sister hath still her dwelling in the bright castle as in other days. She is Queen of the Dwarfs and can never die.

The Rose garden blooms ever fair, but unbeholden by men, in the sunshine of May, and many have sought to find it in vain.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 434]

  

CHAPTER XL

  

Virginal, Queen of the Mountains

The Maid--devouring Giant--Hildebrand slays Orkise--Dietrich and the Giants--Night Battle--The Black Horseman--Slaughter of Monsters--Castle Muter--Prince taken Prisoner--The Rescue--Janibas surrounds Virginal's Castle--Magic Tablet--The Avalanches--A Peerless Queen--Dietrich wins his Bride.

TIDINGS came unto Dietrich at Bern that Virginal, Queen of the Mountains, was in sore distress because that a giant wasted her land and had perforce to obtain as tribute, at each new moon, a fair maiden, whom he did devour.

The prince set forth with old Hildebrand to give aid to the queen, who had great beauty, and ruled over those dwarfs and giants in the Tyrolese mountains that never sought to do injury unto mankind. Her oppressor was named Orkise, whose son was Janibas, an evil magician.

As the two heroes rode through the forest there came unto them a dwarf whose name was Bibung. He guided them towards Jeraspunt, where the queen had her dwelling, but when night came he vanished. Snow fell next morning, and the knights were parted one from another. Ere long Hildebrand heard bitter cries, and he beheld a fair maiden who had been taken to the forest so that the giant might obtain her for tribute. Fairest was she of Queen Virginal's maidens. The knight proffered his protection and vowed to rescue her, whereat her heart was filled with gratitude and her eyes with joy tears.

[p. 435]

Soon the forest was shaken with dread clamour, for the giant was coming nigh with his dogs to possess himself of his prey. Hildebrand drew his sword; not slow was he to enter the conflict, and ere long he slew the giant and put to flight his evil son Janibas.

The maiden returned with glad heart unto the queen, and gave tidings of how the giant Orkise had been slain. There was great rejoicing in the castle, and eagerly did Virginal and all her people await the coming of the heroes.

Meanwhile Dietrich fought with many of the giant's followers. The clamour of battle resounded far and near, and when Hildebrand hastened to his aid the horde was overcome; many were slain and many made escape.

Together did they then go upon their way towards the palace of Jeraspunt. Darkness came on, and they rode to the gate of the castle of Orkise, deeming it theirs by right of conquest. But small hospitality were they shown. No sooner did they demand entrance than fierce giants issued forth against them. Heavy clubs they bore, and they smote fiercely, but soon they were overcome by the valorous heroes. Then appeared a black horseman. He spake in a strange tongue, and giants sprang up out of the earth to continue the fight. As they were cut down others took their place, and when all the giants were slain, hissing snakes and nameless reptiles issued forth against Dietrich and Hildebrand, so that they had to fight constantly throughout the night. The black horseman entered not the fray, and when dawn broke he vanished from sight. Then did the heroes enter the castle and set at liberty three of Queen Virginal's maidens whom they found there.

Now, during the night the heroes slew a fierce

[p. 436]

dragon. It carried in its jaws a brave knight whose name was Rentwin, and with him did Dietrich and Hildebrand journey towards his father's castle. There did they remain until their wounds were healed.

Thereafter the prince and his veteran companion set forth with Rentwin and his sire towards Jeraspunt. Eager was Dietrich to behold the fair maiden queen Virginal. He spurred his steed; he rode in front, and ere long he was lost to his fellow knights. 'Twas ill for him that he waited not for them, because the way was strange and wild, and he wandered from the straight path. So it chanced that he came unto the castle of Duke Nitger, called Muter.

Now the duke had many giants, and when one of them issued forth, Dietrich asked of him to be guided unto the palace of Queen Virginal. Answer was given him according to his desire; but when he turned to ride away the giant smote the hero with his club so that he fell from his horse. Then was brave Dietrich seized and bound and thrown into a dark dungeon. The duke's sister treated him with kindness. But for her protection the prince would have been put to death.

When Hildebrand reached the palace of Virginal he received tidings that the prince had been taken captive. So he hastened back unto Bern, and rode forth with many brave knights, among whom were Wolfhart and Witege and Heime. They laid siege to Castle Muter and fought against twelve giants. While the battle waged fiercely, Dietrich made escape and entered the fray. Victory was then with the heroes of Bern, and all the giants were slain.

The knights sought to put Duke Nitger to death, but his sister pleaded for him, and his life was spared by Dietrich.

[p. 437]

Then did they all set forth towards Jeraspunt, On their way they beheld a dwarf riding towards them. Unto Dietrich spake the little man, and he told that fierce Janibas had surrounded the palace of Queen Virginal with a great army, an made demand of all her maidens and the magic jewel in her crown which gave her power to rule over all her subjects.

So the heroes pressed onward. They climbed the mountains over ice and snow, and soon they heard the fierce clamour of battle. The howling of the great black dogs of Janibas was like the howling of wintry tempests; strange monsters fought there, and the queen's defenders were in sore straits. The voices of the giants were loud as thunder peals.

In the midst of the battle Dietrich saw the black horseman. He knew him to be Janibas. An iron tablet he held in his hand and wrought spells upon it. The prince sprang upon him. His sword flashed fire. He broke in pieces the iron tablet and slew the dread worker of evil. Then pealed the loud thunder amidst the Tyrolese mountains; the glaciers were sundered, and avalanches fell upon the evil army of Janibas, which suddenly vanished from sight. Soon was there silence and peace, and an end to that dread conflict.

Queen Virginal sat alone, high throned in her mountain palace, unmoved and beautiful; brightly gleamed the jewel in her crown. A glistening silver veil was drawn round her body, and her maidens crouched trembling at her feet.

When the battle was ended, Dietrich made approach, and she called him "hero", and greeted him with love.

"No longer can I reign here in Elfland," she spake. "Thy great deeds have I beheld, and for thy sake I shall leave my home and my kingdom, and henceforth live

[p. 438]

among men; for I shall be thy bride, and love thee so long as life may last."

Then were Dietrich and Queen Virginal wedded there with pomp and ceremony, and elves and heroes feasted within the mountain palace, and drank wine and made merry. Ere long Dietrich and his bride and the brave knights journeyed together to Bern, where they were received with acclamations by the people.

Dietrich and Queen Virginal lived happily together, and when King Dietmar died, the prince reigned in his place. Then was there peace within the kingdom; but evil was being wrought in another land, and it was fated that King Dietrich must become a fugitive among men ere he could triumph completely over his evil foemen.

     
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 439]

  

CHAPTER XLI

  

Dietrich in Exile

Ermenrich and Sibeche--Fate of the King's Sons--The Harlungs--Quarrel with Dietrich--Battle between Kinsmen--Convoy captured--Knights ransomed--Dietrich surrenders his Kingdom--At the Court of Etzel--Campaign against Ermenrich--Boy Warriors slain--Witege and the Mermaid--Sorrow in Hunaland--The Nibelung Tragedy--Vengeance of Hagen's Son--End of Exile.

KING ERMENRICH was a mighty monarch, and all the rulers of the Southland owned him as overlord, and paid yearly tribute. His nephew, Dietrich, helped in his wars, and gave to him at length his fierce knights Witege and Heime.

Now it chanced that Ermenrich had an evil counsellor. His name was Sibeche, [*1] and his wife had been wronged by the king. Sibeche first thought to slay Ermenrich, but chose rather to cause the great monarch to murder his own children and wage war against his own kin. Terrible was the vengeance of Sibeche; by reason of it many brave knights went to their death, and for long years bitter warfare was waged.

Ermenrich had three sons. Sibeche bore false witness against one and the king's second bride, Svanhild. The prince was hanged and Gudrun's daughter was trodden to death by many steeds. Another was sent to Britain as an envoy in a leaky ship and was drowned. The third,

[p. 440]

by Sibeche's advice, journeyed to Norway to demand tribute, and there was he slain. Evil charges were then made, reviling the king's nephews, the Harlungs; war was waged against them, and they were overcome and slaughtered in their Rhine-land stronghold.

Nor was Dietrich spared. Sibeche poisoned the mind of Ermenrich against the valiant King of the Amelungs.

"Thy nephew's kingdom grows greater year by year," said Sibeche to the jealous king; "ere long he shall wrest thine own from thee. Thou shouldst demand of him payment of yearly tribute."

Then was the knight Randolt sent unto Bern to demand tribute, but Dietrich gave scornful refusal, whereat Ermenrich was made wroth, so that he vowed he would have his nephew hanged as a traitor.

In vain did Witege and Heime plead with the king. He gave ear to Sibeche, and marched against Bern with a great army. Dietrich went forth and met his sire's brother in battle array, and in a fierce night attack achieved an overwhelming victory, so that Ermenrich was beaten back.

It chanced, however, that Dietrich lacked sufficient treasure to continue the war, and old Hildebrand made offer of all the gold he possessed, as did also Bertram of Pola. So the knights set forth with Wolfhart, Dietleib the Dane, and other heroes to guard a convoy of five hundred horses bearing treasure unto Bern. Ermenrich came to know of their mission, so he had the convoy taken in ambush. Thus were the bravest knights of Dietrich made prisoners and his war treasure captured. Dietleib alone escaped. He carried the mournful tidings of disaster unto his king.

Dietrich sent envoys unto Ermenrich and offered exchange of prisoners, so that his knights might be set

[p. 441]

free; but the fierce monarch made answer that he would have them all hanged unless Dietrich ransomed them with his kingdom.

Noble-hearted was Dietmar's great son. He could suffer not to reign as king if his faithful followers were put to death. His soul was sad, because that Queen Virginal had sickened and died, and he sent a message to Ermenrich saying that he would depart from the kingdom if the lives of Hildebrand and Wolfhart and his other knights were spared.

Then Ermenrich came unto Bern with his army, and Dietrich bade farewell to his own land amidst the lamentation of the people, who loved him well. His brother, Diether, who was but a child, went with him. Old Hildebrand left behind his wife Ute and his babe Hadubrand, and followed his king, as did also the other knights for whose sake he had given up his kingdom.

Dietrich took refuge in the Court of Etzel [*1], King of the Huns. He was made welcome there and greatly honoured. He fought with Etzel against the King of Wilkina-land [*2], and against the King of Russia and Poland, and achieved great conquests. Grateful was Etzel for the help which Dietrich and his knights gave him.

But ever did Dietrich mourn for his lost kingdom. Queen Helche pitied him, because that he was sorrowing continually, and gave him for wife her niece, the gentle Princess Herrad. Soon afterwards King Etzel made promise that he would raise for Dietrich in early spring a great army, so that he might wage war against Ermenrich, and win back the kingdom of the Amelungs.

Years had passed since Dietmar's son rode forth from Bern. His brother Diether had grown into early

[p. 442]

manhood; a brave and bold young knight he was. Well loved was he by Etzel's sons, Erp and Ortwin, and when the great army assembled, the three young friends must needs go forth to battle together, for they desired greatly to win renown as valiant war-men.

Etzel's queen would fain have held them back. She had dreamed in an evil dream that a dragon had entered the castle, carried away the lads, and devoured them while she looked on. But they pleaded with the king, and he gave them their desire. Dietrich vowed that they would have sure protection from danger, and Etzel sent forth with them the Margrave Rudiger and his fearless knights. With Dietrich went Diether, and old Hildebrand, Wolfhart, and Dietleib the Dane, and the other heroes who shared with their king exile in the land of Huns.

Sibeche commanded the army of Ermenrich, who was stricken with sickness, and he waited for the invading army on the southern bank of the river, at Ravenna, nigh to the frontier of the kingdom of the Amelungs.

Dietrich pushed towards Bern, but when he reached the city of Istria he left his brother Diether and Etzel's sons, Erp and Ortwin, in the care of old Elsan, so that they might suffer no harm. He deemed them too young to risk the perils of war against battle-hardened heroes.

Ill-pleased were the lads with their lot. They made resolve to follow the army, and having deceived old Elsan they stole forth from the city and rode swiftly to the front. They rode to their doom.

On the night before the battle Dietrich's forces were drawn up on the north bank of the river, and old Hildebrand went out to scout. A knight came from the foemen's camp with similar intent. They met but fought

[p. 443]

not, for the knight was Reinald. They sorrowed together that friends were divided by war, and ere they parted they embraced and kissed one another.

In the morning Dietrich led his knights across the river at a ford which Hildebrand had found. They fell upon Sibeche's division of the army and put it to flight.

Witege was with Sibeche, but he fled not. He rode on; he slew Dietrich's standard-bearer, but the tide of battle went past him, and soon he found himself alone.

'Twas then that Diether and Etzel's two sons reached the front. They saw Witege and called him a traitor. Ortwin went against him, but ere long he was cut down. Then did Erp seek vengeance; he rushed against the ferocious knight. In vain did Witege warn him to hold back lest he would share his brother's fate; but Erp, was without fear-a great warrior would he have been had he lived. Brief was the conflict, for Witege drew his sword Mimung and smote the prince so that his head was taken off.

Diether sorrowed and was made wroth. He drew his sword and rode against Witege.

Wieland's son watched him drawing nigh, and he spake to the lad, saying:

"Say if thou art Diether, brother of Dietrich; if thou art, I desire pot to combat with thee."

Diether said: "The brother of Dietrich I am indeed, as thou shalt know to thy loss ere long."

"Then combat against another," Witege said; "seek battle glory elsewhere. I desire not to be thy slayer."

"Thou hast slain both Erp and Ortwin," cried Diether, "but me thou shalt not escape. Thou dog and traitor, I would die rather than not slay thee."

Bold attack made he forthwith, but Witege feared him not. He but parried his blows. But at length

[p. 444]

[paragraph continues] Diether smote off his horse's head, and he had perforce to leap to the ground.

"I call to witness the god Irmin," Witege cried, "that I fight now but to defend myself."

When he said that he smote at Diether with his sword Mimung and cut the young hero in twain.

Witege wept. Sad at heart was he because that he had slain the lad, and greatly, too, did he fear the wrath of Dietrich.

Elsan, who had followed the lads from Istria, had meanwhile found Dietrich, and he gave him tidings of their fate. Dietrich smote off his head, and hastened towards the place of sorrow. He found the dead bodies of the young heroes; he wept over them.

"Alas," he cried, "what grief is mine! What sin have I committed that I should be punished thus? My body bears not a battle scar. I have triumphed in the field, and yet is my brother taken from me, and the sons of Etzel laid n death. Never again can I return unto the land of the Huns."

He looked around him. He beheld Witege taking flight on Diether's horse across the heath, and his heart burned to be avenged. Oil his steed Falke he leapt at a bound and rode after the traitor knight. Flames issued from his mouth, so great was his fury.

As he drew nigh to Witege, he called: "Flee not before me, thou hell-hound! If thou art not as great a coward as thou art a traitor, stand now that I may avenge my brother's death."

Witege paused not. He cried in answer: "I had to fight for my life against Diether. 'Twas not my desire to combat against him."

Swiftly rode Witege until he came to the shore of the lake at the river mouth. Dietrich pressed on close

[p. 445]

behind him; his spear was in his hand; he hurled it against the traitor. . . .

But Witege paused not; he rode into the water, and his wrathful pursuer was but a horse-length behind him. . . .

Then suddenly there rose out of the lake the mermaid Waghild, his grandsire's mother. She seized Witege and his steed and drew them beneath the waves. . . . Dietrich rode out until his horse had to swim, but he sought in vain for his brother's slayer. . . . Never again was Witege beheld by human eyes, for the mermaid bore him unto her cave under the waters and guarded him there.

Dietrich returned to the battlefield, and the remnants of Sibeche's army were put to flight. But Dietmar's great son had no joy in the victory, nor could he press on farther with the army of Huns, because that Etzel's two sons were slain. He could hope not for aught save the vengeance of him who had given him help to win back his kingdom.

He mourned for Diether and for Erp and Ortwin, and when they were given burial he bade Rudiger to lead back the army unto the land of the Huns. So did the margrave do: he returned unto Etzel with his heroes; he stood before the king; he gave unto him the mournful tidings of the loss of the two princes.

The queen lamented aloud, but the king, whose heart was sorrow-stricken also, spake saying:

"So hath it happened as it ever doth in the fortunes of war. Each man must die at his appointed time."

Then asked he of Rudiger: "Where is Dietrich and Hildebrand? Why come they not into my presence?'

"They mourn apart," answered the Margrave; "loath

[p. 446]

are they to approach thee because that Erp and Ortwin have been cut off."

Then sent Etzel two knights unto Dietrich, but he refused to go with them before the king; whereat the queen, who at first was wroth against him, rose up and did herself go unto the hero.

She spake to him, saying: "How fought my sons Erp and Ortwin? Were they fearless and bold in battle and worthy their kin?"

"Because they feared not," Dietrich answered, "they fought and fell one after another; nor would they be parted, so great was their love."

The queen kissed him while she wept, and then led him before King Etzel.

Then did Dietrich cast himself at the feet of his great ally, and made offer of his life because that the princes were slain. But Etzel raised him up; Dietrich he kissed, and they sat down together. So was their friendship made more enduring.

When two summers went past the queen died. But ere life was taken from her she warned the king to wed not a wife from the land of the Nibelungs. "Else," she said, "thou and the children she may have shall suffer evil beyond concept."

But the good queen's words were forgotten when Etzel sent envoys unto King Gunther, so that he might have Kriemhild for his bride.

Now Dietrich and old Hildebrand had aforetime been friends of King Gunther and Hagen, and when the conflict was waged at Etzel's Court, by reason of Kriemhild's evil doings, they did hold aloof, until impetuous Wolfhart was drawn into the fray. Then was old Hildebrand wounded, and all the knights of Dietrich were slain.

'Twas then, as hath been told, that Dietmar's great

[p. 447]

son took arms against Hagen and Gunther and overcame them. But when they were put to death, Hildebrand slew Kriemhild, whom he called "a devil".

Etzel said: "A devil she hath been indeed. But for her many a noble knight would still be alive."

Now be it told of how King Etzel passed from before men. Aldrian, Hagen's son, vowed to avenge his sire's death. So he paid visit unto Etzel and spake to him regarding the Nibelung treasure.

"If thou wilt accompany me," he said, "I shall reveal to thee alone where the gold lies hidden."

Etzel went forth. Hagen's son led him to a secret cave which is below the Rhine water. There he beheld vast treasure and his eyes were gladdened. But Aldrian stepped back suddenly and said:

"Now mayest thou have full enjoyment of the gold which thou didst desire, and I shall have vengeance for my sire's death."

When he spake thus, Aldrian shut the door of the cave, and Etzel perished of hunger in that concealed and secure prison n the midst of all the treasure which he desired to obtain.

So time went past, and then tidings came to Dietrich that Ermenrich had been slain by two princes, who avenged the death of Svanhild, and that Sibeche desired to sit upon the throne. He raised an army to march into his own kingdom, and old Hildebrand went with him.

"Rather would I die in Bern," Dietrich said, "than remain any longer in exile even among the Huns."

Footnotes

^439:1 Bikki of the Volsung tale. Ermenrich is Jormunrek.

^441:1 Attila.

^441:2 Norway and Sweden.

    
Teutonic Myth and Legend, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 448]

  

CHAPTER XLII

  

The King's Homecoming

The Army of Huns--Hildebrand and Hadubrand--The Challenge--Hildebrand identifies his Son--Hadubrand suspects Treachery--The Combat --Tragic Ending--Dietrich's Victory--Triumphant Return to Bern--Sibeche slain--The Aged King--A Deathless Hero--The Wild Huntsman.

Now the length of time which Dietrich passed in exile was thirty and two years. He had never ceased to long to return again unto Bern. Hildebrand, who shared with him his sorrow, shared also his hope. He had waxed aged, and men tell that he had grown a century old, yet was he fierce in conflict as of yore, and wise as he was brave.

When Dietrich, leading his army of Huns towards Bern, drew nigh to the northern frontier of the land of the Amelungs, Hadubrand came forth against him with a strong band. Then were the opposing forces drawn up in battle array. And it was fated that Dietrich should return alone unto Bern.

Ere the battle began two brave knights rode forth from either army, challenging one another to single combat. Fearless and of noble seeming were they both. One was old Hildebrand; the other was Hadubrand, his own son, who was but a babe when his father fared forth with Dietrich from Bern. Long had they been parted; now, at last, were they met, but to fight as foemen.

[p. 449]

Son and father had adjusted their armour with care; they were clad in coats of mail; their swords were girded over their armour when they rode into the fight.

Hildebrand, Heribrand's son, spoke first when they drew nigh one to another. He was the older and the wiser man. Few were his words, but he asked:

"Who among men was thy sire? . . . Which generation's child art thou? If thou wilt give me the name of but one of thy kinsmen, I shall know the others; all the nobles of the kingdom are known unto me."

Hadubrand answered: "Wise old men who died long ago were wont to tell me that my sire's name was Hildebrand. . . . Mine own name is Hadubrand. In years past Hildebrand fled eastward with Dietrich and many of his men. He left behind him, helpless and alone, his wife and his child; he left his own people behind. Dietrich had lost his sire; he had become a friendless man, and my sire hated Ermenrich-that worthy hero! . . . Hildebrand was wont to be with Dietrich a leader of the people; he loved warfare; well known was he indeed unto valiant men. . . . I do not believe that ne is still alive."

Hildebrand was deeply moved, and he spake, saying: "Now do I call to witness Irmin, [*1] the god of my people, that I dare not combat with thee, because that thou art so near of kin."

As he spake the old hero took from his arm the twisted armlet of fine gold which Dietrich had given him. He held it towards his son, saying: "This do I give unto thee for love's sake, Hadubrand."

The son advanced not to accept his father's proffered gift. He suspected treachery, so he spake, saying:

[p. 450]

"A warrior must receive gifts with his spear--when lance is against lance. . . . Thou art an old and cunning hero. Fain wouldst thou entice me now with gentle speech. . . . Thou wilt throw thy spear at me betimes. . . . So old art thou grown and so cunning, that thou art become a hardened deceiver."

Mournfully did Hildebrand shake his head.

"Seafarers have told me, his son protested, "that they heard from the east of warfare above the Wendel-sea. [*1] 'Twas told them: 'Hildebrand, Heribrand's son, is dead.'"

"O ruling god! What fate is ours?" cried Hildebrand. . . . "For thirty summers and thirty winters have I wandered as a fugitive. Ever went I into battle against the bowmen, nor would one of them give me my death. . . . Now my own child will hew me with his sword or throw me down with his spear. or else I shall be his murderer. . . ."

In silence he gazed a moment upon his son; he regarded the noble form with sorrow and pride.

"Thou mayest easily win the fight with so old a man as I am he said, "if thy strength is great. If thou dost triumph, thou shalt have my treasure for booty."

Hadubrand made answer with softer voice, for he had spoken harshly: "I can see from thine armour," he said, "that thou hast a good master; and methinks thou didst never become a fugitive by compulsion."

Pleasant were the words of Hadubrand in the ears of his sire. Hildebrand loved his son because that he was fearless and bold and thirsted for the fray. He could delay not meeting him any longer, lest he should be called a coward by friends and foemen alike. So he spake, saying:

[p. 451]

"He who would deny thee combat now would be the worst of eastern men. Greatly dost thou covet glory! By common right of war this conflict should show forth to-day which of us can make boast among men."

Then began they to fight. They tilted with their spears one against the other, but the heavy thrusts were parried by their shields. . . . Ere long they drew their swords--their hard-edged splitters--and fearfully they hewed until, at length, their white shields were splintered and battered. . . . They cast aside their broken bucklers. . . . They fought then with their swords alone.

Silence fell upon the opposing armies. No man spake. Every eye was turned upon the brave warriors in fierce conflict. . . . Neither side was confident of the issue. . . . Never before was Hildebrand so well matched; never did Hadubrand combat against so powerful a foeman.

Long they fought, so that it seemed the conflict would never end. . . . Then fell the last swordstroke. Sudden was its fall like lightning, and as sure, and Hadubrand sank upon the ground, bleeding from his deathwound.

Hildebrand flung his blade from him. He knelt beside the fallen hero. The stern old warrior wept bitter tears.

"Alas," he cried, "I have slain mine own son!"

Hadubrand, enduring sharp agony, looked up with death-bright eyes.

"Thou art, indeed, my sire," he said; "no man save Hildebrand could have prevailed against me."

Hildebrand wound his arms about the dying hero. Deathly white was his face like that of his son. Fate had stricken him sore. . . . The battle began to be waged nigh unto him and went past. . . . He spake not

[p. 452]

to the nobles who came near at eventide.... The eyes of the fallen warrior were then glazed by death; his lips were cold; his armour was reddened by blood; Hadubrand had died of his wounds. Hildebrand, Heribrand's son, had died of grief. . . .

Victory was won by Dietrich. His enemies were scattered before him, and those who were not slain fled unto their homes.

But sad was Dietrich's heart when he rode in triumph into Bern because that old Hildebrand was dead. By the people he was received with great rejoicings; he went unto his palace; there did the nobles greet him and do him homage, laying at his feet gifts of gold and many gems. So was he acclaimed the rightful king.

Sibeche sought in vain to stem the tide of victory which thereafter fell to Dietrich's arms. He marched against the king with a great army; he fought but a single battle. By a brave knight was he challenged to single combat, and after fierce and prolonged fighting he was cleft in twain. Thereafter was his army defeated, and those who survived the vengeance of Dietrich laid down their arms and did him homage. Then was Dietmar's great son exalted among men, for he was crowned king over all the dominions which Ermenrich had held. When Etzel died he was made king of the Huns also. Thus did he become the greatest monarch of his time--he who had long been an exile from his own land.

Long was the reign of King Dietrich, and there was peace over all the wide dominions which he ruled, for it was given unto him to be wise as he was powerful.

To a great old age did he live. And minstrels, wandering from land to land to sing in the halls of heroes, have told that he never died. For it chanced that he went forth one day to hunt in a deep forest. Among

[p. 453]

the huntsmen there was none who was his equal even although he was burdened with years. He bathed himself, after the chase was ended, in a small lake. A dwarf came nigh and cried out:

"O King, the greatest stag which man hath ever looked upon is rushing past; it escapeth the huntsmen."

Dietrich left the water; he wrapped a rug about himself and called for his horse, but he was not heard.

Then there burst through the trees a noble and high-stepping black steed. No man rode it. Dietrich sprang into the saddle; he urged it on, and the black steed ran faster than the wind.

The dwarf rode behind him: "Swiftly indeed thou dost ride," he cried; "when wilt thou return, O King?"

Dietrich made answer: "I can hold not back this evil steed, nor can I dismount from it. Nor can I return again until it is the will of God and the Holy Mary."

So Dietrich vanished from sight. And nevermore was he seen among men. Yet when the wind is high, and the world is tempest-stricken, the sound of hoofs are heard in mid-air, and men know then that Dietrich, seated on his black steed, is pursuing the stag as of old across the heavens. [*1]

Footnotes

^449:1 Irmin's Way is the "Milky Way".

^450:1 The Mediterranean.

^453:1 Like Odin, Charlemagne, King Arthur, &c, he is the Wild Huntsman in the Raging Host.

    


===== BOOK: tmu.txt =====



Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRTY MINOR UPANISHADS

  

TRANSLATED BY

  

K. NARAYANASVAMI AIYAR

  

Translator of

  

Laghu Yoga Vasishtha, Vasudevamanana

  

&c. &c. &c.

  

MADRAS

  

[1914]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, November 2009. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

TO

THE RSHIS OF INDIA

WHO BY TREADING THE PATH

OF

THE UPANISHADS HAVE PERFECTED THEMSELVES

AND

REALISED THE GOAL

THIS HUMBLE EFFORT

TO SPREAD THEIR ANCIENT TEACHINGS IN A MODERN GARB

IS DEDICATED

BY ONE

WHO LOVES AND WORSHIPS THEM

AND TRIES TO WALK IN THEIR FOOTSTEPS

AS THEIR HUMBLE AND DEVOTED DISCIPLE

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS

           

       PAGE

     
      I. VEDANTA-UPANISHADS:

        

     
          1. Muktikopanishad of S'ukla-Yajurveda

       <page 1>

     
          2. Sarvasara-Upanishad of   Krshna-Yajurveda

       <page 13>

     
          3. Niralamba-Upanishad of   S'ukla-Yajurveda

       <page 18>

     
          4. Maitreya-Upanishad of Samaveda

       <page 24>

     
          5. Kaivalya-Upanishad of Krshna-Yajurveda

       <page 31>

     
          6. Amrtabindu-Upanishad Do.

       <page 34>

     
          7. Atmabodha-Upanishad of Rgveda

       <page 37>

     
          8. Skanda-Upanishad of Krshna-Yajurveda

       <page 41>

     
          9. Paingala-Upanishad of S'ukla-Yajurveda

       <page 43>

     
          10. Adhyatma-Upanishad Do.

       <page 55>

     
          11. Subala-Upanishad Do.

       <page 61>

     
          12. Tejobindu-Upanishad of Krshna-Yajurveda

       <page 78>

     
          13. Brahmopanishad Do.

       <page 106>

     
          14. Vajrasuchi-Upanishad of Samaveda

       <page 110>

     
       

        

     
      II. PHYSIOLOGICAL UPANISHADS:

        

     
          15. S'ariraka-Upanishad of Krshna-Yajurveda

       <page 113>

     
          16. Garbha-Upanishad Do.

       <page 116>

     
       

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      III. MANTRA-UPANISHADS:

        

     
          17. Tarasara-Upanishad of   S'ukla-Yajurveda

       <page 124>

     
          18. Narayana-Upanishad of   Krshna-Yajurveda

       <page 128>

     
          19. Kalisantarana-Upanishad Do.

       <page 130>

     
       

        

     
      IV. SANNYASA-UPANISHADS:

        

     
          20. Bhikshuka-Upanishad of   S'ukla-Yajurveda

       <page 132>

     
          21. Naradaparivrajaka-Upanishad of   Atharvanaveda

       <page 134>

     
       

        

     
      V. YOGA-UPANISHADS:

        

     
          22. S'andilya-Upanishad of   Atharvanaveda

       <page 173>

     
          23. Yogatattva-Upanishad of   Krshna-Yajurveda

       <page 192>

     
          24. Dhyanabindu-Upanishad of   Samaveda

       <page 202>

     
          25. Hamsa-Upanishad of S'ukla-Yajurveda

       <page 212>

     
          26. Amrtanada-Upanishad of Krshna-Yajurveda

       <page 216>

     
          27. Varaha-Upanishad Do.

       <page 220>

     
          28. Mandalabrahmana-Upanishad of   S'ukla-Yajurveda

       <page 243>

     
          29. Nadabindu-Upanishad of Rgveda

       <page 254>

     
          30. Yogakundali-Upanishad of   Krshna-Yajurveda

       <page 260>

     
      INDEX

       <page 273>

     
   

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. i]

  

###2384###

  

FOREWORD

FOR the first time it is, I believe, that the English translation of so many as 30 Upanishads is being put forth before the public in a collected form. Among the Hindu Scriptures, the Vedas hold the pre-eminent place. The Upanishads which are culled from the Aranyaka-portions of the Vedas--so-called because they were read in the Aranya (forest) after the learner had given up the life of the world--are regarded as the Vedanta, or the end or final crown of the Vedas. Vedanta is also the end of all knowledge, since the word Vedas means according to its derivation 'knowledge'. Rightly were the Upanishads so considered, since their knowledge led a person to Atma, the goal of life. The other portion of the Vedas, viz., Samhitas and Brahmanas, conferred upon a man, if he should conform to the requisite conditions, the mastery of the Universe only which is certainly inferior to Atma. It is these Upanishads that to the western philosopher Schopenhauer were the "solace of life".

There are now extant, in all, 108 Upanishads, of which the principal or major 12 Upanishads commented upon by S'ri S'ankaracharya and others were translated into English by Dr. Roer and Raja Rajendra Lal Mitra and re-translated by Max Muller in his "Sacred Books of the East," together with one other Upanishad called Maitrayani. Of the rest, 95 in number, two or three Upanishads have appeared in English up to now, but never so many as are here presented to the public, so far as I am aware.

Many years ago, the late Sundara S'astri, a good Sanscrit Scholar and myself worked together to put into English garb the Upanishads that had not been attempted before, and

[p. ii]

succeeded in publishing most of those which are here gathered in the monthly issues of The Theosophist. The Karmic agents willed that my late co-worker should abandon his physical garment at a premature age. Then I resolved upon throwing up my worldly business of pleading the cause of clients before the bench for that of pleading the cause of God before the public. The incessant travel in that cause since then for over 18 years from place to place in all parts of India left me no leisure until now to republish all the above translations in a book form. But when this year a little rest was afforded me, I was able to revise them as well as add a few more. I am conscious of the many faults from which this book suffers and have no other hope in it than that it will serve as a piece of pioneer work, which may induce real Yogins and scholars to come into the field and bring out a better translation.

There are many editions of the Upanishads to be found in Calcutta, Bombay, Poona, South India and other places. But we found that the South Indian editions, which were nearly the same in Telugu or Grantha characters, were in many cases fuller and more intelligible and significant. Hence we adopted for our translation South Indian editions. The edition of the 108 Upanishads which the late Tukaram Tatya of Bombay has published in Devanagari characters approaches the South Indian edition. As the South Indian edition of the Upanishads is not available for the study of all, I intend to have the recensions of that edition printed in Devanagari characters, so that even those that have a little knowledge of Sanscrit may be able to follow the original with the help of this translation.

Transliteration

In the transliteration of Sanscrit letters into the English alphabet certain difficulties present themselves. Let me take first the letter #. There are three letters in Sanscrit #, #, and #. They are differently pronounced and one should not be confounded with another. For the first letter we have the English equivalent S and for the last Sh. But for the second one we

[p. iii]

have none whatsoever. The prominent writers in the field of Theosophy have been transliterating this letter into Sh. Hence in writing the word ### they made it Kashi in the English language. They utter it also in the same manner. To a South Indian ear, it is rather grating. The mantras especially depend for their efficacy upon proper pronunciation. When we therefore utter the words wrongly, there is committed according to Sanscrit writers, Varna-Hatya-Dosha or the sin of the murder of letters or words. In my translation I have represented the letter # by S' and not by Sh, since I consider the latter to be a mistake. Other transliterations are:--

It would be well if our leaders of thought conferred together and came to some agreement upon the question of transliteration.

The Order of the Upanishads

The Upanishads translated have been classified under the headings of (1) Vedanta, (2) Physiology, (3) Mantra, (4) Sannyasa and (5) Yoga. But these are not hard and fast divisions. For instance in the Sannyasa and Yoga Upanishads, mantras also are given. But in the Mantric Upanishads, Mantras alone are given.

Vedanta and Yoga Upanishads

The Upanishads that come under the headings of Vedanta and Yoga are the most important. But it is the latter Upanishads that are most occult in their character, since it is they that give clues to the mysterious forces located in nature and man, as well as to the ways by which they maybe conquered. With reference to Vedanta, the ancient teachers thereof have rightly ordained that none has the right to enter upon a study of it, unless he has mastered to a slight degree at least the Sadhana-Chatushtaya, or four means of salvation. He should not, only be convinced in theory of the fact that Atma

[p. iv]

is the only Reality, and all else are but the ephemeral things of the world, but he should also have outgrown in practice the craving for such transitory worldly things: besides he should have developed a fair mastery over the body and the mind. A non-compliance with these precedent conditions leads men into many anomalies. The orthodox and the clever without any practice are placed in a bad predicament through a study of these Upanishads. In such Upanishads as Maitreya and others, pilgrimages to holy places, the rituals of the Hindus, ceremonial impurities at the time of birth and death, Mantras, etc., are made light of. To the orthodox that are blind and strict observers of rites and ceremonies, statements like these give a rude shock. Hence Upanishads are not meant for persons of this stamp. Nor are they intended tor mere intellectual people who have no knowledge of practice about them, and are immersed in the things of the world. Some of us are aware of the manner in which men with brains alone have made a travesty of the doctrine of Maya. Not a few clever but unprincipled persons actually endeavour to justify arguments of all kinds of dissipations and wrong conduct by the assertion that it is all Maya. The old Rshis were fully aware of the fact that Vedanta would be desecrated by those that had not complied with its precedent conditions. Only when the desires and the self are overcome and the heart is made pure, or as Upanishadic writers put it, the heart-knot is broken, only then the Atma in the heart will be truly realised: and then it is that the Atma in all universe is realised also, the universe being then seen as Maya. But so long as the Atma in the heart is not realised through living the life, the universe will not be realised as Maya, and "God everywhere" will be but in words.

One special point worthy of notice in the Upanishads is that all the knowledge bearing upon a subject is not put forward in one and the same place. We have to wade through a mass of materials and a number of Upanishads, ere we can have a connected view of a subject. In modern days when 'a subject is taken up, all the available information is given in one place in a systematic manner. But not so in the Upanishads.

[p. v]

[paragraph continues] Take the subject of Pranas which refer to life itself. In one Upanishad, one piece of information is given, another in another and so on. And unless we read them all together and reconcile the seemingly discrepant statements, we cannot have a complete and clear knowledge of the subject. This process was adopted by the Rshis, probably because they wanted to draw out thereby the intellectual and spiritual faculties latent in the disciple, and not to make him a mere automaton. In these days when knowledge is presented in a well-assimilated form, it is no doubt taken up easily but it does not evoke the latent reasoning power so much. When therefore the disciple went in the ancient days to the teacher for the solution of a difficulty, having been unable to find it himself after hard thinking, it was understood easily and permanently because of the previous preparation of the mind, and was also reverently appreciated as a boon and godsend, because of the difficulty previously experienced. The function of the teacher was not only to explain the difficult points to the taught, but also to make him realise those things of which understanding was sought. As an illustration, we might take the case of the soul. The Guru not only explained the difficult passages or points relating to the soul, but also made the disciple leave the body or bodies and realise himself as the soul. As we cannot get such Gurus in the outer world nowadays, the only thing left to do instead is to secure the publication of simple treatises on matters of Vedanta and Yoga for the benefit of the public. I hope, I shall before long be able to make a start in this direction.

In studying the Upanishads on Vedanta and Yoga, we find certain peculiarities which throw a light on their greatness. Both of them lay stress upon certain centres in the human body for development. The 12 major Upanishads as well as the Vedanta Upanishads herein published deal with the heart and the heart alone; while the Yoga Upanishads treat of many centres including the heart. For the purpose of simplification, all the centres may be divided under the main headings of head, heart and the portion of the body from the navel downwards.

[p. vi]

But why? The key which will unlock these secrets seems to be this. All religions postulate that the real man is the soul, and that the soul has to reach God. Christianity states that God created the soul in His own image and that the soul has to rise to the full stature of God in order to reach Him. Hinduism says that Jivatma (the human soul) is an Ams'a or portion of Paramatma, or God, which is to eventually unfold the powers of God, and compares it with a ray of the sun of God, or a spark out of the fire of God. In all religions, there is an unanimity of opinion that the soul is a likeness of God, having God's powers in latency to be unfolded hereafter. Let us therefore first understand the attributes of God. He is said to have omnipresence, omniscience and omnipotence. Hinduism translates these ideas into Sat, Chit and Ananda. They are eternal existence, infinite knowledge, and unlimited power. The soul identifying itself with the body thinks it lives for the life-term of the body only; cooped up by the brain, it imagines, it has only the knowledge circumscribed by the brain; carried away by the pleasures of the senses, it whirls about in the midst of them as if they constituted the Real Bliss. But when it wakes up from the dream of the lower things of the body and glances upwards to the higher world of Spirit, it discovers its delusions and finds itself to be of the same nature as the God above, who is eternal, all-knowing and all-powerful. And this discovery has to be made by each soul in the human body, in which it is functioning, through the three main centres of head, heart and navel. Through the heart, it cuts the heart-knot and realises its all-pervading character when it realises its eternity of existence; through the brain, it rises beyond it through its highest seat, viz., Sahasrara which corresponds to the pineal gland in the physical body, and obtains its omniscience; through the navel, according to the Upanishads--it obtains a mastery over that mysterious force called Kundalini which is located therein, and which confers upon it an unlimited power--that force being mastered only when a man arises above Kama or passion. Psychologists tell us that desires when conquered lead to the development of will. When will is developed to a great degree,

[p. vii]

naturally great power, or omnipotence, ensues: our statement is that Kundalini when conquered leads to unlimited powers and perfections, or Siddhis like Anima, etc., and that Kundalini can only be conquered through rising above the desires of the senses.

From the foregoing it is clear that the Vedanta Upanishads are intended only for those devotees of God that want to have a development of the heart mainly, and not of the brain and the navel, and that the Yogic Upanishads are intended for those that want to have an all-round development of the soul in its three aspects. Here I may remark that S'ri S'ankaracharya and other commentators commented upon the 12 Upanishads only, since other Upanishads treating of Kundalini, etc., are of an occult character and not meant for all, but only for the select few who are fit for private initiation. If they had proceeded to comment upon the minor Upanishads also, they would have had to disclose certain secrets which confer powers and which are not meant, therefore, for all. It would be nothing but fatal to the community, were the secrets leading to the acquisition of such powers imparted indiscriminately to all. In the case of dynamite, the criminal using it may be traced, since it is of a physical nature, but in the case of the use of the higher powers, they are set in motion through the will, and can never be traced through ordinary means. Therefore in the Upanishad called Yoga-Kundalini, the final truths that lead to the realisation of the higher powers are said to be imparted by the Guru alone to the disciple who has proved himself worthy after a series of births and trials.

In order to expound the Upanishads, especially those that bear upon Yoga, some one who is a specialist in Yoga--better still, if he is an Adept--should undertake the task of editing and translating them. The passages in Yoga Upanishads are very mystic sometimes; sometimes there is no nominative or verb, and we have to fill up the ellipses as best as we can.

One more remark may be made with reference to the Upanishads. Each Upanishad is said to belong to one of the Vedas. Even if we take the 12 Upanishads edited by Max Muller and others, we find some of them are to be found in the existing

[p. viii]

[paragraph continues] Vedas and others not. Why is this? In my opinion this but corroborates the statement made by the Vishnu-Purana about the Vedas. It says that at the end of each Dwapara Yuga, a Veda-Vyasa, or compiler of the Vedas, incarnates as an Avatara of Vishnu--a minor one--to compile the Vedas. In the Yugas preceding the Kali Yuga we are in, the Vedas were "one" alone though voluminous. Just before this Kali Yuga began, Krshna-Dwaipayana Veda-Vyasa incarnated, and, after withdrawing the Vedas that were not fit for this Yoga and the short-lived people therein, made with the aid of his disciples a division of the remaining portions into four. Hence perhaps we are unable to trace the Vedas of which some of the extant Upanishads form part.

K. NARAYANASWAMI

ADYAR, March 1914.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

MUKTIKOPANISHAD

  

of

  

S'UKLA-YAJURVEDA

  

AdHYaYA I

ADDRESSING with devotion and obedience S'ri-Rama--the Lord Hari, at the end of His Samadhi, who being Himself changeless is the witness of the thousands of changes of Buddhi, and who ever rests in Swarapa-Dhyana (the meditation on Reality) while seated under the bejewelled dome of the palace in the lovely city of Ayodhya, in the midst of Sita, Bharata and Soumitri (Lakshmana) S'atrughna and others, eulogised day and night by Sanaka and other hosts of Munis, as well as by Vasishtha, S'uka, and other devotees of Vishnu--Hanuman, after praising them, asked: "O Rama, Thou art Paramatma of the nature of Sachchidananda. O foremost of the family of Raghu, I make prostrations to Thee again and again. O Rama, I wish to know for the sake of emancipation, Thy nature as it really is. O Rama, be Thou gracious enough to tell me that by which I shall be easily released from the bondage of mundane existence and by which I shall attain salvation."

(S'ri-Rama replied:) "O mighty-armed one, well asked: hearken then to the truth uttered by Me. I am well established in Vedanta (or the end of Vedas or knowledge). Have thou recourse to Vedanta well."

(Hanuman again asked:) "O foremost of Raghus, what are Vedantas? where do they abide? Pray enlighten me." (S'ri-Rama replied:) "O Hanuman, listen to Me. I shall truly describe

[p. 2]

to you the nature of Vedanta. Through the expiratory breath of Myself--Vishnu, the Vedas were generated as many. Like the oil in the sesamum seeds, Vedanta is well established (or latent) in the Vedas."

(Hanuman asked again:) "O Rama, how many are the Vedas and their branches? O Raghava, what are the Upanishads? Please, through Thy grace, tell me truly."

(S'ri-Rama said:) "Through the divisions of Rgveda and others, the Vedas are said to be four in number. Their branches are many. So also the Upanishads. In Rgveda, there are branches, 21 in number. O son of Vayu, there are 109 branches in Yajurveda. O conqueror of enemies, there are 1,000 branches in Samaveda. O best of Monkeys, there are 50 branches in Atharvanaveda. In each branch, there is one Upanishad. Whoever with devotion to Me studies even one of the Rks (hymns) in these, attains the state of absorption, rare for the Munis to attain."

(Hanuman asked:) "O Rama, some excellent Munis have said there is one kind of salvation only, while others [stated that salvation is attained] through the uttering of Thy name or the initiation into Taraka (Om) at Kas'i (Benares); others through Sankhya-Yoga, others through the Yoga of Devotion; other Maharshis through the meditation upon the meaning of Mahavakyas (the sacred sentences of the Vedas). Salvation is stated to be of four kinds through the divisions of Salokya and others."

(S'ri-Rama replied:) "There is only one true emancipation. O Kapi (Monkey), even a person addicted to evil practices attains the salvation of Salokya (My world) through the uttering of My name, but not of other worlds. Should one die in Brahma-na.la (the lotus-stalk--also street) in Kas'i, [*1] he attains My Taraka (Mantra). Such a person attains salvation without any rebirth; wherever he may die in Kas'i, Mahes'wara initiates him by whispering My Taraka (Mantra) into his right ear. Such person, freed from all sins, attains My Swarupa (Form). It is this that is termed Salokya-Sarupya salvation. The twice-born who is of virtuous conduct and who, without diverting his

[p. 3]

intelligence on any other, meditates upon Me, the All-Atma, attains Samipya (nearness) to Me.

"It is this that is termed Salokya-Sarupya-Samipya salvation. The twice-born who according to the path opened by the teacher, meditates upon My immutable Reality attains Sayujya (absorption) into Me, like the caterpillar into the wasp. This is the Sayujya salvation which is productive of Brahmic bliss and auspicious. Thus these kinds of salvation arise through the Upasana (worship) of Me.

"The only means by which the final emancipation is attained is through Mandukya-Upanishad alone, which is enough for the salvation of all aspirants. If Jnana is not attained thereby, study the 10 Upanishads; thou shalt soon attain Jnana , and then My Seat. O son of Anjana, if thy Jnana is not made firm, practise (study) well the 32 Upanishads. Thou shalt get release. If thou longest after Videhamukti (or disembodied salvation), study the 108 Upanishads. I will truly state in order the (names of the) Upanishads with their S'anti (purificatory Mantras). Hearken to them. (They are:) Is'a, Kena, Katha, Pras'na, Munda, Mandukya, Tittiri, Aitareya, Chhandogya, Brhadaranyaka, Brahma, Kaivalya, Jabala, S'wetas'watara, Hamsa, Aruni, Garbha, Narayana, (Parama)-Hamsa, (Amrta)-Bindu, (Amrta)-Nada, (Atharva)-S'ira, (Atharva)-S'ikha, Maitrayani, Kaushitaki, (Brhat)-Jabala, (Narasihma)-Tapani, Kalagnirudra, Maitreyi, Subala, Kshurika, Mantrika, Sarvasara, Niralamba, (S'uka)-Rahasya, Vajrasuchika, Tejo-(Bindu), Nada-(Bindu), Dhyana-(Bindu), (Brahma)-Vidya, Yoga-Tattwa, Atmabodhaka, Parivrat (Narada-Parivrajaka), (Tri)-S'ikhi, Sita, (Yoga)-Chuda-(Mani) Nirvana, Mandala-(Brahmana), Dakshina-(Murti), S'arabha, Skanda, (Tripadvibhuti)-Maha-Narayana, Adwaya-(Taraka), (Rama)-Rahasya, (Rama)-Tapani, Vasudeva, Mudgala, S'andilya, Paingala, Bhikshu, Mahat-S'ariraka, (Yoga)-S'ikha, Turiyatita, Sannyasa, (Paramahamsa)-Parivrajaka, Akshamalika, Avyakta, Ekakshara, (Anna)-Purna, Surya, Akshi, Adhyatma, Kundika, Savitri, Atma, Pas'upata, Parabrahma, Avadhuta, Tripuratapani, Devi, Tripura, Kara, Bhavana, (Rudra)-Hrdaya, (Yoga)-Kundalini, Bhasma-(Jabala) Rudraksha, Ganapati, Dars'ana, Tarasara,

[p. 4]

[paragraph continues] Mahavakya, Panchabrahma, (Prana)-Agnihotra, Gopala-Tapani, Krshna, Yajnavalkya, Varaha, S'atyayani, Hayagriva, Dattatreya, Garuda, Kali-(Santarana), Jabala, Soubhagya, Saraswatirahasya, Bahvricha, and Muktika. These 108 (Upanishads) are able to do away with the three Bhavanas [of doubt, vain thought, and false thought], conferring Jnana and Vairagya, and destroying the three Vasanas [of book-lore, world and body].

"The twice-born--after learning the 108 Upanishads, together with the S'anti as prescribed both before and after from the mouth of a Guru well versed in the observances of Vedic knowledge and study--become Jivanmuktas till the destruction of their Prarabdha; in course of time as Prarabdha is destroyed, they attain My disembodied salvation. There is no doubt of it. O son of Vayu, these 108 Upanishads, which are the essence of all the Upanishads, and are capable of destroying all sins through their mere study, have been imparted by Me to you as a disciple. This science of the 108 Upanishads taught by Me, is an occult one, and will free persons from bondage, whether they read them with or without knowledge. To gratify the desire of a supplicant, a kingdom may be given or wealth, but never shall the 108 Upanishads be imparted to an atheist, an ungrateful person, one intent on vicious actions, one having no devotion towards Me, or one who loses his path in the cave of books. On no account shall they be given to one devoid of devotion. O Maruti, it is only after a thorough examination that they should be imparted to a disciple doing service (to a Guru), to a well-disposed son, or to one devoted to Me, following good observances, belonging to a good family, and being of good intelligence. Whoever studies or hears the 108 Upanishads attains Me. There is no doubt of this. This is stated in the Rk (verse) thus--Vidya (Saraswati) went to a Brahmana (and addressed him) thus: 'Protect me. I shall be thy treasure. Do not confide me to the envious, to one not treading the right path, or to the rogue. Then I shall be potent.' Impart this Atmanishtha-Vidya relating to Vishnu to one after well examining him, who had studied much, is alert, intelligent, observant of the vow of celibacy, and serving [the Guru]."

[p. 5]

Then Hanuman asked S'ri-Ramachandra to relate the S'anti of each Upanishad according to the divisions of Rgveda and others to which they belong. To which S'ri-Rama replied: "Aitareya, Kaushitaki, Nada-(Bindu), Atma-Bodha, Nirvana, Mudgala, Akshamalika, Tripura, Soubhagya and Bahvricha--these 10 Upanishads are of Rgveda and have the S'anti beginning with 'Vanme-Manasi, etc'. Is'a, Brhadaranyaka, Jabala, Hamsa, (Parama)-Hamsa, Subala, Mantrika, Niralamba, Tris'ikhi-Brahmana, Mandala-Brahmana, Adwaya-Taraka, Paingala, Bhikshu, Turiyatita, Adhyatma, Tarasara, Yajnavalkya, S'atyayani, and Muktika--these 19 Upanishads are of S'ukla Yajurveda and have the S'anti beginning with 'Purnamada, etc'.

"Katha, Tittiri, Brahma, Kaivalya, S'wetas'watara, Garbha, Narayana, (Amrta)-Bindu, (Amrta)-Nada, Kalagnirudra, Kshurika, Sarvasara, S'ukarahasya, Tejo-(Bindu), Dhyana-(Bindu), (Brahma)-Vidya, Yoga-Tattwa, Dakshina-(Murti), Skanda, S'ariraka, (Yoga)-S'ikha, Ekakshara, Akshi, Avadhuta, Kara, (Rudra)-Hrdaya, (Yoga)-Kundalini, Panchabrahma, (Prana)-Agnihotra, Varaha, Kali-(Santarana), and Saraswatirahasya,--these 32 Upanishads are of Krshna Yajurveda and have the S'anti beginning with 'Sahanavavatu, etc'.

"Kena, Chhandogya, Aruni, Maitrayani, Maitreyi, Vajrasuchika, (Yoga)-Chuda-(Mani), Vasudeva, Mahat-Sannyasa, Avyakta, Kundika, Savitri, Rudraksha, Jabala, Dars'ana, and Jabali,--these 16 Upanishads are of Samaveda and have the S'anti beginning with 'Apyayantu, etc'.

"Pras'na, Mundaka, Mandukya, (Atharva)-S'ira, (Atharva)-S'ikha, (Brhat)-Jabala, (Nrsihma)-Tapani, (Narada-Parivrajaka), Sita, S'arabha, Maha-Narayana, (Rama)-Rahasya, (Rama)-Tapani, S'andilya, (Paramahamsa)-Parivrajaka, (Anna)-Purna, Surya, Atma, Pas'upata, Parabrahma, Tripuratapani, Devi, Bhavana, Bhasma-(Jabala), Ganapati, Mahavakya, Gopala-Tapani, Krshna, Hayagriva, Dattatreya, and Garuda,--these 31 Upanishads of Atharvana-Veda have the S'anti commencing with 'Bhadram-Karnebhih, etc'.

"Persons desirous of emancipation and having developed the four means of salvation should, with presents in their hands,

[p. 6]

approach a Guru full of faith, of good family, proficient in Vedas, scripture-loving, of good qualities, straightforward, intent upon the welfare of all beings, and an ocean of compassion; and after studying under him, according to the rules, the 108 Upanishads, he should ever be going through the process of studying, thinking and reflecting upon them. With the cessation of the three bodies through the destruction of Prarabdha, they attain the state of Plenum without any Upadhis like the ether in the pot (after the pot is broken). This is the embodied salvation, this is the final emancipation. Therefore even those in Brahmaloka through the studying of Vedanta from the mouth of Brahma attain with Him the final emancipation. Hence to all these is stated the final emancipation through the Jnana path, and not through Karma, Sankhya-Yoga, and other Upasanas. Thus is the Upanishad."

  

AdHYaYA II

Again Maruti (Hanuman) addressed S'ri-Ramachandra thus: "What is Jivanmukti? what is Videhamukti? what is the authority therein? what about its perfection? what is the object of such a perfection?"

(S'ri-Rama replied:) "The Dharma of a man's Chitta that has the characteristics of agency and enjoyment is fraught with pains and hence tends towards bondage. The control of it (the Chitta) is Jivanmukti. Videhamukti follows when through the extinction of Prarabdha, the removal of the vehicles [of the bodies] takes place like the ether in the pot [after the pot is broken]. The authority on the points of Jivanmukti and Videhamukti is the 108 Upanishads. Its object [of perfection] is the attaining of eternal bliss through the removal of the pains of agency, etc. This has to be achieved through human efforts. Like progeny obtained through the Putrakameshti sacrifice, wealth in trade, or heaven through the Jyotishtoma sacrifice, so Jivanmukti is gained through Samadhi arising through Vedantic study, and accomplished through human efforts. It has to be won through the extinction of all Vasanas. Regarding it, there are verses

[p. 7]

thus: 'The efforts of man are stated to be of two kinds, those that transcend scriptures and those that are according to scriptures. Those that transcend scriptures tend to harm while those that are according to scriptures tend to Reality.' To men, true Jnana does not arise through the Vasanas of the world, scripture and body. Vasana is divided into two, the pure and the impure. If thou art led by the pure Vasanas, thou shalt thereby soon reach by degrees My Seat. But should the old impure Vasanas land thee in danger, they should be overcome through efforts. This river of Vasanas towards objects, which flows in the pure and impure paths, should be diverted to the pure path through human efforts. The impure ones have to be transmuted into the pure. That which is diverted from the impure turns towards the pure. So also the reverse. This child, Chitta has to be fondled through human efforts. O killer of enemies, it is only when through means of practice both Vasanas quite abandon thee, that thou wilt be able to realise the effects of [such] practice. Even in the case of doubt, the pure Vasanas alone should be practised.

"O son of Vayu, there is nothing wrong in the increase of the pure Vasanas. The extinction of Vasanas, Vijnana and the destruction of Manas [as these three] when practised together for a long time are regarded, O great and intelligent one, as fruitful. So long as these are not equally practised again and again, so long the [Supreme] Seat is not attained, even after the lapse of hundreds of years. Even should one of these [three] be practised for a long time, it will not yield its fruit like a Mantra imperfectly done. Through the practice of these for a long time, the firm knots of the heart are cut, without doubt, like the breaking of the threads in a lotus-stalk rent in twain. The illusory Samsaric Vasana that has arisen through the practice of [many] hundreds of lives never perishes except through the practice of Yoga for a long time. Therefore, O Somya [disciple], after having put away to a distance the desire of enjoyment through discriminative human effort, resort to these three alone. The wise know that a mind associated with Vasana tends to bondage, while a mind well freed from

[p. 8]

[paragraph continues] Vasana is said to be an emancipated one. O Maha-kapi [great Monkey] practise the state of a mind devoid of Vasana. Vasana perishes through well-conducted deliberation and truth. Through the absorption of Vasanas, Manas attains quiescence like a lamp [without oil]. He whose mind, devoid of destruction, is [centred] on Me as of the nature of Chinmatra [consciousness alone], abandoning the , is no other than Myself of the nature of Sachchidananda. Whether  and Karma are performed or not, one who has a supreme Chitta with a heart devoid of all desires is an emancipated person. He whose mind is freed from Vasanas is not subject to the fruits arising from the performance or non-performance of actions, or Samadhi or Jnana. Except through the entire giving up of Vasanas and through Mouna [the observance of silence towards objects], the Supreme Seat is not attained. Though devoid of Vasanas, the eye and other organs are involuntarily prompted to their (respective) external objects through habit. Just as the eye without any desire sees without any effort the objects that fall on it, so also the undaunted man of intelligence enters into the affairs [of the world] without any desire. O Maruti, the Munis know that as Vasana which is manifested through the consciousness of objects, which is of the nature of the object itself, and which is the cause of the origination and absorption of Chitta. This excessively fluctuating Chitta is the cause of birth, dotage and death, due to the identification of itself with objects practised firmly [for a long time]. Like the analogy of the seed and the tree, the vibration of Prana arises through Vasana and (vice versa) the Vasana through the former--these forming the seed of Chitta. To the tree of Chitta, there are two seeds: the vibration of Prana and Vasana. Should either of them perish, both perish soon. Through the actions of the world being done without attachment, through the abandoning of the [thought of the] reality of the universe and the conviction of the destructibility of the body, Vasana does not arise. Through the complete giving up of Vasana, Chitta becomes not-Chitta. When the mind does not think at all, being completely devoid of Vasana, then dawns the state of mindlessness which confers the

[p. 9]

great peace. So long as you are without a mind of [true] discrimination and are not a knower of the Supreme Seat, so long should you follow whatever has been decided by the teacher and the authorities of the sacred books. When your sins are burnt up and you are a knower of the Reality without any anxiety, then all the good Vasanas even should be given up.

"The destruction of Chitta is of two kinds, that with form and that without form. [The destruction of] that with form is of the Jivanmukta; (the destruction of), that without form being of the Videhamukta. O son of Vayu, hearken to [the means of] the destruction of Chitta. That is said to be the destruction of Chitta when it, associated with all the attributes of Maitri (friendship) and others, becomes quiescent [without any resurrection]. There is no doubt of it. Then the Manas of a Jivanmukta is free from fresh rebirth; to him, there is the destruction of Manas with form. But to the Videhamukta, there is the destruction of Man as without form. It is Manas that is the root of the tree of Samsara with its thousands of shoots, branches, tender leaves and fruits. I think it to be Sankalpa alone. In order that the tree of Samsara may wither soon, dry up its root through the quiescence of Sankalpa. There is only one means to control one's mind. That is to destroy the mind as soon as it rises. That is the (great) dawn. In the case of the wise, the mind is destroyed: but in the case of the ignorant, it is indeed a fetter. So long as the mind is not destroyed through the firm practice of the One Reality, so long as Vasanas are prancing about in the heart like Vetala (goblin) in the night-time. The Vasanas of enjoyment of one who has destroyed the egoism of Chitta and controlled the organs, the enemies, decay like lotuses in mid-winter. Pressing one hand against the other, setting teeth against teeth, and forcing one limb against the other, he should first conquer his mind.

"It is not possible on the part of the one-thoughted to control the mind by sitting up again and again except through the approved means. As a vicious rutting elephant is not subject to control except through the goad, so in the matter of the control of the mind, the effective means are the attainment of

[p. 10]

spiritual knowledge, association with the wise, the entire abdication of all Vasanas and the control of pranas. While such are the [prescribed] means, should persons try to control the mind through violence, they are like those that search in darkness, having thrown aside the light (in their hands). Those who endeavour to control the mind through force are but trying to bind a mad elephant with the filaments of a lotus-stalk.

To the tree of the mind having the ever-growing branches of modifications, there are two seeds. One is the fluctuation of Prana, and the other is the firmness of Vasana. The [One] All-pervading Consciousness is agitated by the fluctuation of Prana. The means of Dhyana by which [the one] Jnana is attained through the one-pointedness of the mind is now imparted to you. After duly resolving back the things originated [in the universe] with all their changes, meditate upon that which remains--[viz.], Chinmatra (the consciousness alone), which is also Chidananda (conscious-bliss). The wise say that the interval experienced by Yogins after the inspiration and before the (next) expiration is [the internal] Kumbhaka (cessation of breath); while the interval of complete equilibrium after expiration and before the next inspiration is the external Kumbhaka. Through the force of the practice of Dhyana, the current of the modification of Manas devoid of Self that is of Brahmic nature is said to be Samprajnata Samadhi, while the mind with the utter quiescence of modifications that confers upon one supreme bliss is said to be Asamprajnata-Samadhi that is dear unto Yogins. This [state] that is devoid of light, Manas and Buddhi, and that is of the nature of Chit (consciousness merely) is styled by the Munis Atadvyavrtti Samadhi (a Samadhi that does not care or require the aid of another). It is Plenum above, below and in the middle, and is of the nature of S'iva (auspiciousness). This noumenal (or occult) Samadhi is itself Vidhi-Mukha (sanctioned by books or Brahma).

"The clinging to objects without previous or subsequent deliberation through intense thought [or longing] is stated to be Vasana. O chief of Monkeys, whatever is meditated upon by a person with ardent impetuosity without any other Vasana

[p. 11]

[paragraph continues] --that he soon becomes. A person that is entirely subject to Vasana becomes of the nature of that. When he regards this [universe] as Sat [the Reality], then he is subject to delusion. Because of the many strong Vasanas, he does not abandon the nature of the universe. This person of wrong vision sees everything under infatuation like one deluded. Vasanas are of two kinds--the pure and the impure. The impure ones are the cause of rebirth, while the pure are the destroyers of it. The impure are said by the wise to be of the nature of intense Ajnana, associated with the great Ahankara and generative of rebirth. Of what avail is the chewing again and again of the many S'astric stories to one that has abandoned the seed of rebirth, having turned it into a burnt one? O Maruti, thou shouldst with effort seek the effulgence within. O tiger of Monkeys, whoever, after having abandoned the visible and the invisible, is as the One alone is not a mere knower of Brahman but is Brahman itself. One who having studied the four Vedas and the various books does not cognize the reality of Brahman is like the ladle ignorant of the taste of the dainty. Therefore what other advice of indifference can be imparted to a person that has not attained the indifference to the impure Vasana of delusion [or body]? This body is very impure while the one [Atma] that dwells in it is very pure. When the differences between the two are [thus] known, what then may be ordained as the purification? The bondage of Vasana is the [real] bondage, while the destruction of Vasana is salvation. After wholly abandoning the Vasanas, give up even the desire for salvation. After first giving up the Vasana of objects dependent upon the Vasana of the mind, attract unto thyself the pure Vasanas associated with Maitri [friendship] and others. Though engaged in the world with these pure Vasanas, give up them too and retire within the quiescent desires and become of the form of the longing after Chit alone. Then, O Maruti! giving up that also associated as it is with Manas and Buddhi, mayst thou now left alone become firm in Me in Samadhi. O son of Vayu! always worship My Reality that is destructive of pains, without sound, touch, form, decay, taste, destruction or smell, and without name and

[p. 12]

[paragraph continues] Gotra [clan]. I am that non-dual One (Brahman) that is of the nature of the visible (Jnana), like unto the Akas', supreme, always shining, without birth, non-dual, without destruction, without attachment and pervading all. I am the All, and of the nature of salvation. One should ever meditate upon Me thus: 'I am of the form of the visible [Jnana], the pure, of changeless nature and have really no objects in Me. I am the ever-full Brahman, transverse and across, up and down.' Also meditate upon Me thus: 'I am birthless, deathless, ageless, immortal, self-shining, all-pervading, destructionless, causeless, pure beyond the effect (of the universe) and ever content.' When one's body becomes a prey to time, he gives up the state of Jivanmukti, as the wind attains the motionless state.

"The following is said in the Rg [-Veda] also: Like the eye which is spread in the Akas' (seeing all things without any obstacle), so the wise ever see the Supreme. Seat of Vishnu. The Brahmanas that have ever the Divine vision praise in diverse ways and illumine the Supreme Seat of Vishnu."

OM-TAt-SAt IS THE UPANISHAd.

Footnotes

^2:1 There is a street in Kasi called Brahma-nala.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 13]

  

SARVASARA-UPANISHAD [*1]

  

OF

  

KRSHNA-YAJURVEDA

[In the text, all the questions are given first and then the answers follow. But the following arrangement is adopted to facilitate reference.]

1. What is Bandha (bondage).

Atma [the Self] falsely superimposing the body and others which are not-Self upon Himself, and identifying Himself with them--this identification forms the bondage of the Self.

2. What is Moksha [emancipation]?

The freedom from that [identification] is Moksha.

3. What is Avidya (Nescience)?

That which causes this identification--that indeed is Avidya.

4. What is Vidya (knowledge)?

That which removes this identification is Vidya.

5. What are (meant by) the states of Jagrat [the waking], Swapna [the dreaming], Sushupti [the dreamless sleeping] and Turiya [the fourth]?

Jagrat is that [state] during which Atma enjoys the gross objects of senses as sound, etc., through the 14 organs [*2] as Manas, etc., having the sun and the rest as their presiding deities.

Swapna is that [state] during which Atma experiences, through the 14 organs associated with the Vasanas [affinities],

[p. 14]

of the waking condition, sound and other objects which are of the form of the Vasanas created for the time being, even in the absence of [the gross] sound and the others. Atma experiences Sushupti when it does not experience sound and other objects of sense from the cessation of the functions of the 14 organs, there being no special enjoying consciousness on account of the absence of these organs.

Turiya is that state during which Atma is a witness to the existence of the above-mentioned three states, though it is in itself without (their) existence and non-existence and during which it is one uninterrupted Chaitanya (consciousness) alone. And that Chaitanya is that which is connected with the three states, which is without the three states, and which is pare.

6. What are the Annamaya, Pranamaya, Manomaya, Vijnanamaya and Anandamaya Kos'as (sheaths)?

Annamaya sheath is the aggregate of the materials formed by food. When the ten Vayus (Vital airs), Pranas and others, flow through the Annamaya sheath, then it is called the Pranamaya sheath. When Atma connected with the above two sheaths performs the functions of hearing, etc., through the 14 organs of Man as and others, then it is called Manomaya sheath.

When in the (Antah-karana) internal organs connected with the above three sheaths, there arise the modifications of contemplation, meditation, etc., about the peculiarities of the sheaths, then it is called Vijnanamaya sheath.

When the self-cause Jnana is in its Self-bliss like the banyan tree in its seed, though associated with these four sheaths caused by Ajnana, then it is called Anandamaya sheath. Atma which is associated with the Upadhi [vehicle] of these sheaths is figuratively called Kos'a.

7. What is meant by Karta (actor), Jiva, Panchavarga [the five groups], Kshetrajna (the lord of the place), Sakshi [the witness], Kutastha and Antaryamin (the latent guide)?

Karta (the actor) is the one who possesses the body and the internal organs through their respective desires proceeding from the idea of pleasure and pain. The idea of pleasure is that modification of the mind known as love. The idea of pain is

[p. 15]

that modification of the mind known as hate. The cause of pleasure and pain are sound, touch, form, taste and odour.

Jiva is that Adhyasi [deluded one] that thinks that this body, which is obtained through the effects of good and bad Karmas, is one not so obtained.

Panchavarga (the five groups) are (1) Manas, viz., Manas, Buddhi, Chitta and Ahankara (creating uncertainty, certitude, flitting thought and egoism), (2) Prana, i.e., Prana, Apana, Vyana Samana and Udana, (3) Sattwa, i.e., Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas. (4) the [five] elements: earth, water, fire, Vayu and Akas' and (5) Dharma and its opposite Adharma.

The original Avidya which has the characteristics of the above 5 groups, which does not perish without Atma-Jnana, which appears eternal through the presence of Atma and which is the vehicle for [the manifestation of] Atma, is the seed of the Linga [subtle] body. It is also called Hrdaya-granthi [the heart-knot].

The Chaitanya [consciousness] which is reflected and shines in it is Kshetrajna.

Sakshi [the witness] is that conscious one that is aware of the appearance and disappearance [of the three states] of the knower, the knowledge and the known, who is himself without [or not affected by] this appearance and disappearance, and who is self-radiant.

Kutastha is he who is found without exception in the Buddhi of all creatures from Brahma down to ants, and who is shining as Atma and dwells as witness to the Buddhi of all creatures.

Antaryamin is the Atma that shines as the ordainer, being within all bodies like the thread [on which] beads [are strung] and serving to know the cause of the several differences of Kutastha and others associated with him.

8. Who is Pratyagatma?

He is of the nature of truth, wisdom, eternity and bliss. He has no vehicles of body. He is abstract wisdom itself, like a mass of pure gold that is devoid of the changes of bracelet, crown, etc. He is of the nature of mere consciousness. He is that which shines as Chaitanya and Brahman. When He is

[p. 16]

subject to the vehicle of Avidya and is the meaning of the word "Twam" ('Thou' in "Tattwamasi"), then He is Pratyagatma.

9. Who is Paramatma?

It is He who is associated with truth, wisdom, eternity, bliss, omniscience, etc., who is subject to the vehicle of Maya and who is the meaning of the word "Tat" (or 'That' in "Tattwamasi").

10. What is Brahman?

Brahman is that which is free from all vehicles, which is the Absolute Consciousness devoid of particularities, which is Sat (Be-ness), which is without a second, which is bliss and which is Maya-less. It is different from characteristics of that expressed by the word "Twam" (Thou) subject to Upadhis (vehicles), or the characteristics of 'That' expressed by the word "Tat" subject to Upadhis. It is itself differenceless and is seen as the Seat of everything. It is the pure, the noumenal, the true and the indestructible.

And what is Satya (the true)?

It is the Sat (Be-ness) which is the aim pointed out by the Vedas. It is that which cannot be said to be Asat (not-Be-ness). It is that which is not affected by the three periods of time. It is that which continues to exist during the three periods of time. It is that which is. It is one without a second. It has not the differences of similarity or dissimilarity; or it is that which is the source of all ideas. It is that which does not perish even though space, time, matter, cause, etc., perish.

And what is Jnana (wisdom)?

It is self-light. It is that which illuminates all. It is that Absolute Consciousness which is without any obscuration. It is that Consciousness which has no beginning or end, which is perpetual and which is the witness to all modifications and their opposites.

And what is Ananta (the eternal)?

It is that which is without origin and destruction. It is that which is not subject to the six changes (viz., birth, growth, manhood, decay, old age and death). It is free from all Upadhis. It is that Consciousness which, being all full and without

[p. 17]

destruction, permeates the created universe composed of Avyakta and others, like the earth in the modifications of clay, the gold in the modifications of gold, and thread in the modifications of thread.

And what is Ananda (bliss)?

It is the seat of all sentient beings, like the ocean of the water, is eternal, pure, partless and non-dual, and is the sole essence of Chidananda (consciousness-bliss).

11. Of how many kinds are substances?

There are three kinds, Sat (Be-ness), Asat (not-Be-ness) and Mithya (Illusion).

Sat alone is Brahman. Asat is that which is not. Mithya is the illusory ascription to Brahman of the universe that is not.

What is fit to be known is Brahman, the Atma alone.

Brahma-Jnana is the rooting out of all--bodies and such like--that are not Self, and the merging in Brahman, the Sat. The universe of Akas' and others including Jiva is not-Atma.

12. What is Maya?

The root of this not-Atma is Maya. She appears in Brahman like clouds, etc., in the sky. She has no beginning but has an end. She is subject to proof and not-proof. She neither is; nor is not; nor is she a combination of both (Sat and Asat). Her seat is indescribable. She has the varieties of differences as extolled by the wise. It is she that truly is not. Her nature is Ajnana. She appears as Mulaprakrti, Guna-Samya (a state where the three Gunas are found in equilibrium), [*1] Avidya (Nescience) and other forms, transforming herself into the form of the universe. Thus does a knower of Brahman cognize her.

Footnotes

^13:1 This Upanishad and the next form a glossary of some of the terms of Vedanta. 'Sarva-Sara' is the all-essence or quintessence.

^13:2 They are the 5 organs of sense, the 5 organs of action and the 4 of Antah-karana (the internal organ), viz., Manas, Buddhi, China and Ahankara. Each is animated by a Devata or intelligential principle.

^17:1 This refers to that slumbering or latent state of the universe--called also Maha-Sushupti when the Gunas are in equilibrium; on re-awakening into activity when the Gunas are disturbed, Mulaprakrti is called by the different names of Maya, Avidya, Tamas, etc.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18]

  

NIRALAMBA [*1]-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

S'UKLA-YAJURVEDA

HARIH-OM. I shall relate in the form of a catechism whatever should be known for the removal of all miseries that befall these ignorant creatures [men].

What is Brahman? Who is Is'wara? Who is Jiva? What is Prakrti? Who is Paramatma? Who is Brahma? Who is Vishnu? Who is Rudra? Who is Indra? Who is Yama? Who is Surya? Who is Chandra? Who are Devas? Who are Rakshasas? Who are Pis'achas? Who are Manushyas? Who are Women? Who are Pas'us, etc.? What is Sthavara? Who are Brahmans and others? What is Jati (caste)? What is Karma? What is Akarma? What is Jnana? What is Ajnana? What is Sukha? What is Duhkha? What is Swarga? What is Naraka? What is Bandha? What is Moksha? Who is Upasya? Who is Vidwan? Who is Mudha? What is Asura? What is Tapas? What is Paramapada? What is Grahya? What is Agrahya? Who is Sannyasi? Thus are the questions.

1. What is Brahman?

It is the Chaitanya that appears, through the aspects of Karma and Jnana, as this vast mundane egg composed of Mahat, Ahankara and the five elements, earth, water, fire, Vayu and --that is secondless--that is devoid of all Upadhis [vehicles], that is full of all S'aktis [potencies], that is without beginning and end, that is described as pure, beneficial, peaceful, and Guna-less and that is indescribable.

[p. 19]

2. Who is Is'wara? and what are His characteristics?

 itself, having through His S'akti called Prakrti (matter) created the worlds and being latent in them, becomes the ruler of Buddhi and Indriyas (organs of sense and action) as well as Brahma (the creator) and others. Hence he is named Is'wara.

3. Who is Jiva?

Is'wara Himself, subject to the false superimposition upon Himself [of the idea] "I am the gross" through the [assumption of the] names and forms of Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Indra, and others is Jiva. Though one, he appears as many Jivas, through the force of the different Karmas originating the bodies.

4. What is Prakrti (matter)?

It is nothing else but the S'akti [potency] of Brahman which is of the nature of Buddhi that is able to produce the many motley worlds by virtue of the mere presence of Brahman.

5. What is Paramatma?

The supreme Atma or soul. It is Brahman alone that is Paramatma as it (the former) is far superior to bodies and others.

6. Who is Brahma [the creator]?
 7. Who is Vishnu [the preserver]?
 8. Who is Rudra [the destroyer]?
 9. Who is Indra?
 10. Who is Yama [the angel of death]?
 11. Who is Surya [the Sun]?
 12. Who is Chandra [the Moon]?
 13. Who are Devas [the Angels]?
 14. Who are Asuras [the Demons]?
 15. Who are Pis'achas [the evil spirits]?
 16. Who are Manushyas [the men]?
 17. Who are Women?
 18. What are beasts, etc.?
 19. What are the Sthavaras [fixed ones]?
 20. Who are Brahmans and others?

That Brahman is Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra and Indra, Yama, Sun and Moon, Devas, Asuras, Pis'achas, men, women, beasts, etc., the fixed ones, Brahmans and others. Here there is no manyness in the least degree: all this is verily Brahman.

[p. 20]

21. What is Jati (caste)

It cannot refer to the skin, the blood, the flesh or the bone. There is no caste for Atma; caste is only conventional.

22. What is Karma?

Karma is that action alone which is performed by the organs and ascribed to Atma as "I do" (viz., agency being attributed to Atma).

23. What is Akarma [or non-Karma]?

Akarma is the performance, without any desire for the fruits, of the daily and occasional rites, sacrifices, vows, austerities, gifts and other actions that are associated with the egoism of the actor and the enjoyer, and that are productive of bondage, rebirth, etc.

24. What is Jnana?

It is the realisation by direct cognition of the fact that in this changing universe there is nothing but Chaitanya [the one life] that is Consciousness, that is of the form of the seer and the seen, pervading all things, that is the same in all, and that is not subject to changes like pot, cloth, etc. This realisation is brought about by means of the subjugation of the body and the senses, the serving of a good Guru (teacher), the hearing of the exposition of Vedantic doctrines and constant meditation thereon.

25. What is Ajnana?

It is the illusory attribution, like the snake in the rope, of many Atmas (souls) through the diverse Upadhis [or vehicles] of the angels, beasts, men, the fixed ones, females, males, castes and orders of life, bondage and emancipation, etc., to Brahman that is secondless, all-permeating and of the nature of all.

26. What is Sukha (happiness)?

It is a state of being of the nature of bliss, having cognized through experience the Reality of Sachchidananda [or that which is be-ness, consciousness and bliss].

27. What is Duhkha (pains)?

It is the mere Sankalpa [or the thinking] of the objects of mundane existence [or of not-Self according to the Bombay Edition].

[p. 21]

28. What is Swarga (heaven)?

It is the association with Sat [either good men or Brahman which is Sat, the true].

29. What is Naraka (hell)?

It is the association with that which brings about this mundane existence which is Asat [the false].

30. What is Bandha [bondage]?

Such Sankalpas [thoughts] as "I was born," etc., arising from the affinities of beginningless Ajnana form bondage.

The thought obscuration [or mental ignorance] of the mundane existence of "mine" in such as father, mother, brother, wife, child, house, gardens, lands, etc., forms bondage.

The thoughts of I-ness as actor, etc., are bondage.

The thought of the development in oneself of the eight Siddhis (higher psychical powers) as Anima and others [*1] is bondage.

The thought of propitiating the angels, men, etc., is bondage. The thought of going through the eight means of Yoga [*2] practice, Yama, etc., is bondage.

The thought of performing the duties of one's own caste and order of life is bondage.

The thought that command, fear and doubt are the attributes of [or pertain to] Atma is bondage.

The thought of knowing the rules of performing sacrifices, vows, austerity and gift is bondage. Even the mere thought of desire for Moksha (emancipation) is bondage. By the very act of thought, bondage is caused.

31. What is Moksha [emancipation]?

Moksha is the (state of) the annihilation, through the discrimination of the eternal from the non-eternal, of all thoughts of bondage, like those of "mine" in objects of pleasure and pain, lands, etc., in this transitory mundane existence.

32. Who is Upasya [or fit to be worshipped]?

That Guru (or spiritual instructor) who enables (the disciple) to attain to Brahman, the Consciousness that is in all bodies.

[p. 22]

33. Who is S'ishya (the disciple)?

The disciple is that Brahman alone that remains after the consciousness of the universe has been lost (in him) through Brahmic wisdom.

34. Who is Vidwan (the learned)?

It is he who has cognized the true form (or reality) of his own consciousness that is latent in all.

35. Who is Mudha [the ignorant]?

He who has the egoistic conception of the body, caste, orders of life, actor, enjoyer and others.

36. What is Asura [the demoniacal]?

It is the Tapas [austerity] practised by one inflicting trouble on the Atma within through Japa [or inaudible muttering of Mantras], abstinence from food, Agnihotra [the performance of the worship of fire], etc., attended with cruel desire, hatred, pain, hypocrisy and the rest for the purpose of acquiring the powers of Vishnu, Brahma, Rudra, Indra and others.

37. What is Tapas?

Tapas is the act of burning--through the fire of direct cognition of the knowledge that Brahman is the truth and the universe, a myth--the seed of the deep-rooted desire to attain the powers of Brahma, etc.

38. What is Paramapada [the supreme abode]?

It is the seat of the eternal and emancipated Brahman which is far superior to Pranas (the vital airs), the organs of sense and actions, the internal organs (of thought), the Gunas and others, which is of the nature of Sachchidananda and which is the witness to all.

39. What is Grahya [or fit to be taken in]?

Only that Reality of Absolute Consciousness which is not conditioned by space, time or substance.

40. What is Agrahya?

The thought that this universe is truth--this universe which is different from one's Self and which being subject to Maya (or illusion) forms the object of (cognition of) Buddhi and the organs.

41. Who is the Sannyasi [ascetic]?

[p. 23]

A Sannyasi is an ascetic who having given up all the duties of caste and orders of life, good and bad actions, etc., being freed from [the conceptions of] "I" and "mine" and having taken his refuge in Brahman alone, roams at large practising Nirvikalpa Samadhi and being firmly convinced of "I am Brahman" through the realisation of the meaning of such sacred (Vedic) sentences as "Thou art That" "All this is verily Brahman" and "Here there is no manyness in the least". He only is an emancipated person. He only is fit to be adored. He only is a Yogin. He only is a Paramahamsa. He only is an Avadhuta. He only is a Brahman. Whoever studies the Niralamba-Upanishad becomes, through the grace of Guru, pure like fire. Ho becomes pure like Vayu (air). He does not return. He is not born again: nay he is not born again.

Such is the Upanishad.

Footnotes

^18:1 Lit.--without support.

^21:1 There are 18 Siddhis, 8 higher and 10 lower.

^21:2 They are Yama, Niyama, etc.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 24]

  

MAITREYA-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

SAMAVEDA

A KING named Brhadratha, thinking this body to be impermanent and having acquired indifference (to objects), retired to the forest, leaving his eldest son to rule over (his) kingdom. With hands uplifted and eyes fixed on the sun, he performed a severe Tapas (or religious austerity). At the end of a thousand days, the Lord S'akayanya Muni, a knower of Atma, who was like fire without smoke, and who was as a scorching fire with his Tejas (spiritual lustre) approached (him) and addressed the King thus: "Rise, rise and choose a boon." The King prostrated before him and said: "O Lord, I am not an Atmavit (or knower of Atma). Thou art a Tattwavit, we hear. Please enlighten me about Sattva (the state of Sat or Brahman)." (To which) the Muni replied thus: "O thou that art born of the race of Ikshwaku: To begin with, your question is difficult (of explanation): do not question me. Ask for any other thing you desire." Thereupon the King touched the feet of S'akayanya and recited the (following) verse:

"What is the use of these to me or any other? Oceans dry up. Mountains sink down. The positions of Dhruva (the Polar Star) and of trees change. Earth is drowned. The Suras (angels) run away, leaving their (respective) places. (While such is the case), I am He in reality. Therefore of what avail to me is the gratification of desires, since one who clings to the gratification of desires is found to return again and again to this Samsara (mundane existence)? Thou art able to extricate me (out of this Samsara). I am drowned like a frog in a dry well. Thou art my refuge.

[p. 25]

"O Lord! this body was the result of sexual intercourse. It is without wisdom; it is hell (itself). It came out through the urinary orifice. It is linked together by bones. It is coated over with flesh. It is bound by skin. It is replete with faeces, urine, Vayu (air), bile, phlegm, marrow, fat, serum and many other impurities. O Lord! to me in such a foul body (as this), thou art my refuge."

Thereupon Lord S'akayanya was pleased and addressed the King thus: "O Maharaja, Brhadratha, the flag of the Ikshwaku race, thou art an Atmajnani. Thou art one that has done his duty. Thou art famous by the name of Marut." At which the King asked: "O Lord! in what way, can you describe Atma?" To which he replied thus: "Sound, touch, and others which seem to be Artha (wealth) are in fact Anartha (evil). The Bhutatma (the lower Self) clinging to these, never remembers the Supreme Seat. Through Tapas, Sattwa (quality) is acquired; through Sattwa, a (pure) mind is acquired; and through mind, (Parama-) Atma, (the higher Self) is reached. Through attaining Atma, one gets liberation. Just as fire without fuel is absorbed into its own womb, so Chitta (thought) through the destruction of its modifications is absorbed into its own womb (source). To a mind that has attained quiescence and truth, and which is not affected by sense-objects, the events that occur to it through the bondage of Karma are merely unreal. It is Chitta alone that is Samsara. It should be cleansed with effort. Whatever his Chitta (thinks), of that nature he becomes. This is an archaic mystery. With the purifying of Chitta, one makes both good and bad Karmas to perish. One whose mind is thus cleansed attains the indestructible Bliss (through his own Self). Just as Chitta becomes united with an object that comes across it, so why should not one (be released) from bondage, when one is united with Brahman. One should meditate in the middle of the lotus of the heart, Parames'wara (the highest Lord) who is the witness to the play of Buddhi, who is the object of supreme love, who is beyond the reach of mind and speech, who has no beginning or end, who is Sat alone being of the nature of light only, who is beyond meditation, who can

[p. 26]

neither be given up nor grasped (by the mind), who is without equal or superior, who is the permanent, who is of unshaken depth, who is without light or darkness, who is all-pervading, changeless and vehicleless, and who is wisdom of the nature of Moksha (salvation). I am He--that Paramatma who is the eternal, the pure, the liberated, of the nature of wisdom, the true, the subtle, the all-pervading, the secondless, the ocean of bliss, and one that is superior to Pratyagatma (the lower Self). There is no doubt about it. How will calamity (or bondage) approach me who am depending upon my own bliss in my heart, who have put to shame the ghost of desires, who look upon this universe as (but) a jugglery and who am not associated with anything. The ignorant with their observance of the castes and orders of life obtain their fruits according to their Karmas. Men who have given up all duties of castes, etc., rest content in the bliss of their own Self. The distinctions of caste and orders of life have divisions among them, have beginning and end, and are very painful. Therefore having given up all identification with sons and as well as body, one should dwell in that endless and most supreme Bliss."

  

AdHYaYA II

Then Lord Maitreya went to Kailas and having reached it asked Him thus: "O Lord! please initiate me into the mysteries of the highest Tattwa." To which Mahadeva replied: "The body is said to be a temple. The Jiva in it is S'iva alone. Having given up all the cast-off offerings of Ajnana, one should worship Him with So'ham (I am He). The cognition of everything as non-different from oneself is Jnana (wisdom). Abstracting the mind from sensual objects is Dhyana (meditation). Purifying the mind of its impurities is Snana (bathing). The subjugation of the Indriyas (sensual organs) is S'aucha (purification). One should drink the nectar of Brahman and beg food for maintaining the body. Having one (thought) alone, he should live in a solitary place without a second. The wise man should observe thus: then be obtains Absolution.

"This body is subject to birth and death. It is of the nature of the secretion of the father and mother. It is impure,

[p. 27]

being the seat of happiness and misery. (Therefore) bathing is prescribed for touching it. It is bound by the Dhatus (skin, blood, etc.), is liable to severe diseases, is a house of sins, is impermanent and is of changing appearance and size. (Therefore) bathing is prescribed for touching it. Foul matter is naturally oozing out always from the nine holes. It (body) contains bad odour and foul excrement. (Therefore) bathing is prescribed for touching it. It is connected (or tainted) with the child-birth impurity of the mother and is born with it. It is also tainted with death impurity. (Therefore) bathing is prescribed for touching it. (The conception of) "I and mine" is the odour arising from the besmeared dung and urine. The release from it is spoken of as the perfect purification. The (external) purification by means of water and earth is on account of the worldly. The destruction of the threefold affinities (of S'astras, world and body) generates the purity for cleansing Chitta. That is called the (real) purification which is done by means of the earth and water of Jnana (wisdom) and Vairagya (indifference to objects).

"The conception of Adwaita (non-dualism) should be taken in as the Bhiksha (alms-food); (but) the conception of Dwaita (dualism) should not be taken in. To a Sannyasi (ascetic), Bhiksha is ordained as dictated by the S'astra and the Guru. After becoming a Sannyasi, a learned man should himself abandon his native place and live at a distance, like a thief released from prison. When a person gives up Ahankara (I-am-ness) the son, wealth the brother, delusion the house, and desire the wife, there is no doubt that he is an emancipated person. Delusion, the mother is dead. Wisdom, the son is born. In this manner while two kinds of pollution have occurred, how shall we (the ascetics) observe the Sandhyas (conjunction periods)? The Chit (consciousness) of the sun is ever shining in the resplendent Akas' of the heart. He neither sets nor rises; while so, how shall we perform the Sandhyas? Ekanta (solitude) is that state of one without second as determined by the words of a Guru. Monasteries or forests are not solitudes. Emancipation is only for those who do not doubt. To those who doubt, there

[p. 28]

is no salvation even after many births. Therefore one should attain faith. (Mere) abandoning of the Karmas or of the Mantras uttered at the initiation of a Sannyasi (ascetic) will not constitute Sannyasa. The union of Jiva (-Atma) (the lower Self) and Parama (-Atma) (the higher Self) at the two Sandhis (morning and evening) is termed Sannyasa. Whoever has a nausea for all Ishana (desires) and the rest as for vomited food, and is devoid of all affection for the body, is qualified for Sannyasa. At the moment when indifference towards all objects arises in the mind, a learned person may take up Sannyasa. Otherwise, he is a fallen person. Whoever becomes a Sannyasi on account of wealth, food, clothes and fame, becomes fallen in both (as a Sannyasi and as ); (then) he is not worthy of salvation.

"The thought of (contemplation upon) Tattwas is the transcendental one; that of the S'astras, the middling, and that of Mantras, the lowest. The delusion of pilgrimages is the lowest of the lowest. Like one, who, having seen in water the reflection of fruits in the branches of trees, tastes and enjoys them, the ignorant without self-cognition are in vain overjoyed with (as if they reached) Brahman. That ascetic is an emancipated person who does not abandon the internal alms-taking (viz., the meditation upon the non-dual), generating Vairagya as well as faith the wife, and wisdom the son. Those men (termed) great through wealth, age, and knowledge, are only servants to those that are great through their wisdom as also to their disciples. Those whose minds are deluded by My Maya, however learned they may be, do not attain Me, the all-full Atma, and roam about like crows, simply for the purpose of filling up their belly, well burnt up (by hunger, etc.). For one that longs after salvation, the worship of images made of stone, metals, gem, or earth, is productive of rebirth and enjoyment. Therefore the ascetic should perform his own heart-worship alone, and relinquish external worship in order that he may not be born again. Then like a vessel full to its brim in an ocean, he is full within and full without. Like a vessel void in the ether, he is void within and void without. Do not become (or

[p. 29]

differentiate between) the Atma that knows or the Atma that is known. Do become of the form of that which remains, after having given up all thoughts. Relinquishing with their Vasanas the seer, the seen and the visual, worship Atma alone, the resplendent supreme presence. That is the real supreme State wherein all Sankalpas (thoughts) are at rest, which resembles the state of a stone, and which is neither waking nor sleeping."

  

AdHYaYA III

"I am "I" (the Self). I am also another (the not-Self). I am Brahman. I am the Source (of all things). I am also the Guru of all worlds. I am of all the worlds. I am He. I am Myself alone. I am Siddha. I am the Pure. I am the Supreme. I am. I am always He. I am the Eternal. I am stainless. I am Vijnana. I am the Excellent. I am Soma. I am the All. I am without honour or dishonour. I am without Gunas (qualities). I am S'iva (the auspicious). I am neither dual or non-dual. I am without the dualities (of heat or cold, etc.) I am He. I am neither existence nor non-existence. I am without language. I am the Shining. I am the Glory of void and non-void. I am the good and the bad. I am Happiness. I am without grief. I am Chaitanya. I am equal (in all). I am the like and the non-like. I am the eternal, the pure, and the ever felicitous. I am without all and without not all. I am Sattwika. I am always existing. I am without the number one. I am without the number two. I am without the difference of Sat and Asat. I am without Sankalpa. I am without the difference of manyness. I am the form of immeasurable Bliss. I am one that exists not. I am the one that is not another. I am without body, etc. I am with asylum. I am without asylum. I am without support. I am without bondage or emancipation. I am the pure Brahman. I am He. I am without Chitta, etc. I am the supreme and the Supreme of the supreme. I am ever of the form of deliberation and yet am without deliberation. I am He. I am of the nature of the Akara and Ukara as also of Makara. I am the earliest. The contemplator and contemplation I am without. I am One that cannot be contemplated upon. I

[p. 30]

am He. I have full form in all. I have the characteristics of Sachchidananda. I am of the form of places of pilgrimages. I am the higher Self and S'iva. I am neither the thing defined nor non-defined. I am the non-absorbed Essence. I am not the measurer, the measure or the measured. I am S'iva. I am not the universe. I am the Seer of all. I am without the eyes, etc. I am the full grown. I am the Wise. I am the Quiescent. I am the Destroyer. I am without any sensual organs. I am the doer of all actions. I am One that is content with all Vedantas (either books or Atmic Wisdom). I am the easily attainable. I have the name of one that is pleased as well as one that is not. I am the fruits of all silence. I am always of the form of Chinmatra (Absolute Consciousness). I am always Sat (Be-ness) and Chit (Consciousness). I am one that has not anything in the least. I am not one that has not anything in the least. I am without the heart-Granthi (knot). I am the Being in the middle of the lotus. I am without the six changes. I am without the six sheaths and without the six enemies. I am within the within. I am without place and time. I am of the form of happiness having the quarters as My garment. I am the emancipated One, without bondage. I am without the "no". I am of the form of the part-less. I am the partless. I have Chitta, though released from the universe. I am without the universe. I am of the form of all light. I am the Light (Jyotis) in Chinmatra (Absolute Consciousness). I am free from the three periods (of time past, present, and future). I am without desires. I am without body. I am One that has no body. I am Gunaless. I am alone. I am without emancipation. I am the emancipated One. I am ever without emancipation. I am without truth or untruth. I am always One that is not different from Sat (Be-ness). I have no place to travel. I have no going, etc. I am always of the same form. I am the Quiescent. I am Purushottama (the Lord of Souls). There is no doubt that he who has realised himself thus, is Myself. Whoever hears (this) once becomes himself Brahman, yea, he becomes himself Brahman. Thus is the Upanishad."

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 31]

  

KAIVALYA [*1]-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

KRSHNA-YAJURVEDA

HARIH-OM. Then [*2] As'walayana went to Lord Parameshti (Brahma) and addressed Him thus: "Please initiate me into Brahmavidya (Divine Wisdom), which is the most excellent, which is ever enjoyed by the wise, which is mystic, and by which the learned, after having soon freed themselves from all sins, reach Purusha, the Supreme of the supreme."

To him the Grandfather (thus);replied: "Know (It) through S'raddha (faith), Bhakti (devotion), Dhyana (meditation), and Yoga. Persons attain salvation not through Karma, progeny or wealth but through Sannyasa (renunciation) alone. Ascetics of pure mind through (the realisation of) the meaning well-ascertained by Vedanta-Vijnana and through S'annyasa-Yoga enter into That which is above Swarga (heaven) and is in the cave (of the heart). They all attain Paramatma [*3] in the Brahma-world and are (finally) emancipated.

"Being seated in a pleasant posture in an unfrequented place with a pure mind, and with his neck, head, and body erect, having given up the duties of the (four) orders of life, having subjugated all the organs, having saluted his Guru with devotion, having looked upon the heart (-lotus) as being free from Rajoguna and as pure, and having contemplated in its (heart's) centre Parames'wara who is always with His consort Uma, who is pure and free from sorrow, who is unthinkable and invisible, who is of endless forms, who is of the nature of happiness,

[p. 32]

who is very quiescent, who is of the form of emancipation, who is the source of Maya, who has no beginning, middle or end, who is One, who is All-Pervading, who is Chidananda (Consciousness-Bliss), who is formless, who is wonderful, who is the Lord (of all), who has three eyes, who has a blue neck, (Nilakantha), and who is serenity (itself)--the Muni attains Paramatma, the womb of all elements, the All-Witness, and above lamas. He only is Brahma. He only is S'iva. He only is Indra. He only is the indestructible. He only is the Supreme. He only is the Self-Shining. He only is Vishnu. He only is Prana. He only is Time. He only is Agni (fire). He only is the moon. He only is all things that exist or will hereafter exist. He only is eternal. Having known Him, one crosses death. There is no other path to salvation. He only attains Parabrahman who sees in himself all elements and himself in all elements. There is no other means. Having constituted his body an Arani (the lower attritional piece of wood) and Pranava (Om), the upper Arani, a wise man burns Ajnana by the churning of meditation.

"It is only He (Paramatma) who, deluded by Maya, assumes a body with the internal organs and does everything. It is only He who in the waking state is gratified with women, food, drink, and other diverse enjoyments. In the dreaming state, the Jiva enjoys pleasures and pains in the several worlds which are created by His Maya. In the dreamless sleeping state when all are absorbed, He, replete with Tamas, attains the state of happiness. Then through the force of the Karmas of previous births, that Jiva again wakes up and goes to sleep. All the diversified objects (of the universe) emanate from the Jiva, who sports in the three bodies (gross, subtle and causal). The three bodies are finally absorbed in Him who is the source of all, who is Bliss, and who is Absolute Wisdom. From Him, arise Prana, Manas, all the organs of sense and action, Akas', Vayu, Agni, water and the earth supporting all. Parabrahman, which is of all forms, which is the Supreme Abode of this universe, which is the most subtle of the subtle and which is eternal, is only yourself. You are

[p. 33]

only That. One who knows himself to be that Parabrahman that shines as the universe in the waking, dreaming, dreamless and other states, will be relieved from all bondage. I am that Sadas'iva, (or the eternal happiness) who is other than the enjoyer, the enjoyed, and the enjoyment in the three seats (or bodies), and who is witness and Chinmatra. All emanate from Me alone. All exist in Me alone. All merge into Me alone. I am that non-dual Brahman. I am the atom of atoms; so am I the biggest (of all). I am this diversified universe. I am the oldest of all. I am Purusha. I am Is'a (the Lord). I am of the form of Jyotis (light) and of the form of happiness. I have neither hands nor feet. I have power unthinkable. I see without eyes. I hear without ears. I am omniscient. I have one kind of form only. None is able to know Me fully. I am always of the form of Chit. I am the One that should be known through all the Vedas. I am the Guru who revealed the Vedanta. I am only He who knows the true meaning of Vedanta. I have no sins or virtues. I have no destruction. I have no birth, body, organs of sense or action, or Buddhi. To Me there is no earth, water or fire. There is no Vayu; there is no Akas'. He who thinks Paramatma as being in the cave (of the heart), as having no form, as being secondless, as being the witness of all and as being neither Sat nor Asat, attains the pure form of Paramatma.

"Whoever recites this Upanishad belonging to Yajurveda, he becomes as pure as Agni (fire). He becomes purified from the sins of theft of gold. He becomes purified from the sins of drinking alcohol. He becomes purified from the sins of murder of a Brahman. He becomes purified from the sins of commission (of those that ought not to be done) and the sins of omission (of those that ought to be done). Therefore he becomes a follower of Brahman. Were one who has stepped beyond the duties of the four orders of life to recite (this Upanishad) always or even once, he acquires the wisdom that destroys the ocean of Samsara. Therefore having known Him, he attains the Kaivalya State (or state of isolation or emancipation)--yea, he attains the Kaivalya State."

OM-TAt-SAt.

Footnotes

^31:1 Lit., isolation- or emancipation-Upanishad.

^31:2 After attaining Sadhana-Chatushtaya or the four means of salvation.

^31:3 Hiranyagarbha or the higher Self.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

  

AMRTABINDU [*1]-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

KRSHNA-YAJURVEDA

OM. Manas (mind) is said to be of two kinds, the pure and the impure. That which is associated with the thought of desire is the impure, while that which is without desire is the pure. To men, their mind alone is the cause of bondage or emancipation. That mind which is attracted by objects of sense tends to bondage, while that which is not so attracted tends to emancipation. Now inasmuch as to a mind without a desire for sensual objects there is stated to be salvation, therefore an aspirant after emancipation should render his mind ever free from all longing after material objects. When a mind freed from the desires for objects and controlled in the heart attains the reality of Atma, then is it in the Supreme Seat. Till that which arises in the heart perishes, till then it (Manas) should be controlled. This only is (true) wisdom. This only is true Dhyana (meditation). Other ways are but long or tedious. It (Brahman) is not at all one that can be contemplated upon. It is not one that cannot be contemplated upon. It is not capable of contemplation, (and yet) it should be contemplated upon. Then one attains Brahman that is devoid of partiality. Yoga should be associated with Swara (sound, accent). (Brahman) should be meditated upon without Swara. By meditating without Swara upon Brahman, that which is cannot become non-existent. Such a Brahman is partless, devoid of fancy and quiescent (or free from the action of mind). Whoever cognizes "I" to be that Brahman

[p. 35]

attains certainly Brahman. A wise man having known that Brahman, that is without fancy, without end, without cause, or example, beyond inference and without beginning, is emancipated. There is (for him then) no destruction, no creation, no person in bondage, no devotee, no aspirant for salvation, no emancipated person. This is the truth. Atma that should be contemplated upon is One in (the three states), the waking, the dreaming, and the dreamless sleep. There is no rebirth to him who goes beyond the three states. The one Bhutatma of all beings is in all beings. Like the moon (reflected) in water, he appears as one and as many. While a pot is being carried (from one place to another), the Akas' (ether) that is within it is not carried (along with it). As the pot alone is carried, Jiva (within the body) may be likened to the Akas'. Like the pot, the body has various kinds of forms. The body which perishes again and again is not conscious of its own destruction. But he (the Jiva) knows (it) always. He who is enveloped by the Maya of sound, is never able to come to (or see) the sun (of Parabrahman) from the darkness (of ignorance). Should such darkness be cleared, then he alone sees the non-dual state. Parabrahman is S'abdakshara. [*1] What remains after the cessation of S'abda-Vedas, that is Akshara (indestructible)', should be meditated upon by a learned man who wishes to secure quiescence to his Atma.

Two Vidyas (sciences) are fit to be known, viz., S'abdabrahman and Parabrahman. One who has completely mastered S'abdabrahman attains Parabrahman. Having studied well the books, the learned man should persevere studiously in Jnana (the acquisition of knowledge) and Vijnana (Self-realisation according to such knowledge). Then he should discard the whole of the books, as a person in quest of grain gives up the straw. Though there are cows of different colours, yet their milk is of the same colour. Like milk is seen Jnana, and like cows are seen the different kinds of forms (in the universe). As ghee is latent in milk, so is Vijnana (Self-realisation) latent in every being. Through churning always the Manas with the

[p. 36]

churning-stick of Manas and the string of Jnana, Parabrahman that is partless, calm and quiescent should be brought out like fire from the wood. I am that Brahman. That Vasudeva who is support of all beings, who lives in all and who protects all creatures is Myself. That Vasudeva is Myself.

Such is the Upanishad.

OM-TAT-SAt.

Footnotes

^34:1 Lit., the immortal germ.

^35:1 It is the indestructible known through the sound or the Vedas.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 37]

  

ATMABODHA [*1]-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

RGVEDA

OM. Prostrations to Narayana wearing conch, discus, and mace, [*2] by whom the Yogi is released from the bondage of the cycle of rebirth through the utterance of Him who is of the form of Pranava, the Om, composed of the three letters A, U, and M, who is the uniform bliss and who is the Brahmapurusha (all-pervading Purusha). Om. Therefore the reciter of the Mantra "Om-namo-Narayanaya" reaches the Vaikuntha world. It is the heart-Kamala (lotus), viz., the city of Brahman. It is effulgent like lightning, shining like a lamp. It is Brahmanya (the presider over the city of Brahman) that is the son of Devaki. It is Brahmanya that is Madhusudana (the killer of Madhu). It is Brahmanya that is Pundarikaksha (lotus-eyed). It is Brahmanya, Vishnu that is Achyuta (the indestructible). He who meditates upon that sole Narayana who is latent in all beings, who is the causal Purusha, who is causeless, who is Parabrahman, the Om, who is without pains and delusion and who is all-pervading--that person is never subject to pains. From the dual, he becomes the fearless non-dual. Whoever sees this (world) as manifold (with the differences of I, you, he, etc.), passes from death to death. In the centre of the heart-lotus is Brahman, which is the All, which has Prajna as Its eye and which is established in Prajnana [*3] alone. To creatures,

[p. 38]

[paragraph continues] Prajnana is the eye and Prajna is the seat. It is Prajnana alone that is Brahman. A person who meditates (thus), leaves this world through Prajnana, the Atma and ascending attains all his desires in the Supreme Swarga deathless. Oh! I pray Thee, place me in that nectar-everflowing unfailing world where Jyotis (the light) always shines and where one is revered. (There is no doubt) he attains nectar also. Om-namah.

I am without Maya. I am without compare. I am solely the thing that is of the nature of wisdom. I am without Ahankara (I-am-ness). I am without the difference of the universe, Jiva and Is'wara. I am the Supreme that is not different from Pratyagatma (individual Atma). I am with ordinances and prohibitions destroyed without remainder. I am with As'ramas (observances of life) well given up. I am of the nature of the vast and all-full wisdom. I am one that is witness and without desire. I reside in My glory alone. I am without motion. I am without old age--without destruction--without the differences of My party or another. I have wisdom as chief essence. I am the mere ocean of bliss called salvation. I am the subtle. I am without change. I am Atma merely, without the illusion of qualities. I am the Seat devoid of the three Gunas. I am the cause of the many worlds in (My) stomach. I am the Kutastha-Chaitanya (supreme Cosmic-mind). I am of the form of the Jyotis (light) free from motion. I am not one that can be known by inference. I alone am full. I am of the form of the stainless salvation. I am without limbs or birth. I am the essence which is Sat itself. I am of the nature of the true wisdom without limit. I am the state of excellent happiness. I am One that cannot be differentiated. I am the all-pervading and without stain. I am the limitless and endless Sattwa alone. I am fit to be known through Vedanta. I am the one fit to be worshipped. I am the heart of all the worlds. I am replete with Supreme Bliss. I am of the nature of happiness, which is Supreme Bliss. I am pure, secondless, and eternal. I am devoid of beginning. I am free from the three bodies (gross, subtle, and causal). I am of the nature of wisdom. I am the emancipated One. I have a wondrous form. I am free from impurity.

[p. 39]

[paragraph continues] I am the One latent (in all). I am the equal Atma of eternal Vijnana. I am the refined Supreme Truth. I am of the nature of Wisdom-Bliss alone.

Though I cognize as the secondless Atma by means of discriminative wisdom and reason, yet is found the relation between bondage and salvation. Though to Me the universe is gone, yet it shines as true always. Like the truth in the (illusory conception of a) snake, etc., in the rope, so the truth of Brahman alone is, and is the substratum on which this universe is playing. Therefore the universe is not. Just as sugar is found permeating all the sugar-juice (from which the sugar is extracted), so I am full in the three worlds in the form of the non-dual Brahman. Like the bubbles, waves, etc., in the ocean, so all beings, from Brahma down to worm, are fashioned in Me; just as the ocean does not long after the motion of the waves, so to Me, there is no longing after sensual happiness, being Myself of the form of (spiritual) Bliss. Just as in a wealthy person the desire for poverty does not arise, so in Me who am immersed in Brahmic Bliss, the desire for sensual happiness cannot arise. An intelligent person who sees both nectar and poison rejects poison; so having cognized Atma, I reject those that are not-Atma. The sun that illuminates the pot (both within and without) is not destroyed with the destruction of the pot; so the Sakshi (witness) that illuminates the body is not destroyed with the destruction of the body. To Me there is no bondage; there is no salvation, there are no books, there is no Guru; for these shine through Maya and I have crossed them and am secondless. Let Pranas (vital airs) according to their laws be fluctuating. Let Manas (mind) be blown about by desire. How can pains affect Me who am by nature full of Bliss? I have truly known Atma. My Ajnana has fled away. The egoism of actorship has left Me. There is nothing I should yet do. Brahman's duties, family, Gotra (clan), name, beauty, and class--all these belong to the gross body and not to Me who am without any mark (of body). Inertness, love, and joy--these attributes appertain to the causal body and not to Me, who am eternal and of changeless nature. Just as an owl sees

[p. 40]

darkness only in the sun, so a fool sees only darkness in the self-shining Supreme Bliss. Should the clouds screen the eyesight, a fool thinks there is no sun; so an embodied person full of Ajnana thinks there is no Brahman. Just as nectar which is other than poison does not commingle with it, so I, who am different from inert matter, do not mix with its stains. As the light of a lamp, however small, dispels immense darkness, so wisdom, however slight, makes Ajnana, however immense, to perish. Just as (the delusion) of the serpent does not exist in the rope in all the three periods of time (past, present, and future), so the universe from Ahankara (down) to body does not exist in Me who am the non-dual One. Being of the nature of Consciousness alone, there is not inertness in Me. Being of the nature of Truth, there is not non-truth to Me. Being of the nature of Bliss, there is not sorrow in Me. It is through Ajnana that the universe shines as truth.

Whoever recites this Atmabodha-Upanishad for a Muhurta (48 minutes) is not born again--yea, is not born again.

Footnotes

^37:1 This Upanishad treats of Atmic instruction.

^37:2 The three symbols stand for Akasa, Manas, and Buddhi.

^37:3 In the Mandukya Upanishad, Prajna is said to be the Jiva in the third state and Prajnana is its attribute. Prajnana is Prakarsha Jnana or special wisdom, viz., of looking over the past and the future.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 41]

  

SKANDA [*1]-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

KRSHNA-YAJURVEDA

OM. O Mahadeva (Lord of Devas), I am indestructible through a small portion of Thy grace. I am replete with Vijnana. I am S'iva (Bliss). What is higher than It? Truth does not shine as such on account of the display of the antahkarana (internal organs). Through the destruction of the antahkarana, Hari abides as Samvit (Consciousness) alone. As I also am of the form of Samvit, I am without birth. What is higher than It? All inert things being other (than Atma) perish like dream. That Achyuta (the indestructible or Vishnu), who is the seer of the conscious and the inert, is of the form of Jnana. He only is Mahadeva. He only is Maha-Hari (Mahavishnu). He only is the Jyotis of all Jyotis (or Light of all lights). He only is Parames'vara. He only is Parabrahman. That Brahman I am. There is no doubt (about it). Jiva is S'iva. S'iva is Jiva. That Jiva is S'iva alone. Bound by husk, it is paddy; freed from husk, it is rice. In like manner Jiva is bound (by karma). If karma perishes, he (Jiva) is Sadas'iva. So long as he is bound by the bonds of karma, he is Jiva. If freed from its bonds, then he is Sadas'iva. Prostrations on account of S'iva who is of the form of Vishnu, and on account of Vishnu who is of the form of S'iva. The heart of Vishnu is S'iva. The heart of S'iva is Vishnu. As I see no difference [*2] (between these two), therefore to me are prosperity and life. There is no difference--between S'iva and

[p. 42]

[paragraph continues] Kes'ava (Vishnu). The body is said to be the divine temple. The S'iva (in the body) is the God Sadas'iva [*1] (in the temple).

Having given up the cast-off offerings of ajnana, one should worship Him with the thought "I am He". To see (oneself) as not different (from Him) is (jnana) wisdom. To make the mind free from sensual objects is dhyana (meditation). The giving up of the stains of the mind is snana (bathing). The subjugation of the senses is s'oucha (cleansing). The nectar of Brahman should be drunk. For the upkeep of the body, one should go about for alms and eat. He should dwell alone in a solitary place without a second. He should be with the sole thought of the non-dual One. The wise person who conducts himself thus, attains salvation. Prostrations on account of S'rimat Param-Jyotis (Supreme Light) abode! May prosperity and long life attend (me). O Narasimha! [*2] O Lord of Devas! through Thy grace, persons cognize the true nature of Brahman that is unthinkable, undifferentiated, endless, and immutable, through the forms of the Gods, Brahma, Narayana, and S'ankara.

Like the eye (which sees without any obstacle the things) spread in the akas', so the wise always see the supreme abode of Vishnu. Brahmans with divine eyes who are always spiritually awake, praise in diverse ways and illuminate the supreme abode of Vishnu. Thus is the teaching of the Vedas for salvation.

Thus is the Upanishad.

Footnotes

^41:1 Skanda is the son of S'iva and is represented on earth by Sanatkumara.

^41:2 This will give a rude shock to the followers of S'iva and Vishnu in India, who, wage useless war as to the supremacy of Vishnu and S'iva.

^42:1 Sadasiva, lit., eternal bliss. This is one of the names applied to S'iva as also Mahadeva.

^42:2 Narasimha, lit., Man-lion. This refers to one of the incarnations of Vishnu when he killed the evil power Hiranyakasipu.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 43]

  

PAINGALA-UPANISHAD [*1]

  

OF

  

S'UKLA-YAJURVEDA

  

AdHYaYA I

OM. Paingala, having served under Yajnavalkya for twelve years, asked him to initiate him into the supreme mysteries of Kaivalya. To which Yajnavalkya replied thus: "O gentle one, at first, this (universe) was Sat (Be-ness) only. It (Sat) is spoken of as Brahman which is ever free (from the trammels of matter), which is changeless, which is Truth, Wisdom, and Bliss, and which is full, permanent, and one only without a second. In It, was like a mirage in the desert, silver in mother-of-pearl, a person in the pillar, or colour, etc., in the crystals, mulaprakrti, having in equal proportions the gunas, red, [*2] white, and black, and being beyond the power of speech. That which is reflected in it is Sakshi-Chaitanya (lit., the witness-consciousness), It (mulaprakrti) undergoing again change becomes with the preponderance of Sattva (in it), Avarana [*3] S'akti named avyakta. That which is reflected in it (Avyakta) is Is'vara-Chaitanya. He (Is'vara) has Maya under his control, is omniscient, the original cause of creation, preservation, and dissolution, and the seed of this universe. He causes the universe which was latent in Him, to manifest itself through the bonds of karma of all creatures like a painted canvas unfurled. Again through the extinction

[p. 44]

of their karmas, he makes it disappear. In Him alone is latent all the universe, wrapped up like a painted cloth. Then from the supreme (Avarana) S'akti, dependent on (or appertaining to Is'vara, arose, through the preponderance of Rajas, Vikshepa [*1] S'akti called Mahat. That which is reflected in it is Hiranyagarbha-Chaitanya. Presiding (as He does) over Mahat, He (Hiranyagarbha) has a body, both manifested and unmanifested. [*2] From Vikshepa S'akti, of Hiranyagarbha arose, through the preponderance of Tamas, the gross S'akti called ahankara. That which is reflected in it is Virat-Chaitanya. He (Virat) presiding over it (ahankara) and possessing a manifested body becomes Vishnu, the chief Purusha and protector of all gross bodies. From that Atma arose akas'; from akas' arose vayu, from vayu agni, from agni apas, and from apas prthivi. The five tanmatras [*3] (rudimentary properties) alone are the gunas (of the above five). That generating cause of the universe (Is'vara) wishing to create and having assumed tamo-guna, wanted to convert the elements which were subtle tanmatras into gross ones. In order to create the universe, he divided into two parts each of those divisible elements; and having divided each moiety into four parts, made a fivefold mixture, each element having moiety of its own original element and one-fourth of a moiety of each of the other elements, and thus evolved out of the fivefold classified gross elements, the many myriads of Brahmandas (Brahma's egg or macrocosm), the fourteen worlds pertaining to each sphere, and the spherical gross bodies (microcosm) fit for the (respective) worlds. Having divided the Rajas-essence of the five elements into four parts, He out of three such parts created (the five) pranas having fivefold function. Again out of the (remaining) fourth part, He created karmendriyas (the organs of action). Having divided their Sattva-essence into four parts, He out of three such parts created the antahkarana (internal organ) having fivefold

[p. 45]

function. Out of the (remaining) fourth part of S'attva-essence, he created the jnanendriyas (organs of sense). Out of the collective totality of Sattva-essence, He created the devatas (deities) ruling over the organs of sense and actions. Those (devatas) He created, He located in the spheres (pertaining to them). They through His orders, began to pervade the macrocosm. Through His orders, Virat associated with ahankara created all the gross things. Through His orders, Hiranyagarbha protected the subtle things. Without Him, they that were located in their spheres were unable to move or to do anything. Then He wished to infuse chetana (life) into them. Having pierced the Brahmanda (Brahma's egg or macrocosm) and Brahmarandhras (head-fontanelle) in all the microcosmic heads, He entered within. Though they were (at first) inert, they were then able to perform karmas like beings of intelligence. The omniscient Is'vara entered the microcosmic bodies with a particle of Maya and being deluded by that Maya, acquired the state of diva. Identifying the three bodies with Himself, He acquired the state of the actor and enjoyer. Associated with the attributes of the states of jagrat, svapna, sushupti, trance, and death and being immersed in sorrow, he is (whirled about and) deluded like water-lift or potter's wheel, as if subject to birth and death."

  

AdHYaYA II

Paingala again addressed Yajnavalkya thus: "How did Is'vara, who is the creator, preserver, and destroyer and the Lord of all the worlds, acquire the state of Jiva?" To which Yajnavalkya replied: "I shall tell in detail the nature of Jiva and Is'vara, together with a description of the origin of the gross, subtle, and karana (causal) bodies. Hear attentively with one-pointed mind.

"Is'vara having taken a small portion of the quintuplicated maha-bhutas, (the great elements), made in regular order the gross bodies, both collective and segregate. The skull, the skin, the intestines, bone, flesh, and nails are of the essence of prthivi. Blood, urine, saliva, sweat and others are of the essence of

[p. 46]

apas. Hunger, thirst, heat, delusion, and copulation are of the essence of agni. Walking, lifting, breathing and others are of the essence of vayu. Passion, anger, etc., are of the essence of akas'. The collection of these having touch and the rest is this gross body that is brought about by karma, that is the seat of egoism in youth and other states and that is the abode of many sins. Then He created pranas out of the collective three parts of Rajas-essence of the fivefold divided elements. The modifications of prana are prana, apana, vyana, udana, and samana; naga, karma, krkara, devadatta and dhananjaya are the auxiliary pranas. (Of the first five), the heart, anus, navel, throat and the whole body are respectively the seats. Then He created the karmendriyas out of the fourth part of the Rajas-guna. Of 'Olds' and the rest the mouth, legs, hands, and the organs of secretion and excretion are the modifications. Talking, walking, lifting, excreting, and enjoying are their functions. Likewise out of the collective three parts of Sattva-essence, He created the antahkarana (internal organ). Antahkarana, [*1] manas, buddhi, chitta, and ahankara are the modifications. Sankalpa (thought), certitude, memory, egoism, and anusandhana (inquiry) are their functions. Throat, face, navel, [*2] heart, and the middle of the brow are their seats. Out of the (remaining) fourth part of Sattva-essence, He created the jnanendriyas (organs of sense). Ear, skin, eyes, tongue, and nose are the modifications. Sound, touch, form, taste, and odour are their functions. Dik (the quarters), Vayu, Arka (the sun), Varuna, As'vini Devas, Indra, Upendra, Mrtyu (the God of death), Prajapati, the Moon, Vishnu the four-faced Brahma and S'ambhu (S'iva) are the presiding deities of the organs. There are the five kos'as (sheaths), viz., annamaya, pranamaya, manomaya, vijnanamaya, and anandamaya. Annamaya sheath is that which is created and developed out of the essence of food, and is absorbed into the earth which is of the form of food. It alone is the gross body. The pranas with the karmendriyas (organs of action) is the pranamaya

[p. 47]

sheath. Manas with the jnanendriyas (organs of sense) is the manomaya sheath. Buddhi with the jnanendriyas is the vijnanamaya sheath. These three sheaths constitute the lingas'arira (or the subtle body). (That which tends to) the ajnana (ignorance) of the Reality (of Atma) is the anandamaya sheath. This is the karana body. Moreover the five organs of sense, the five organs of action, the five pranas and others, the five akas' and other elements, the four internal organs, avidya, passion, karma, and Lamas--all these constitute this town (of body).

"Virat, under the orders of Is'vara having entered this microcosmic body, and having buddhi as his vehicle, reaches the state of Vis'va. Then he goes by the several names of Vinjanatma, Chidabhasa, Vis'va, Vyavaharika, the one presiding over the waking gross body and the one generated by karma. Sutratma, under the orders of Is'vara, having entered the microcosmic subtle body, and having manas as his vehicle, reaches the Taijasa state. Then he goes by the names of taijasa, pratibhasika and svapnakalpita (the one bred out of dream). Then under the orders of Is'vara, he who is coupled with avyakta, the vehicle of Maya having entered the microcosmic karana body, reaches the state of prajna. He goes then by the names of prajna, avichchinna, and paramarthika and sushupthi-abhimani (the presider over sushupti). Such sacred sentences, as Tattvamasi (That art thou) and others, speak of the identity with the Brahman of the Paramarthika-Jiva enveloped by ajnana, which is but a small particle of avyakta; but not vyavaharika and pratibhasika (Jivas). It is only that chaitanya which is reflected in antahkarana that attains the three states. When it assumes the three states of jagrat, swapna, and sushupti, it is like a water-lift as if grieved, born and dead. There are five avasthas--jagrat, swapna, sushupti, murchchha (trance), and death. Jagrat avastha is that in which there is the perception of objects, of sound, etc., through the grace of the devata presiding over each of them. In it, the Jiva, being in the middle of the eyebrows and pervading the body from head to foot, becomes the agent of actions, such as doing, hearing and others. He becomes also the enjoyer of the

[p. 48]

fruits thereof; and such a person doing karma for the fruits thereof goes to other worlds and enjoys the same there. Like an emperor tired of worldly acts (in the waking state), he strives to find the path to retire into his abode within. The svapna avastha is that in which, when the senses are at rest, there is the manifestation of the knower and the known, along with the affinities of (things enjoyed in) the waking state. In this state Vis'va alone, its actions in the waking state having ceased, reaches the state of Taijasa (of tejas or effulgence), who moves in the middle of the nadis (nerves), illuminates by his lustre the heterogeneity of this universe which is of the form of affinities, and himself enjoys according to his wish. The sushupti avastha is that in which the chitta is sole organ (at play). Just as a bird, tired of roaming, flies to its nest with its stomach filled, so the Jiva being tired of the actions of the world in the waking and dreaming states, enters ajnana and enjoys bliss. Then trance is attained which resembles death, and in which one with his collection of organs quails, as it were, through fear and ajnana, like one beaten unexpectedly by a hammer, club or any other weapon. Then death avastha is that which is other than the avasthas of jagrat, svapna, sushupti, and trance, which produces fear in all Jivas from Brahma down to small insects and which dissolves the gross body. The Jiva, that is surrounded by avidya and the subtle elements, takes with it the organs of sense and action, their objects, and pranas along with the kamic karmas and goes to another world, assuming another body. Through the ripening of the fruits of previous karmas, the Jiva has no rest like an insect in a whirlpool. It is only after many births that the desire of emancipation arises in man through the ripening of good karma. Then having resorted to a good Guru and served under him for a long time, one out of many attains moksha, free from bondage. Bondage is through non-inquiry and moksha through inquiry. Therefore there should always be inquiry (into Atma). The Reality should be ascertained through adhyaropa (illusory attribution) and apavad (withdrawal or recession of that idea). Therefore there

[p. 49]

should be always inquiring into the universe, Jiva and Paramatma. Were the true nature of Jiva and the universe known, then there remains Brahman which is non-different from Pratyagatma."

  

AdHYaYA III

Then Paingala asked Yajnavalkya to offer an exposition on the mahavakyas (sacred sentences of the Vedas). To which Yajnavalkya replied: "One should scrutinise (the sacred sentences), Tattvamasi (That art thou), Tvamtadasi (Thou art That), Twambrahmasi (Thou art Brahman) and Ahambrahmasmi (I am Brahman). The word 'Tat' denotes the cause of the universe that is variegated beyond perception, has the characteristics of omniscience, has Maya as His vehicle and has the attributes of Sachchidananda. It is He that is the basis of the notion 'I' which has the differentiated knowledge produced by antahkarana; and it is He that is denoted by the word 'Twam' (Thou). That is the undifferentiated Brahman which remains as the aim (or meaning) of the words Tat and Tvam after freeing itself from Maya and Avidya which are respectively the vehicles of Paramatma and Jivatma. The inquiry into the real significance of the sentences Tattvamasi and Ahambrahmasmi forms (what is called) s'ravana (hearing--the first stage of inquiry). To inquire in solitude into the significance of s'ravana is manana. The concentration of the mind with one-pointedness upon that which should be sought after by s'ravana and manana is nididhyasana. Samadhi is that state in which chitta having given up (the conception of the difference of) the meditator and the meditation, becomes of the form of the meditated like a lamp in a place without wind. Then arise the modifications pertaining to Atma. Such (modifications) cannot be known; but they can only be inferred through memory (of the samadhi state). The myriads of karmas committed in this beginningless cycle of rebirths are annihilated only through them. Through proficiency in practice, the current of nectar [*1]

[p. 50]

always rains down in diverse ways. Therefore those who know Yoga call this samadhi, dharma-megha (cloud). Through these (modifications of Atma), the collection of affinities is absorbed without any remainder whatever. When the accumulated good and bad karmas are wholly destroyed, these sentences (Tattvamasi and Ahambrahmasmi), like the myrobalan in the palm of the hand, bring him face to face with the ultimate Reality, though It was before invisible. Then he becomes a Jivanmukta.

"Is'vara wished to produce non-quintuplication (or involution) in the fivefold differentiated elements. Having drawn into their cause Brahma's egg and its effects of worlds, and mixed together the subtle organs of sense and action and the four internal organs and dissolved all things composed of the elements into their cause, the five elements, He then caused prthivi to merge into water, water into agni, agni into vayu, and vayu into akas', akas' into ahankara, akankara into mahat, mahat into avyakta, and avyakta into Purusha in regular order. Virat, Hiranyagarbha and Is'vara being freed from the vehicle of Maya, are absorbed into Paramatma. This gross body composed of the five differentiated elements and obtained through accumulated karma, is merged into its subtle state of non-quintuplicated elements, through the extinction of (bad) karma and increase of good karma, then attains its karana (causal) state and (finally) is absorbed into its cause, (viz.,) Kutastha-Pratyagatma. Vis'va and Taijasa and Prajna, their upadhi (of avidya) having become extinct, are absorbed in Pratyagatma. This sphere (of universe) being burnt up by the fire of jnana is absorbed along with its cause into Paramatma. Therefore a Brahmana should be careful and always meditate upon the identity of Tat and Tvam. Then Atma shines, like the sun freed from the (obscuration of the) clouds. One should meditate upon Atma in the midst (of the body) like a lamp within a jar.

"Atma, the Kutastha, should be meditated upon as being of the size of a thumb, as being of the nature of the jyotis (light) without smoke, as being within, illuminating all and as being

[p. 51]

indestructible. That Muni (sage) who meditates (upon Atma always) until sleep or death comes upon him passes into the state of (Jivanmukti) emancipation like the immovable state of the wind. Then there remains that One (Brahman) without sound, touch, free from destruction, without taste or odour, which is eternal, which is without beginning or end, which is beyond, the Tattva of Mahat, and which is permanent and without stain or disease."

  

AdHYaYA IV

Then Paingala addressed Yajnavalkya thus: "To the wise, what is their karma? And what is their state?" To which Yajnavalkya replied: "A lover of moksha, having humility [*1] and other possessions (or virtues), enables twenty-one generations to cross (to Atma). One through his being a Brahmavit [*2] alone enables 101 generations to cross. Know Atma to be the rider and the body as the chariot. Know also buddhi as the charioteer and manas as the reins. The wise say the organs are the horses, the objects are the roads (through which the horses travel) and the hearts are the moving balloons. Maharshis say that Atma, when associated with the sense organs and manas, is the enjoyer. Therefore it is the actual Narayana alone that is established in the heart. Till his prarabdha karma [*3] is worn out, he exists (in his body) as in the (cast-off) slough of a serpent (without any desire for the body). An emancipated person having such a body roves about like a moon gladdening all with no settled place of abode. He gives up his body whether in a sacred place, or in a chandala's (out-caste's) house (without any distinction whatever), and attains salvation. Such a body (when seen by a person) should be offered as a sacrifice to dik (the quarters) or should be buried (underground). It is only to Purusha (the wise) that sannyasa (renunciation) is ordained and not to others. In case of the

[p. 52]

death of an ascetic who is of the form (or has attained the nature) of Brahman, there is no pollution (to be observed); neither the ceremonies of fire (as burning the body, homa, etc.); nor the pinda (balls of rice), nor ceremonies of water, nor the periodical ceremonies (monthly and yearly). Just as a food once cooked is not again cooked, so a body once burnt (by the fire of wisdom) should not be burnt (or exposed to fire) again. To one whose body was burnt by the fire of wisdom there is neither s'raddha [*1] (required to be performed), nor (funeral) ceremony. So long as there is the upadhi (of non-wisdom) in one, so long should he serve the Guru. He should conduct himself towards his Guru's wife and children as he does to his Guru. If being of a pure mind, of the nature of immaculate Chit and resigned, and having the discrimination arising from the attainment of wisdom "I am He," he should concentrate his heart on Paramatma and obtain firm peace in his body, then he becomes of the nature of Jyotis, void of manas and buddhi. Of what avail is milk to one content with nectar? Of what avail are the Vedas to him who has known his Atma thus? For a Yogin content with the nectar of wisdom, there is nothing more to be done. If he has to do anything, then he is not a knower of Tattva. Pratyagatma though far (or difficult of attainment), is not far; though in the body, he is devoid of it (since) he is all-pervading. After having purified the heart and contemplated on the One without disease (viz., Brahman), the cognizing of 'I' as the supreme and the all is the highest bliss. Like water mixed with water, milk with milk, and ghee with ghee, so Jivatma and Paramatma are without difference. When the body is rendered bright through wisdom and the buddhi becomes of the partless One, then the wise man burns the bondage of karma through the fire of Brahma-jnana. Then he becomes purified, of the nature of the non-dual named Parmes'vara and the light like the stainless akas'. Like water mixed with water, so Jiva (-Atma) becomes upadhiless (or freed from the bonds of matter). Atma, is, like akas', of an invisible form. (Therefore) the inner Atma is invisible like vayu. Though he is within and without, he is the immovable

[p. 53]

[paragraph continues] Atma. Through the torch of wisdom, the internal Atma sees (or knows) .

"A wise man, in whatever place or manner he dies, is absorbed in that place like the all-pervading akas'. It should be known that Atma is absorbed as truly as the akas' in the pot (when broken). Then he attains the all-pervading wisdom-light that is without support. Though men should perform tapas standing on one leg for a period of 1,000 years, it will not, in the least, be equal to one-sixteenth part of dhyanayoga. One desirous of knowing what jnana (wisdom) and jneya (the object to be known) are, will not be able to attain his desired end, even though he may study the S'astras for 1,000 years. That which is alone should be known as the indestructible. That which exists (in this world) is only impermanent. (Therefore) after having given up (the study of) the many S'astras, one should worship that which is satya (truth). The many karmas, purity (of mind and heart), japa (the muttering of mantras), sacrifice and pilgrimages--all these should be observed till Tattva is known. For Mahatmas (noble souls) to be always in (the conception of) 'I am Brahman' conduces to their salvation. There are two causes (that lead) to bondage and emancipation. They are 'mine' and 'not mine'. Through 'mine' creatures are bound, whereas through 'not mine' they are released from bondage. When the mind attains the state of Unmani (above manas, viz., when it is destroyed), then there is never the conception of duality. When the Unmani state occurs, then is the supreme Seat (attained). (After which) wherever the mind goes, there is the supreme Seat (to it, viz., the mind enjoys salvation wherever it is). That which is equal in all is Brahman alone. One may attain the power to strike the akas' with his fist; he may appease his hunger by eating husks (of grain), but never shall he attain emancipation who has not the self-cognition, 'I am Brahman'.

"Whoever recites this Upanishad becomes as immaculate as Agni. He becomes as pare as Brahma. He becomes as pure as Vayu. He becomes like one who has bathed in all the holy waters. He becomes like one who has studied all the Vedas. He becomes like one that has undergone all vedic observances. He

[p. 54]

obtains the fruit of the recitation of Itihasas [*1], Puranas and Rudramantras a lakh of times. He becomes like one that has pronounced Pranava (Om) ten thousand times. He purifies his ancestors ten degrees removed and his descendants ten degrees removed. He becomes purified of all those that sit with him for dinner. He becomes a great personage. He becomes purified from the sins of the murder of a Brahman, the drinking of alcohol, theft of gold, and sexual cohabitation with Guru's wife, and from the sins of associating with those that commit such sins.

"Like the eye pervading the akas' (seeing without effort everything above), a wise man sees (always) the supreme Seat of Vishnu. The Brahmanas who have always their spiritual eyes wide open praise and illuminate in diverse ways the supreme Seat of Vishnu. Om: This Upanishad is truth."

Footnotes

^43:1 This Upanishad is so called after the questioner.

^43:2 Rajas, Sattva and Tamas colours.

^43:3 Avarana S'akti literally means the veiling or contracting power. This is it that produces egoism. It may be called the centripetal force.

^44:1 Vikshepa Sakti (lit.,) is the expanding power. It may be called the centrifugal force.

^44:2 The account given here though differing from that in other books may be justified.

^44:3 They are sound, touch, form, taste, and odour.

^46:1 The fifth aspect of antahkarana is made to be itself, having the function of anusandhana or inquiry, though others call it otherwise.

^46:2 Navel is the seat of chitta.

^49:1 It is said that in samadhi astral nectar flows from the head down which the Yogins are said to drink and which gives them infinite bliss.

^51:1 Humility and other virtues twenty in number are described in Bhagavad-Gita, Chapter XIII.

^51:2 There are four classes of Brahma Jnanis or initiates of whom this is one.

^51:3 That portion of past karma which is being enjoyed in this life.

^52:1 The yearly ceremonies in honour of the dead.

^54:1 Itihasas are the Ramayana and the Mahabharata.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

  

ADHYATMA-UPANISHAD [*1]

  

OF

  

S'UKLA-YAJURVEDA

THE One Aja (unborn) is ever located in the cave (of the heart) within the body. (Prthivi) the earth is His body; though He pervades the earth, it does not know Him. The waters are His body; though He pervades the waters, they do not know Him. Agni is His body; though He pervades agni, it does not know Him. Vayu is His body; though He pervades vayu, it does not know Him. Akas' is His body; though He pervades akas', it does not know Him. Manas is His body; though He pervades manas, it does not know Him. Buddhi is His body; though He pervades buddhi, it does not know Him. Ahankara is His body; though He pervades ahankara, it does not know Him. Chitta is His body; though He pervades chitta, it does not know Him. Avyakta is His body; though He pervades avyakta, it does not know Him. Akshara is His body; though He pervades akshara, it does not know Him. Mrtyu is His body; though He pervades mrtyu, it does not know Him. He who is the inner soul of all creatures and the purifier of sins, is the one divine Lord Narayana.

The wise should through the practice of deep meditation of Brahman leave off the (recurrent) conception of "I" and mine" in the body and the senses which are other than Atma. Having known himself as Pratyagatma, the witness of buddhi and its actions, one should ever think "So'ham" ("I am That") and leave off the idea of Atma in all others. Shunning the pursuits of the world, the body and the S'astras, set about removing the false attribution of self. In the case of a Yogin staying always in his own Atma, his mind parishes having known his Atma as the Atma of all, through inference, Vedas

[p. 56]

and self-experience. Never giving the slightest scope to sleep, worldly talk, sounds, etc., think of Atma, (in yourself) to be the (supreme) Atma. Shun at a distance like a chandala (the thought of) the body, which is generated out of the impurities of parents and is composed of excreta and flesh. Then you will become Brahman and be (in a) blessed (state). O Sage, having dissolved (Jiva-) Atma into Paramatma with the thought of its being partless, like the ether of a jar in the universal ether, be ever in a state of taciturnity. Having become that which is the seat of all Atmas and the self-resplendent, give up the macrocosm and microcosm like an impure vessel. Having merged into Chidatma, which is ever blissful, the conception of "I" which is rooted in the body, and having removed the (conception of) Linga (here the sign of separateness), become ever the Kevala (alone). Having known "I am that Brahman" in which alone the universe appears like a town in a mirror, become one that has performed (all) his duty, O sinless one. The ever-blissful and the self-effulgent One being freed from the grip of ahankara attains its own state, like the spotless moon becoming full (after eclipse).

With the extinction of actions, there arises the extinction of chinta. From it arises the decay of vasanas; and from the latter, arises moksha; and this is called Jivanmukti. Looking upon everything in all places and times as Brahman brings about the destruction of vasanas through the force of vasanas of sattvic nature. Carelessness in Brahmanishtha by (or meditation of Brahman) should not in the least be allowed (to creep in). Knowers of Brahman style (this) carelessness, in Brahmic science, as death (itself). Just as the moss (momentarily) displaced (in a tank) again resumes its original position, in a minute, so Maya envelops even the wise, should they be careless (even for a moment). He who attains the Kaivalya state during life becomes a Kevala even after death of his body. Ever devoted to samadhi, become a nirvikalpa (or the changeless one), O sinless. one. The granthi (or knot) of the heart, full of ajnana, is broken completely only when one sees his Atma as secondless through nirvikalpa samadhi.

[p. 57]

Now, having strengthened the conception of Atma and well given up that of "I" in the body, one should be indifferent as he would be towards jars, cloth, etc. From Brahma down to a pillar, all the upadhis are only unreal. Hence one should see (or cognize) his Atma as all-full and existing by itself (alone). Brahma is Swayam (Atma); Vishnu is Atma; Rudra is: Atma; Indra is Atma; all this universe is Atma and there is nothing but Atma. By expelling (from the mind) without any remainder all objects which are superimposed on one's Atma, one becomes himself Parabrahman the full, the secondless and the actionless. How can there be the heterogeneity of the universe of sankalpa and vikalpa in that One Principle which is immutable, formless and homogeneous? When there is no difference between the seer, the seen, and sight, there being the decayless and Chidatma, full like the ocean at the end of a Kalpa and effulgent, all darkness, the cause of false perception, merges in it. How can there be heterogeneity in that one supreme Principle which is alike? How can there be heterogeneity in the highest Tattva which is One? Who has observed any heterogeneity in sushupti (the dreamless sleep), where there is happiness only? This vikalpa has its root in chitta only. When chitta is not, there is nothing. Therefore unite the chitta with Paramatman in its Pratyagatmic state. If one knows Atma as unbroken bliss in itself, then he drinks always the juice (or essence) of bliss in his Atma, whether internally or externally.

The fruit of vairagya is bodha (spiritual wisdom); the fruit of bodha is uparati (renunciation); s'anti (sweet patience) is attained out of the enjoyment of the bliss of one's Ming, and this s'anti is the fruit of uparati. If the latter in each of these is absent, the former is useless. Nivrtti (or the return path) leads to the highest contentment and (spiritual) bliss is said to be beyond all analogy. That which has Maya as its upadhi is the womb of the world; that true one which has the attribute of omniscience, etc., and has the variegated mystery is denoted by the word "Tat" (that). That is called Apara (the other or inferior) which shines through meditation upon the idea and the

[p. 58]

world asmat [*1] and the consciousness of which is developed by antahkarana. By separating the upadhis Maya and avidya from Para and Jiva (cosmic and human Atmas respectively), one realises Parabrahman which is partless and Sachchidananda. Making the mind dwell upon such sentences (or ideas) as the above constitutes s'ravana (hearing). It becomes manana (contemplation) when such ideas are quieted (in one) through logical reasoning. When (their) meaning is confirmed through these (two processes), the concentration of the mind on it alone constitutes nididhyasana. That is called samadhi in which the chitta, rising above the conception of the contemplator and contemplation, merges gradually into the contemplated, like a light undisturbed by the wind. Even the mental states are not known (at the time when one is within the scope of Atma). But they are only inferred from the recollection which takes place after samadhi. Through this samadhi are destroyed crores of karmas which have accumulated during cycles of births without beginning and pure dharma is developed. Knowers of Yoga call this samadhi, dharma-megha (cloud), inasmuch as it showers nectarine drops of karma in great quantities, when all the hosts of vasanas are destroyed entirely through this, and when the accumulated karmas, virtuous and sinful, are rooted out. Then that in which speech was hidden till now, appears no longer so, and shines as Sat; and direct cognition reveals itself, like the myrobalan in the palm of the hand. Vairagya begins from where the vasanas cease to arise towards objects of enjoyment. The cessation of the rising of the idea of "I" is the highest limit of buddhi; uparati begins from where the mental states once destroyed do not again arise. That ascetic is said to possess Sthitaprajna who enjoys bliss always and whose mind is absorbed in Brahman that is formless and actionless. That state of mind is termed prajna that realises the oneness of Brahman and Atma after deep inquiry, and that has the vrtti of nirvikalpa and chinmatra. He who possesses this always is a Jivanmukta. He is a Jivanmukta who has, neither the conception of "I" in the body and the senses, nor

[p. 59]

the conception of another (different from himself) in everything else. He is a Jivanmukta who sees through his prajna no difference between his own Atma and Brahman as well as between Brahman and the universe. He is a Jivanmukta who preserves equanimity of mind, either when revered by the good or reviled by the vicious. One who has cognized the true nature of Brahman is not subject to rebirth as before. But were he so subjected, then he is not a true knower, the knowing of Brahman being external only. A man is subject to prarabdha [*1] so long as he is affected by pleasure, etc. The attainment of a result is always preceded by action; and nowhere is it without karma. Through the cognition "I am Brahman" are destroyed the karmas accumulated during hundreds of crores of previous births, like the actions in the dreaming state (that are destroyed) during the waking state.

An ascetic having known himself as associateless and indifferent like ether, is not at all affected by any of his karmas at any time. Just as the ether is not affected by the alcoholic smell through its contact with a pot, so Atma is not affected by the gunas produced by its upadhi. The prarabdha karma that has begun to act before the dawn of jnana is not checked by it; and one should reap its fruit, as in the case of an arrow discharged at a target. An arrow that is discharged towards an object with the idea that it is a tiger, does not stop when it (the tiger) is found to be a cow; but it (even) pierces the mark through its speed, without stopping. When one realises his Atma as free from old age and death, then how will prarabdha affect him? Prarabdha accomplishes (its work) only when one considers his body as At ma. This conception of Atma as body is not at all a desirable one; so it should be given up along with prarabdha, since it is simply a delusion to attribute prarabdha to this body. How can there be reality to that which is superimposed upon another? How can there be birth to that which is not real? How can there be death to that which is not born? How can there be prarabdha to that which is unreal? The Veda speaks of prarabdha in an external sense only, to satisfy those

[p. 60]

foolish persons that doubt, saying: "If jnana can destroy all the results of ajnana (such as body, etc.), then whence is the existence of this body to such a one?" but not to inculcate to the wise the existence of the body.

Atma is all-full, beginningless, endless, immeasurable, unchangeable, replete with Sat, Chit, and Ananda, decayless, the one essence, the eternal, the differentiated, the plenum, the endless, having its face everywhere, the one that can neither be given up nor taken up, the one that can neither be supported nor be made to support, the gunaless, the actionless, the subtle, the changeless, the stainless, the indescribable, the true nature of one's Atma, above the reach of speech and mind, the one full of Sat, the self-existent, the immaculate, the enlightened, and the incomparable; such is Brahman, one only without a second. There are not in the least many. He who knows his Atma himself through his own cognition, as the one who is not restricted by any, is a Siddha (one that has accomplished his object), who has identified his Atma with the one changeless Atma. Whither is this world gone, then? How did it appear? Where is it absorbed? It was seen by me just now, but now it is gone. What a great miracle! What is fit to be taken in? and what to be rejected? What is other (than Atma)? And what is different (from It)? In this mighty ocean of Brahman full of the nectar of undivided bliss, I do not see, hear, or know anything. I remain in my Atma only and in my own nature of Sat, Anandarupa. I am an asanga (or the associateless). I am an asanga. I am without any attributes. I am Hari (the Lord taking away sin). I am the quiescent, the endless, the all-full and the ancient. I am neither the agent nor the enjoyer.

I am the changeless and the decayless. I am of the nature of pure enlightenment. I am the one and the perpetual bliss.

This science was imparted to Apantaratama who gave it to Brahma,. Brahma gave it to Ghora-Angiras. Ghora-Angiras gave it to Raikva, who gave it to Rama. And Rama gave it to all beings. This is the teaching of Nirvana; and this is the teaching of the Vedas; yea, this is the teaching of the Vedas. Thus ends the Upanishad.

Footnotes

^55:1 This Upanishad is also called Turiyatita Avadhuta Upanishad.

^58:1 I and its inflexions.

^59:1 The result of past karma now enjoyed.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 61]

  

SUBALA-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

S'UKLA-YAJURVEDA

  

KHAnDA I

THEN he (Raikva [*1]) asked: "What was at first?" To which (He the Lord) replied:

"There was neither Sat [*2] nor asat nor Sat-asat. From it, tamas (darkness) was evolved. From tamas came bhutadi; [*3]from bhutadi came akas', from akas', vayu; from vayu, agni (fire); from agni, apas (water); and from apas, prthivi (earth). Then it became an egg. After remaining so for one (divine) year, it split into two and became earth below, [*4] the akas' above and in the midst, the infinite Purusha of a divine form of myriads of heads, eyes, feet and hands. Prior to the bhutas (elements), he had evolved Mrtyu (time or death) of three letters [*5], three heads, and three feet, and having a khanda-paras'u [*6] (broken

[p. 62]

axe). To him, Brahma (the Purusha) spoke. He entered Brahma himself and evolved mentally the seven sons [*1] and these Havirats (or sons) as well as the seven prajapatis (progenitors). Brahmanas [*2] were born from His mouth, Kshattriyas from His hands, Vais'yas from His thighs, and from the feet were born the S'udras. The moon was born from His manas (mind), the sun from His eyes, vayu from (His) ears and pranas from (His) heart. Thus all things were born."

  

KHAnDA II

"From apana came Nishadas, Yakshas, Rakshasas, and Gandharvas. From (His) bones, arose the mountains. From His hairs arose the herbs and the trees. From His forehead, Rudra was born through His anger. The breath of this great Being became the Rgveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda, Atharvaveda, S'iksha (the science of the proper pronunciation and articulation of sounds), Kalpa (the science of methodology), Vyakarana (grammar), Nirukta (glossarial explanation of obsolete and other terms in Vedas), Chhandas (prosody or vedic metre), Jyotisha (astronomy), Nyaya (logic), Mimamsa (including rituals and vedanta), Dharmas'astras, commentaries, glosses and all beings. This Atma (or the Self of Purusha) is Hiranyajyotis (or golden or effulgent Light) into which all the universe is absorbed. He divided Atma (his Self) into two moieties; out of one moiety, the woman was created; and out of the other, man. Having become a Deva, He created the Devas. Having become a Rshi, He created the Rshis; also He created Yakshas, Rakshasas, Gandharvas, wild and domestic beasts and others such as cows, bulls, mares and horses, she-asses and asses and Vis'vambhara (the Supporter) and Vis'vambhara (the earth). Becoming Vais'vanara (fire) at the end (of creation), He burnt up all objects. Then (in dissolution), prthivi was absorbed in apas, apas in agni, agni in vayu, vayu in akas', akas' in indriyas (organs),

[p. 63]

indriyas into tanmatras (rudimentary properties), tanmatras into bhutadi, bhutadi into mahat, mahat into avyakta, avyakta into akshara (the indestructible), akshara into Lamas (darkness). And Lamas becomes one with the supreme Lord. And then there is neither Sat nor asat, nor Sat-asat. This is the teaching of Nirvana and this is the teaching of the Vedas. Yea, This is the teaching of the Vedas."

  

KHAnDA III

"At first, there was Asat, unborn, non-existent, unsupported, soundless, touchless, formless, tasteless, odourless, and decayless. The undaunted man never grieves, as he knows Atma to be great, all-pervading and unborn. It (Atma) is pranaless, mouthless, earless, tongueless, manas-less, tejas-less, eyeless, nameless, gotraless (or clanless), headless, handless, feetless, non-unctuous, bloodless, non-measurable, neither long nor short, neither gross nor atomic, neither great nor small, endless, indescribable, nonreturnable, non-luminous, not hidden, having neither inside nor outside, neither eating anything nor being eaten by others. Some one (out of many) attains to this (Atma) by the six means of satya (truth), dana (charity), tapas (religious austerities), non-injury to any creature, celibacy and complete indifference to worldy objects; [*1] and there are no other means. Whoever feels happy with the thought 'I know That', that learned person's prana will never get out of his body at the moment of death, but will become absorbed in Brahman; and being absorbed in Brahman, he attains the state of Brahman Itself as he who knows this."

  

KHAnDA IV

"In the middle of the heart is a red fleshy mass in which is the dahara-lotus. Like the lotus, it opens into many (petals). There are ten openings in the heart. The (different kinds of) pranas are located there. Whenever he (Atma) is united with

[p. 64]

prana, he sees cities with rivers and other variegated things; when united with vyana, he sees Devas and Rshis; when united with apana, he sees Yakshas, Rakshasas and Gandharvas; when united with udana, he perceives the celestial world, Devas, Skanda (Kartikeya or the six-faced Mars), and Jayanta (Indra's son); when united with samana, he sees the celestial world and the treasures (of Kubera); when united with rambha (a nadi hereafter given out), he sees whatever is seen or not seen, heard or not heard, eaten or not eaten, asat or Sat and all else.

"There are ten midis; in each of these are seventy-one. And these become 72,000 branch nadis. When Atma sleeps therein, it produces sound; but when Atma sleeps in the second kos'a (or sheath) then it sees this world and the higher as also knows all the sounds. This is spoken of as samprasada (deep sleep rest). Then prana protects the body. The nadis are full of blood, of the colours green, blue, yellow, red, and white. Now this dahara-lotus has many petals like a lily. Like a hair divided into 1,000 parts, the nadis called hita are. The divine Atma sleeps in the akas' of the heart, in the supreme kos'a (or anandamaya sheath); sleeping there, it has no desires, no dreams, no deva-worlds, no yajnas or sacrificer, no mother or father, no relative, no kinsman, no thief, or no Brahman-slayer. Its body is tejas (resplendent effulgence) and of the nature of nectar (or the immortal). It is as if in sport, a water-lotus. When he returns again to the waking state by the same way (he quitted or went in before to the heart), he is Samrat [*1]. Thus says he."

  

KHAnDA V [*2]

"That which joins one place (or centre) with another is the nadis which bind them. The eye is adhyatma, (pertaining to the body); the visible objects are adhibhuta (pertaining to the

[p. 65]

elements) and the sun is adhidaivata (spiritual). The nadis form their bond (or connect them). He who moves in the eye, in the visible, in the sun, in the midis, in prana, in vijnana, [*1] in ananda, in the akas' of the heart, and within all else--That is Atma. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"The ear is adhyatma, the audible adhibhuta, and dik (the quarters) is adhidaivata. The nadis bind them. He who moves in the ear, in the audible, in the quarters, in the nadis, in prana, in vijnana, in ananda, in the akas' of the heart, and within all else--That is Atma. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"The nose is adhyatma, the odoriferous adhibhuta, and the earth is adhidaivata. The nadis bind them. He who moves in the nose, the odoriferous, the earth, the nadis, prana, vijnana, ananda, the akas' of the heart, and within all else--That is Atma. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"The tongue is adhyatma: the tastable adhibhuta, and Varuna is adhidaivata. The nadis bind them. He who moves in the tongue, the tastable, Varuna, the nadis, prana, vijnana, ananda, the akas' of the heart, and within all else--That is Atma. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"The skin is adhyatma, the tangiferous adhibhuta, and the vayu is adhidaivata. The nadis bind them. He who moves in the skin, the tangiferous, the vayu, the nadis, prana, vijnana, ananda, the akas' of the heart, and within all else--That is Atma. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"Vak (speech) is adhyatma, that which is acted upon by vak is adhibhuta, and Agni is Adhidaivata. The nadis bind them. He who moves in vak, that which is acted upon by vak, Agni, the nadis, prana, vijnana, the akas' of the heart, and within all else--That is Atma. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

[p. 66]

"The hand is adhyatma, that which can be handled is adhibhuta, and Indra is adhidaivata. The nadis bind them. He who moves in the hand, that which can be handled by it, Indra, the nadis, prana vijnana, ananda, the akas' of the heart, and within all else--That is Atma. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"The feet is adhyatma, that which is walked upon is adhibhuta, and Vishnu (or Upendra) is adhidaivata. The nadis bind them. He who moves in the feet, that which is walked upon, Vishnu, the midis, prana, vijnana, ananda, the akas' of the heart, and within all else--That is Atma. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"The anus is adhyatma, the excreta is adhibhuta, and Mrtyu is adhidaivata. The nadis bind them. He who moves the anus, the excreta, Mrtyu, the nadis, prana, vijnana, ananda, the akas' of the heart, and within all else--That is Atma. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"The genitals is adhyatma, the secretion is adhibhuta, and Prajapati is adhidaivata. The nadis bind them. He who moves in the genitals, secretion, Prajapati, the nadis, prana, vijnana, ananda, the akas' of the heart, and within all else--That is Atma. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

 [*1]"Manas is adhyatma, the thinkable is adhibhuta, and the moon is Adhidaivata. The nadis bind them. He who moves in the manas, the thinkable, the moon, the nadis, prana, vijnana, ananda, the akas' of the heart, and within all else--That is Atma. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"Buddhi is adhyatma, the certainly knowable is adhibhuta, and Brahma is adhidaivata. The nadis bind them. He who moves in buddhi, the certainly knowable, Brahma, the nadis, prana, vijnana, ananda, the akas' of the heart, and within all else--That

[p. 67]

is Atma. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"Ahankara is adhyatma, that which is acted upon by ahankara is adhibhuta, and Rudra is adhidaivata. The nadis bind them. He who moves in ahankara, that which is acted upon by ahankara, Rudra, the nadis, prana, vijnana, ananda, the akas' of the heart, and within all else--That is Atma. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"Chitty is adhyatma, that which is acted upon by chitta (producing fluctuation of thought) is adhibhuta, and Kshetrajna is adhidaivata. The nadis bind them. He who moves in chitta, that which is acted upon by chitta, Kshetrajna, the nadis, prana, vijnana, ananda, the akas' of the heart, and within all else--That is Atma. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"He is the knower of all, the Lord of all, the ruler of all, the one latent in all, the one worshipped for the happiness of all, but Himself not worshipping (or seeking) any happiness, the one worshipped by all, the Vedas and other books and to which all this is food, but who does not become the food of another; moreover, the one who, as the eye, is the ordainer of all, the one who as annamaya is Bhutatma; the one who as pranamaya is Indriyatma, the one as manomaya is Sankalpatma, the one who as vijnanamaya is Kalatma, the one who as anandamaya is Layatma, is one and not dual. How can it be said to be mortal? How can it be said that there is not immortality in It? It is neither internal prajna nor external prajna nor both, nor Prajnanaghana; it is neither prajna nor not-prajna; it is neither known nor is it to know anything. Thus is the exposition of Nirvana; and thus is the exposition of the Vedas; yea, thus is the exposition of the Vedas."

  

KHAnDA VI

"At first there was not anything in the least. These creatures were born through no root, no support but the Divine Deva, the one Narayana. [*1] The eye and the visible are Narayana;

[p. 68]

the ear and the audible are Narayana; the tongue and the 'tastable' are Narayana; the nose and the 'smellable' are Narayana; the skin and the tangible are Narayana; manas and that which is acted upon by it are Narayana; buddhi and that which is acted upon by it are Narayana; ahankara and that which is acted upon by it are Narayana; chitta and that which is acted upon by it are Narayana; vak and that which is spoken are Narayana; the hand and that which is lifted are Narayana; the leg and that which is walked upon are Narayana; the anus and the excreted are Narayana; the genitals and the enjoyment of pleasure are Narayana. The originator and the ordainer as also the agent and the causer of changes, are the Divine Deva Narayana only. Adityas, Rudras, Maruts, Vasus, As'vins, the Rk, Yajus, and Sama, Mantras, Agni, clarified butter and oblation--all these are Narayana. The origin and the combination are the Divine Deva Narayana only. Mother, father, brother, residence, asylum, friends and dependents are Narayana only. The divine midis known as viraja, sudars'ana, jita, saumya, mogha, kumara, amrta, satya, sumadhyama, nasira, s'is'ira, sura, surya, and bhasvati (fourteen nadis in all), that which thunders, sings and rains, viz., Varuna, Aryama (sun), Chandramas (moon), Kala (part), Kavi (S'ukra), the creator Brahma and Prajapati, Indra, Kala (or time) of days, half-days, Kalpa, the upper, and the directions--all these are Narayana. That which was and will be is this Purusha only. Like the eye (which sees without any obstacle) the thing spread in the akas', the wise ever see this supreme seat of Vishnu. Brahmanas who are ever spiritually awake, praise in diverse ways and illuminate the supreme abode of Vishnu. Thus is the exposition to the attaining of Nirvana; thus is the teaching of the Vedas; yea, thus is the teaching of the Vedas."

  

KHAnDA VII

"Within the body, is the one eternal Aja (unborn), located in the cave (of the heart). Earth is His body. Though He moves in the earth, earth does not know Him. Waters are His

[p. 69]

body. Though He moves in the waters, waters do not know Him. Tejas is His body. Though He moves in tejas, tejas does not know Him. Vayu is His body. Though He moves in vayu, vayu does not know Him. Akas' is His body. Though He moves in akas', akas' does not know Him. Manas is His body. Though He moves in manas, manas does not know Him. Buddhi is His body. Though He moves in buddhi, buddhi does not know Him. Ahankara is His body. Though He moves in ahankara, ahankara does not know Him. Chitta is His body. Though He moves in chitta, chitta does not know Him. Avyakta is His body. Though He moves in avyakta, avyakta does not know Him. Akshara is His body. Though He moves in akshara, akshara does not know Him. Mrtyu (death) is His body. Though He moves in Mrtyu, Mrtyu does not know Him. Such an one is the Mind within all creatures, the remover of all sins and the Divine Deva, the one Narayana.

"This knowledge was imparted (by Narayana) to Apantaratama who in turn imparted it to Brahma. Brahma imparted it to Ghora-Angiras. He imparted it to Raikva, who in turn imparted it to Rama. Rama imparted it to all creatures. This is the teaching of Nirvana; this is the teaching of the Vedas; yea, this is the teaching of the Vedas."

  

KHAnDA VIII

"The Atma of all which is immaculate, is located within the cave in the body. Atma which lives in the midst of the body filled with fat, flesh and phlegm in a seat very closely shut up with shining many-coloured walls resembling a Gandharva city and with the (subtle) essence going out of it (to other parts of the body), which seat may be likened to a plantain flower and is ever agitated like a water-bubble--this Atma is of an unthinkable form, the Divine Deva, associateless and pure, has tejas as its body, is of all forms, the Lord of all, the unthinkable and the bodiless, placed within the cave, immortal, shining, and bliss itself. He is a wise person who cognizes Atma thus, and not one who does not do so."

[p. 70]

  

KHAnDA IX

Once Raikva questioned Him (Lord) thus: "O Lord, in whom does everything disappear (or merge)?" He replied thus: "That which (or he who) disappears in the eye becomes the eye only; that which disappears in the visible becomes the visible only; that which disappears in the sun becomes sun only; that which disappears in Virat becomes Virat only; that which disappears in prana becomes prana only; that which disappears in vijnana becomes vijnana only; that which disappears in ananda becomes ananda only; that which disappears in turya becomes turya only--(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the ear becomes ear itself; that which disappears in the audible becomes the audible only; that which disappears in dik (space) becomes dik only; that which disappears in sudars'ana (discus) becomes sudars'ana only: that which disappears in apana becomes apana only; that which disappears in vijnana becomes vijnana only; that which disappears in ananda become ananda only; that which disappears in turya becomes turya only--(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the nose becomes nose only; that which disappears in the odoriferous becomes odoriferous only; that which disappears in prthivi becomes prthivi only; that which disappears in jitam (victory) becomes; victory only; that which disappears in vyana becomes vyana only; that which disappears in vijnana becomes vijnana only; that which disappears in bliss becomes bliss only; that which disappears in turya becomes turya only--(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the mouth becomes the mouth only; that which disappears in the tasted becomes the tasted only; that which disappears in Varuna becomes Varuna only; that which disappears in soumya

[p. 71]

[paragraph continues] (moon or Mercury) becomes soumya only; that which disappears in udana becomes udana only; that which disappears in vijnana becomes vijnana only; that which disappears in bliss becomes bliss only; that which disappears in turya becomes turya only--(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the skin becomes the skin only; that which disappears in touch becomes touch only; that which disappears in vayu becomes vayu only; that which disappears in cloud becomes cloud only; that which disappears in samana becomes samana only; that which disappears in vijnana becomes vijnana only; that which disappears in bliss becomes bliss only; that which disappears in turya becomes turya only--(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in vak becomes vak only; that which disappears in speech becomes speech only; that which disappears in Agni becomes Agni only; that which disappears in kumara becomes kumara only; that which disappears in hostility becomes hostility itself; that which disappears in vijnana become vijnana only; that which disappears in bliss becomes bliss only; that which disappears in turya becomes turya only--(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the hand becomes the hand only; that which disappears in that which is lifted by the hand becomes that which is lifted by the hand; that which disappears in Indra becomes Indra only; that which disappears in the nectar becomes the nectar only; that which disappears in mukhya becomes mukhya only; that which disappears in vijnana becomes vijnana only; that which disappears in  becomes bliss only; that which disappears in turya becomes turya only--(all these) attain, that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the leg becomes the leg only; that which disappears in that which is walked upon becomes that which is walked upon; that which disappears

[p. 72]

in Vishnu becomes Vishnu only; that which disappears in satya becomes satya only; that which disappears in the suppression of the breath and voice becomes the suppression of the breath and voice; that which disappears in vijnana becomes vijnana only; that which disappears in bliss becomes bliss only; that which disappears in turya becomes turya only--(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the anus becomes the anus only; that which disappears in that which is excreted becomes that which is excreted; that which disappears in Mrtyu becomes Mrtyu only; that which disappears in spirituous liquor becomes spirituous liquor only; that which disappears in hurricane becomes hurricane only; that which disappears in vijnana becomes vijnana only; that which disappears in bliss becomes bliss only; that which disappears in turya becomes turya only--(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the genitals becomes the genitals only; that which disappears in that which is enjoyed becomes that which is enjoyed; that which disappears in that which is Prajapati becomes Prajapati only; that which disappears in nasinam becomes nasinam only; that which disappears in kurmira becomes kurmira only; that which disappears in vijnana becomes vijnana only; that which disappears in bliss becomes bliss only; that which disappears in turya becomes turya only--(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in manas becomes manas itself; that which disappears in the thinkable becomes the thinkable itself; that which disappears in the moon becomes the moon itself; that which disappears in s'is'u becomes s'is'u itself; that which disappears in s'yena becomes s'yena itself; that which disappears in vijnana becomes vijnana itself; that which disappears in ananda, becomes ananda itself; that which disappears in turya becomes turya itself--(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless,"

[p. 73]

Then He continued: "That which disappears in buddhi becomes buddhi itself; that which disappears in the certainly knowable becomes the certainly knowable itself; that which disappears in Brahma becomes Brahma himself; that which disappears in Krshna becomes Krshna himself; that which disappears in Surya becomes Surya itself; that which disappears in vijnana becomes vijnana itself; that which disappears in ananda becomes ananda itself; that which disappears in turya becomes turya itself--(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in ahankara becomes ahankara itself; that which disappears in that which is acted upon by ahankara becomes that itself; that which disappears in Rudra becomes Rudra himself; that which disappears in asura becomes asura itself; that which disappears in s'veta becomes s'veta itself; that which disappears in vijnana becomes vijnana itself; that which disappears in ananda becomes ananda itself; that which disappears in turya becomes turya itself--(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrow-less, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in chitta becomes chitta itself; that which disappears in that which is acted upon by chitta becomes that itself; that which disappears in Kshetrajna becomes Kshetrajna itself; that which disappears in bhasvati becomes bhasvati itself; that  disappears in naga becomes naga itself; that which disappears in vijnana becomes vijnana itself; that which disappears in ananda becomes ananda itself; that which disappears in turya  turya itself--(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

"He who knows this as seedless in this manner becomes himself seedless. He is neither born, nor dies, nor is deluded, nor split, nor burnt, nor cut--yea, he does not feel angry, and hence he is said to be Atma, capable of burning all. Such an Atma is neither attained by a hundred sayings, nor by (the reading of) many scriptures, nor by mere intelligence, nor by hearing from others, nor by understanding, nor by Vedas, nor

[p. 74]

by scriptures, nor by severe tapas, nor sankhya, nor yoga, nor observances of the orders of the life, nor by any other means (than the following). Devoted Brahmanas who repeat the Vedas according to rules and who worship Him with praise attain Him. He who is quiescent, self-controlled, indifferent to worldly objects and resigned, having centred his mind on Atma sees Atma and becomes one with the Atma of all, as also he who knows this."

  

KHAnDA X

Then Raikva asked Him: "O Lord, where do all things rest? He replied: "In the worlds of Rasatala (or nether worlds)."

"In what are these (Rasatala worlds) woven warp and woof?" He replied: "In the worlds of Bhuh."

"In what are these (worlds of Bhuh) woven warp and woof?" He replied: "In the worlds of Bhuvah."

"In what are these (Bhuvah worlds) woven warp and woof?" "In the worlds of Suvah."

"In what are these (Suvah worlds) woven warp and woof?" "In the worlds of Mahah."

In what are these (Mahah worlds) woven warp and woof?" "In the Janaloka."

"In what are these (Jana worlds) woven warp and woof?" "In the Tapoloka."

"In what are these (Tapolokas) woven warp and woof?" "In the Satya loka."

"In what are these (Satya worlds) woven warp and woof?" "In the Prajapati loka."

"In what are these (Prajapati worlds) woven warp and woof?" "In the Brahmaloka."

"In what are these (Brahma worlds) woven warp and woof?" "In the Sarvaloka."

"In what are these (Sarva lokas) woven warp and woof?" "In Atma--which is Brahman, like beads (in a rosary) warp-wise and woof-wise."

Then he said: "All these rest in Atma, and he who knows this, becomes Atma itself. Thus is the exposition of Nirvana.

[p. 75]

[paragraph continues] Thus is the exposition of the Vedas; yea, thus is the exposition of the Vedas."

  

KHAnDA XI

Again Raikva asked Him: "O Lord! what is the seat of Atma which is replete with vijnana? and how does it leave the body and pervade the universe?" To this He replied: "There is a mass of red flesh in the middle of the heart. In it, there is a lotus called dahara. It buds forth in many petals like a water-lily. In the middle of it is an ocean (samudra). [*1] In its midst is a koka [*2] (bird). In it there are four nadis. They are rama, arama, Ichchha and punarbhava. Of these, rama leads a man of virtue to a happy world. Arama leads one of sins into the world of sins. (Passing) through Ichchha (nadi), one gets whatever he remembers. Through punarbhava, he splits open the sheaths; after splitting open the sheaths, he splits open the skull of the head; then he splits open prthivi; then apas; then tejas; then vayu; then akas'. Then he splits open manas; then bhutadi; then mahat; then avyakta; then akshara; then he splits open mrtyu and mrtyu becomes one with the supreme God. Beyond this, there is neither Sat nor asat, nor Sat-asat. Thus is the exposition of Nirvana; and thus is the exposition of the Vedas; yea, thus is the exposition of the Vedas."

  

KHAnDA XII [*3]

"Anna (food) came from Narayana. It was first cooked in Brahmaloka in the Maha-samvartaka fire. Again it was cooked in the sun; again it was cooked in kravyadi (lit., the fire that burns raw flesh, etc.); again it was cooked in jwalakila (the flaming kila); then it became pure and not stale (or fresh). One should eat whatever has fallen to his lot and without begging; one should never beg any (food)."

[p. 76]

  

KHAnDA XIII

"The wise man should conduct himself like a lad, with the nature of a child, without company, blameless, silent and wise and without exercising any authority. This description of Kaivalya is stated by Prajapati. Having found with certitude the supreme seat, one should dwell under a tree with torn cloths, unaccompanied, single and engaged in samadhi. He should be longing after the attaining of Atma and having attained this object, he is desireless, his desires have decayed. He fears none, though he finds the cause of death in such as elephants, lions, gadflies, musquitoes, ichneuma, serpents, Yakshas, Rakshasas, and Gandharvas. He will stand like a tree. Though cut down, he will neither get angry nor tremble. He will stand (or remain) like a lotus. Though pierced, he will neither get angry nor tremble. He will stand like akas'; though struck, he will neither get angry nor tremble. He will stand by Satya (truth), since Atma is Satya.

"Prthivi is the heart (or centre) of all odours; apas is the heart of all tastes; tejas is the heart of all forms; vayu is the heart of all touch; akas' is the heart of all sounds; avyakta is the heart of gitas (or sounds); mrtyu is the heart of all Sattvas; and mrtyu becomes one with the Supreme. And beyond Him, there is neither Sat nor asat, nor Sat-asat. Thus is the exposition of Nirvana; thus is the exposition of the Vedas; yea, thus is the exposition of the Vedas."

  

KHAnDA XIV [*1]

"Prthivi is the food, and apas is the eater; apas is the food, and jyotis (or fire) is the eater; jyotis is the food, and vayu is the eater; vayu is the food, and akas' is the eater; and akas' is the food and the indriyas (organs) are the eaters; indriyas are the food and manas is the eater; manas is the food, and buddhi is the eater; buddhi is the food, and avyakta is the eater; avyakta is the food, and akshara is the eater; akshara is the food, and

[p. 77]

mrtyu is the eater; and mrtyu becomes one with the Supreme. Beyond Him, there is neither Sat nor asat, nor Sat-asat. Thus is the exposition of Nirvana, and thus is the exposition of the Vedas; yea, thus is the exposition of the Vedas."

  

KHAnDA XV

Again Raikva asked: "O Lord, when this Vijnana-ghana goes out (of the body or the universe), what does it burn and how?" To which He replied: "When it goes away, it burns prana, apana, vyana, udana, samana, vairambha, mukhya, antaryama, prabhanjana, kumara, s'yena, krshna, s'veta, and naga. Then it burns prthivi, apas, tejas, vayu, and akas'; then it burns the waking, the dreaming, the dreamless sleeping and the fourth states as well as the maharlokas and worlds higher; then it burns the lokaloka (the highest world forming a limit to the other worlds). Then it burns dharma and adharma. Then it burns that which is beyond, is sunless, limitless, and worldless. Then it burns mahat; it burns avyakta; it burns akshara; it burns mrtyu; and mrtyu becomes one with the great Lord. Beyond Him, there is neither Sat nor asat, nor Sat-asat. Thus is the exposition of Nirvana, and thus is the exposition of the Vedas; yea, thus is the exposition of the Vedas."

  

KHAnDA XVI

"This Subala-Bija-Brahma-Upanishad should neither be given out nor taught to one who has not controlled his passions, who has no sons, who has not gone to a Guru, and having become his disciple has not resided with him for a year, and whose family and conduct are not known. These doctrines should be taught to him who has supreme devotion to the Lord and as much to his Guru. Then these truths shine in his great soul. Thus is the exposition of Nirvana; thus is the exposition of the Vedas; yea, thus is the exposition of the Vedas."

Footnotes

^61:1 In the Chhandogya Upanishad, Raikva is said to be the imparter of Samvargavidya.

^61:2 The absolute (Parabrahman) is neither Sat (Be-ness) nor asat (not-Be-ness) nor a commingling of both. It is neither spirit nor matter nor a commingling of both.

^61:3 Bhutadi is tamasa ahankara according to Vishnu Purana.

^61:4 "Above and below" refers not to the position but only to the state, of matter, gross or subtle. "In the midst" implies that akas' and earth are soaked in and with spirit.

^61:5 This refers to the first triune manifestation of Purusha or spirit through time when only there is activity, Mrtyu or Kala is the first manifestation whereas Yama (or the God of death) is the secondary one dealing with the death of creatures lower down.

^61:6 Khanda means divided or with parts. Parasu literally injuring another. Hence Mrtyu with his khanda-parasu divided eternal time into its parts and conditions the absolute through primordial matter. In the Puranas and other books, Mrtyu and Yama are represented as having an axe broken in a conflict.

^62:1 This refers to the septenary manifestation from the triune one; also to the sub-septenary ones.

^62:2 In other words beings of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas and an admixture of these were born.

^63:1 The word anasakena (non-injury) is repeated in the text which is wrong.

^64:1 Lit., one producing sound.

^64:2 In this chapter are given out the several correspondences of the devas (or the presiding spiritual deities) and of the objects to the five organs of sense, the five organs of action, and the antahkarana (or lower mind) composed of manas, buddhi, ahankara, and chitta.

^65:1 Probably prana, vijnana, and ananda refer to the sheaths formed by them.

^66:1 Although in the original manas, buddhi, etc., are in the middle, yet they are inserted here after the karmendriyas.

^67:1 Narayana is the Universal Self. This chapter gives out the pantheistic theory that the whole universe is nothing but God Narayana.

^75:1 The ocean probably refers to akasic space.

^75:2 Koka probably refers to Hamsa.

^75:3 In this chapter are related the different fires, the first or primordial anna or food-substance has to pass through in order to become the gross food.

^76:1 The causes and effects are herein given out, the cause of an effect becoming itself the effect of a higher cause.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 78]

  

TEJOBINDU [*1]-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

KRSHNA-YAJURVEDA

  

CHAPTER I

PARAM-DHYaNA (the supreme meditation) should be upon tejo bindu, which is the Atma of the universe, which is seated in the heart, which is of the size of an atom, which pertains to S'iva, which is quiescent and which is gross and subtle, as also above these qualities. That alone should be the dhyana of the Munis as well as of men, which is full of pains, which is difficult to meditate on, which is difficult to perceive, which is the emancipated one, which is decayless and which is difficult to attain. One whose food is moderate, whose anger has been controlled, who has given up all love for society, who has subdued his passions, who has overcome all pairs (heat and cold etc.), who has given up his egoism, who does not bless anyone nor take anything from others, and also who goes where they naturally ought not to go, and naturally would not go where they like to go--such persons also obtain three [*2] in the face. Hamsa is said to have three seats. Therefore know it is the greatest of mysteries, without sleep and without support. It is very subtle, of the form of Soma, and is the supreme seat of Vishnu. That seat has three faces, three gunas and three dhatus, and is formless, motionless, changeless, sizeless, and supportless. That seat is without upadhi, and is above the reach of speech and

[p. 79]

mind. It is Svabhava (Self or nature) reachable only by bhava (being). The indestructible seat is associateless, without bliss, beyond mind, difficult to perceive, emancipated and changeless. It should be meditated upon as the liberated, the eternal, the permanent and the indestructible. It is Brahman, is adhyatma (or the deity presiding as Atma) and is the highest seat of Vishnu. It is inconceivable, of the nature of Chidatma and above the akas', is void and non-void, and beyond the void, and is abiding in the heart. There is (in It) neither meditation nor meditator, nor the meditated, nor the non-meditated. It is not the universe. It is the highest space; it is neither supreme nor above the supreme. It is inconceivable, unknowable, non-truth, and not the highest. It is realised by the Munis, but the Devas do not know the supreme One. Avarice, delusion, fear, pride, passion, anger, sin, heat, cold, hunger, thirst, thought and fancy--(all these do not exist in It). (In It) there is no pride of (belonging to) the Brahmana caste, nor is there the collection of the knot of salvation. (In It) there is no fear, no happiness, no pains, neither fame nor disgrace. That which is without these states is the supreme Brahman.

Yama, [*1] (forbearance), niyama (religious observance), tyaga (renunciation), mouna (silence) according to time and place, asana (posture), mulabandha, seeing all bodies as equal, the position of the eye, prana-samyamana (control of breath), pratyahara (subjugation of the senses), dharana, atma-dhyana and samadhi--these are spoken of as the parts (of yoga) in order. That is called yama in which one controls all his organs (of sense and actions) through the vijnana that all is Brahman; this should be practised often and often. Niyama, in which there is the supreme bliss enjoyed through the flowing (or inclination) of the mind towards things of the same (spiritual) kind, (viz., Brahman) and the abandoning of things differing from one another is practised by the sages as a rule. In tyaga (renunciation), one abandons the manifestations (or objects) of the universe through the cognition of Atma that is Sat and Chit. This is practised by the great and is the giver of immediate salvation.

[p. 80]

[paragraph continues] Mouna (the silence), in which, without reaching That, speech returns along with mind, is fit to be attained by the Yogins and should be ever worshipped by the ignorant (even). How is it possible to speak of "That", from which speech returns? How should it be described as the universe as there is no word to describe it? It is "That" which is (really) called silence, and which is naturally understood (as such). There is silence in children, but with words (latent); whereas the knowers of Brahman have it (silence) but without words. That should be known as "the lonely seat" in which there is no man in the beginning, middle, or end, and through which all this (universe) is fully pervaded. The illusion of Brahma and all other beings takes place within one twinkling (of His eye). That should be known as asana (posture), in which one has with ease and without fatigue (uninterrupted) meditation of Brahman; that is described by the word kala (time), that is endless bliss and that is secondless. Everything else is the destroyer of happiness. That is called siddhasana (siddha-posture) in which the siddhas (psychical personages) have succeeded in realising the endless One as the support of the universe containing all the elements, etc. That is called the mulabandha, which is the Mula (root) of all worlds, and through which the root Chitta is (bandha) bound. It should be always practised by the Rajayogins.

One after having known the equality of the angas (or parts of yoga) point to one and the same Brahman, should be absorbed in that equal (or uniform) Brahman; if not, there is not that equality (attained). Then like a dry tree, there is straightness (or uniformity throughout). Making one's vision full of spiritual wisdom, one should look upon the world as full of Brahman. That vision is very noble. It is (generally) aimed at the tip of the nose; but it should be directed towards that seat (of Brahman) wherein the cessation of seer, the seen, and sight will take place, and not towards the tip of the nose. That is called pranayama (the control of breath), in which there is the control of the modifications (of mind) through the cognition of Brahman in all the states of chitta, and others. The checking of

[p. 81]

[paragraph continues] (the conception of the reality of) the universe, is said to be expiration. The conception of "I am Brahman" is inspiration. The holding on (long) to this conception without agitation is cessation of breath. Such is the practice of the enlightened. The ignorant close their nose. That should be known as pratyahara, through which one sees Atma (even) in the objects of sense, and pleases chitta through manas. It should be practised often and often. Through seeing Brahman wherever the mind goes, the dharana of the mind is obtained. Dharana is thought of highly by the wise. By dharana is meant that state where one indulges in the good thought, "I am Brahman alone," and is without any support. This dhyana is the giver of supreme bliss. Being first in a state of changelessness, and then thoroughly forgetting (even) that state owing to the cognition of the (true) nature of Brahman--this is called samadhi. This kind of bliss should be practised (or enjoyed) by a wise person till his cognition itself united in a moment with the state of pratyag (Atma). Then this King of Yogins becomes a Siddha, and is without any aid (outside himself). Then he will attain a state, inexpressible and unthinkable.

When samadhi is practised, the following obstacles arise with great force--absence of right inquiry, laziness, inclination to enjoyment, absorption (in material object), tamas, distraction, impatience, sweat, and absent-mindedness. All these obstacles should be overcome by inquirers into Brahman. Through bhavavrttis (worldly thoughts), one gets into them. Through s'unya-vrttis (void or empty thoughts), one gets into them. But through the vrttis of Brahman, one gets fullness. Therefore one should develop fullness through this means (of Brahman). He who abandons this vrtti of Brahman, which is very purifying and supreme--that man lives in vain like a beast. But he who understands this vrtti (of Brahman), and having understood it makes advances in it, becomes a good and blessed person, deserving to be worshipped by the three worlds. Those who are greatly developed through the ripening (of their past karmas) attain the state of Brahman; others are simply reciters of words.

[p. 82]

[paragraph continues] Those who are clever in arguments about Brahman, but are without the action pertaining to Brahman, and who are greatly attached to the world--those certainly are born again and again (in this world) through their ajnana; (the former) never remain, even for half a moment--without the vrtti of Brahman, like Brahma and others, Sanaka, [*1] etc., S'uka and others. When a cause is subject to changes, it (as an effect) must also have its cause. When the cause ceases to exist in truth, the effect perishes through right discrimination. Then that substance (or principle) which is beyond the scope of words, remains pure. After that, vrtti jnana arises in their purified mind; through meditation with transcendental energy, there arises a firm certitude. After reducing the visible into the invisible state, one should see everything as Brahman. The wise should ever stay in bliss with their understanding full of the essence of Chit. Thus ends the first chapter of Tejobindu.

  

CHAPTER II

Then the Kumara [*2] asked S'iva: "Please explain to me the nature of Chinmatra, that is the partless non-dual essence." The great S'iva replied: "The partless non-dual essence is the visible. It is the world, it is the existence, it is the Self, it is mantra, it is action, it is spiritual wisdom, it is water. It is the earth, it is akas', it is the books, it is the three Vedas, it is the Brahman, it is the religious vow, it is Jiva, it is Aja (the unborn), it is Brahma, it is Vishnu, it is Rudra; it is I, it is Atma, it is the Guru. It is the aim, it is sacrifice, it is the body, it is manas, it is chitta, it is happiness, it is vidya; it is the undifferentiated, it is the eternal, it is the supreme, it is everything. O six-faced one, different from It there is nothing. None, none but It; It is I. It is gross, it is subtle, it is knowable, it is thou; it is the mysterious; it is the knower; it is existence, it is mother, it is father, it is brother, it is husband, it is Sutra (Atma), it is Virat.

[p. 83]

[paragraph continues] It is the body, it is the head, it is the internal, it is the external, it is full, it is nectar, it is gotra (clan), it is grha (the house), it is the preservable, it is the moon, it is the stars, it is the sun, it is the holy seat. It is forgiveness, it is patience, it is the gunas, it is the witness. It is a friend, it is a relative, it is an ally, it is the king, town, kingdom and subjects. It is Om, japa, meditation, the seat, the one worthy to be taken (in), the heart, the Jyotis, Swarga (heaven) and Self."

"All the partless and non-dual essence should be regarded as Chinmatra. Chinmatra alone is the Absolute Consciousness; and this partless non-dual essence alone is the (real) essence. All having consciousness alone except those having changes, are Chinmatra. All this is Chinmatra. He is Chinmaya; the state of Atma is known as Chinmatra and the partless non-dual essence. The whole world is Chinmatra. Your state and my state are Chinmatra. Akas', earth, water, vayu, agni, Brahma, Vishnu, S'iva and all else that exist or do not, are Chinmatra. That which is the partless non-dual essence is Chinmatra. All the past, present, and future are Chinmatra. Substance and time are Chinmatra. Knowledge and the knowable are Chinmatra. The knower is Chinmatra. Everything is Chinmatra. Every speech is Chinmatra. Whatever else is Chinmatra. Asat and Sat are Chinmatra. The beginning and end are Chinmatra; that which is in the beginning and end is Chinmatra ever. The Guru and the disciple are Chinmatra. If the seer and the seen are Chinmatra, then they are always Chinmaya. All things wondrous are Chinmatra. The (gross) body is Chinmatra, as also the subtle and causal bodies. There is nothing beyond Chinmatra. I and thou are Chinmatra. Form and non-form are Chinmatra. Virtue and vice are Chinmatra. The body is a symbol of Chinmatra. Sankalpa, knowing, mantra, and others, the gods invoked in mantras, the gods presiding over the eight quarters, the phenomenal and the supreme Brahman are nothing but Chinmatra. There is nothing without Chinmatra. Maya is nothing without Chinmatra. Puja (worship) is nothing without Chinmatra. Meditation, truth, sheaths and others, the (eight) valus, silence, non-silence, and indifference to objects

[p. 84]

[paragraph continues] --are nothing without Chinmatra. Everything is from Chinmatra. Whatever is seen and however seen--it is Chinmatra so far. Whatever exists and however distant, is Chinmatra. Whatever elements exist, whatever is perceived, and whatever is vedanta--all these are Chinmatra. Without Chinmatra, there is no motion, no Moksha and no goal aimed at. Everything is Chinmatra. Brahman that is the partless non-dual essence is known to be nothing but Chinmatra. Thou, O Lord, art the partless non-dual essence (stated) in the books, in me, in Thee, and in the ruler. He who thus perceives 'I' as of one homogeneity (pervading everywhere) will at once be emancipated through this spiritual wisdom. He is his own Guru with this profound spiritual wisdom. Thus ends the second chapter of Tejobindu."

  

CHAPTER III

The Kumara addressed his father (again): "Please explain to me the realisation of Atma." To which the great S'iva said: "I am of the nature of the Parabrahman. I am the supreme bliss. I am solely of the nature of divine wisdom. I am the sole supreme, the sole quiescence, the sole Chinmaya, the sole unconditioned, the sole permanent and the sole Sattva. I am the 'I' that has given up 'I'. I am one that is without anything. I am full of Chidakas'. I am the sole fourth one. I am the sole one above the fourth (state of turya). I am of the nature of (pure) consciousness. I am ever of the nature of the bliss-consciousness. I am of the nature of the non-dual. I am ever of a pure nature, solely of the nature of divine wisdom, of the nature of happiness, without fancies, desires or diseases, of the nature of bliss, without changes or differentiations, and of the nature of the eternal one essence and Chinmatra. My real nature is indescribable, of endless bliss, the bliss above Sat and Chit and the interior of the interior. I am beyond reach of manas and speech. I am of the nature of Atmic bliss, true bliss and one who plays with (my) Atma. I am Atma and Sadas'iva. My nature is Atmic spiritual effulgence. I am the essence of the jyotis of Atma. I am without beginning, middle, or end. I am like the

[p. 85]

sky. I am solely Sat, Ananda, and Chit which is unconditioned and pure. I am the Sachchidananda that is eternal, enlightened and pure. I am ever of the nature of the eternal S'esha (serpent-time). I am ever beyond all. My nature is beyond form. My form is supreme akas'. My nature is of the bliss of earth. I am ever without speech. My nature is the all-seat (foundation of all). I am ever replete with consciousness, without the attachment of body, without thought, without the modifications of chitta, the sole essence of Chidatma, beyond the visibility of all and of the form of vision. My nature is ever full. I am ever fully contented, the all, and Brahman, and the very consciousness; I am 'I'. My nature is of the earth. I am the great Atma and the supreme of the supreme; I appear sometimes as different from myself; sometimes as possessing a body, sometimes as a pupil and sometimes as the basis of the worlds. I am beyond the three periods of time, am worshipped by the Vedas, am determined by the sciences and am fixed in the chitta. There is nothing left out by me, neither the earth nor any other objects here. Know that there is nothing which is out of myself. I am Brahma, a Siddha, the eternally pure, non-dual one, Brahman, without old age or death. I shine by myself; I am my own Atma, my own goal, enjoy myself, play in myself, have my own spiritual effulgence, am my own greatness, and am used to play in my own Atma, look on my own Atma and am in myself happily seated. I have my own Atma as the residue, stay in my own consciousness, and play happily in the kingdom of my own Atma. Sitting on the real throne of my own Atma, I think of nothing else but my own Atma. I am Chidrupa alone, Brahman alone, Sachchidananda, the second-less, the one replete with bliss and the sole Brahman and ever without anything, have the bliss of my own Atma, the unconditioned bliss, and am always Atma-Akas'. I alone am in the heart like Chidaditya (the consciousness-sun). I am content in my own Atma, have no form, or no decay, am without the number one, have the nature of an unconditionod and emancipated one, and I am subtler than akas'; I am without the existence of beginning or end, of the nature of the

[p. 86]

all-illuminating, the bliss greater than the great, of the sole nature of Sat, of the nature of pure Moksha, of the nature of truth and bliss, full of spiritual wisdom and bliss, of the nature of wisdom alone, and of the nature of Sachchidananda. All this is Brahman alone. There is none other than Brahman and that is 'I'.

"I am Brahman that is Sat, and bliss, and the ancient. The word 'thou' and the word 'that' are not different from me. I am of the nature of consciousness. I am alone the great S'iva. I am beyond the nature of existence. I am of the nature of happiness. As there is nothing that can witness me, I am without the state of witness. Being purely of the nature of Brahman, I am the eternal Atma. I alone am the Adis'esha (the primeval S'esha). [*1] I alone am the S'esha. I am without name and form, of the nature of bliss, of the nature of being unperceivable by the senses, and of the nature of all beings; I have neither bondage nor salvation. I am of the form of eternal bliss. I am the primeval consciousness alone, the partless and non-dual essence, beyond reach of speech and mind, of the nature of bliss everywhere, of the nature of fullness everywhere, of the nature of earthly bliss, of the nature of contentment everywhere, the supreme nectary essence, and the one and secondless Sat, (viz.,) Brahman. There is no doubt of it. I am of the nature of all-void. I am the one that is given out by the Vedas. I am of the nature of the emancipated and emancipation, of Nirvanic bliss, of truth and wisdom, of Sat alone and bliss, of the one beyond the fourth, of one without fancy, and ever of the nature of Aja (the unborn). I am without passion or faults. I am the pure, the enlightened, the eternal, the all-pervading and of the nature of the significance of Om, of the spotless, and of Chit. I am neither existing nor non-existing. I am not of the nature of anything. I am of the nature of the actionless. I am without parts. I have no semblance, no manas, no sense, no buddhi, no change, none of the three bodies, neither the waking, dreaming, or dreamless sleeping states. I am neither of the nature of the three pains nor of the three desires. I have neither

[p. 87]

[paragraph continues] s'ravana nor manana in Chidatma in order to attain salvation. There is nothing like me or unlike me. There is nothing within me. I have none of the three bodies.

"The nature of manas is unreal, the nature of buddhi is unreal, the nature of aham (the 'I') is unreal; but I am the unconditioned, the permanent and the unborn. The three bodies are unreal, the three periods of time are unreal, the three gunas are unreal, but I am of the nature of the Real and the pure. That which is heard is unreal, all the Vedas are unreal, the S'astras are unreal, but I am. the Real and of the nature of Chit. The Murtis (Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra having limitation) are unreal, all the creation is unreal, all the tattvas are unreal, but know that I am the great Sadas'iva. The master and the disciple are unreal, the mantra of the Guru is unreal, that which is seen is unreal, but know me to be the Real. Whatever is thought of is unreal, whatever is lawful is unreal, whatever is beneficial is unreal, but know me to be the Real. Know the Purusha (ego) to be unreal, know the enjoyments to be unreal, know things seen and heard are unreal as also the one woven warp-wise and woof-wise, viz., this universe; cause and non-cause are unreal, things lost or obtained are unreal. Pains and happiness are unreal, all and non-all are unreal, gain and loss are unreal, victory and defeat are unreal. All the sound, all the touch, all the forms, all the taste, all the smell, and all ajnana are unreal. Everything is always unreal--the mundane existence is unreal--all the gunas are unreal. I am of the nature of Sat.

"One should cognize his own Atma alone. One should always practise the mantra of his Atma. The mantra (Ahambrahmasmi) 'I am Brahman' removes all the sins of sight, destroys all other mantras, destroys all the sins of body and birth, the noose of Yama, the pains of duality, the thought of difference, the pains of thought, the disease of buddhi, the bondage of chitta, all diseases, all griefs and passions instantaneously, the power of anger, the modifications of chitta, sankalpa, crores of sins, all actions and the ajnana of Atma. The mantra 'I am Brahman' gives indescribable bliss, gives the state of ajada (the non-inertness or the undecaying) and

[p. 88]

kills the demon of non-Atma. The thunderbolt 'I am Brahman' clears all the hill of not-Atma. The wheel 'I am Brahman' destroys the asuras of not-Atma. The mantra 'I am Brahman' will relieve all (persons). The mantra 'I am Brahman' gives spiritual wisdom and bliss. There are seven crores of great mantras and there are vratas (vows) of (or yielding) hundred crores of births. Having given up all other mantras, one should ever practise this mantra. He obtains at once salvation, and there is not even a particle of doubt about it. Thus ends the third chapter of the Tejobindu-Upanishad."

  

CHAPTER IV

The Kumara asked the great Lord: "Please explain to me the nature of Jivanmukti (embodied salvation) and videhamu.kti (disembodied salvation)." To which the great S'iva replied: "I am Chidatma. I am Para-Atma. I am the Nirguna, greater than the great. One who will simply stay in Atma is called a Jivanmukta. He who realises: 'I am beyond the three bodies, I am the pure consciousness and I am Brahman,' is said to be a Jivanmukta. He is said to be a Jivanmukta, who realises: 'I am of the nature of the blissful and of the supreme bliss, and I have neither body nor any other thing except the certitude "I am Brahman" only'. He is said to be a Jivanmukta who has not at all got the 'I' in myself, but who stays in Chinmatra (absolute consciousness) alone, whose interior is consciousness alone, who is only of the nature of Chinmatra, whose Atma is of the nature of the all-full, who has Atma left over in all, who is devoted to bliss, who is undifferentiated, who is all-full of the nature of consciousness, whose Atma is of the nature of pure consciousness, who has given up all affinities (for objects), who has unconditioned bliss, whose Atma is tranquil, who has got no other thought (than Itself), and who is devoid of the thought of the existence of anything. He is said to be a Jivanmukta who realises: I have no chitta, no buddhi, no ahankara, no sense, no body at any time, no pranas, no Maya, no passion and no anger, I am the great, I have nothing of these objects or

[p. 89]

of the world, and I have no sin, no characteristics, no eye, no manas, no ear, no nose, no tongue, no hand, no waking, no dreaming, or causal state in the least or the fourth state.' He is said to be a Jivanmukta, who realises: 'All this is not mine, I have no time, no space, no object, no thought, no snana (bathing), no sandhyas (junction-period ceremonies), no deity, no place, no sacred places, no worship, no spiritual wisdom, no seat, no relative, no birth, no speech, no wealth, no virtue, no vice, no duty, no auspiciousness, no Jiva, not even the three worlds; no salvation, no duality, no Vedas, no mandatory rules, no proximity, no distance, no knowledge, no secrecy, no Guru, no disciple, no diminution, no excess, no Brahma, no Vishnu, no Rudra, no moon, no earth, no water, no vayu, no akas', no agni, no clan, no lakshya (object aimed at), no mundane existence, no meditator, no object of meditation, no manas, no cold, no heat, no thirst, no hunger, no friend, no foe, no illusion, no victory, no past, present, or future, no quarters, nothing to be said or heard in the least, nothing to be gone (or attained) to, nothing to be contemplated, enjoyed or remembered, no enjoyment, no desire, no yoga, no absorption, no garrulity, no quietude, no bondage, no love, no joy, no instant joy, no hugeness, no smallness, neither length nor shortness, neither increase nor decrease, neither adhyaropa (illusory attribution) nor apavada (withdrawal of that conception) no oneness, no manyness, no blindness, no dullness, no skill, no flesh, no blood, no lymph, no skin, no marrow, no bone, no skin, none of the seven dhatus, no whiteness, no redness, no blueness, no heat, no gain, neither importance nor non-importance, no delusion, no perseverance, no mystery, no race, nothing to be abandoned or received, nothing to be laughed at, no policy, no religious vow, no fault, no bewailments, no happiness, neither knower nor knowledge nor the knowable, no Self, nothing belonging to you or to me, neither you nor I, and neither old age nor youth nor manhood; but I am certainly Brahman. "I am certainly Brahman. I am Chit, I am Chit "' He is said to be a Jivanmukta who cognizes: I am Brahman alone, I am Chit alone, I am the supreme.' No doubt need be entertained about this; 'I am Hamsa itself, I remain of my own will, I can see

[p. 90]

myself through myself, I reign happy in the kingdom of Atma and enjoy in myself the bliss of my own Atma.' He is a Jivanmukta who is himself, the foremost and the one undaunted person who is himself the lord and rests in his own Self.

"He is a Videhamukta who has become Brahman, whose Atma has attained quiescence, who is of the nature of Brahmic bliss, who is happy, who is of a pure nature, and who is a great mouni (observer of silence). He is a Videhamukta who remains in Chinmatra alone without (even) thinking thus: 'I am all Atma, the Atma that is equal (or the same) in all, the pure, without one, the non-dual, the all, the self only, the birth-less and the deathless--I am myself the undecaying Atma that is the object aimed at, the sporting, the silent, the blissful, the beloved and the bondless salvation--I am Brahman alone--I am Chit alone.' He is a Videhamukta who having abandoned the thought: 'I alone am the Brahman' is filled with bliss. He is a Videhamukta who having given up the certainty of the existence or non-existence of all objects is pure Chidananda (the consciousness-bliss), who having abandoned (the thought): 'I am Brahman' (or) 'I am not Brahman' does not mingle his Atma with anything, anywhere or at any time, who is ever silent with the silence of Satya, who does nothing, who has gone beyond gunas, whose Atma has become the All, the great, and the purifier of the elements, who does not cognize the change of time, matter, place, himself or other differences, who does not see (the difference of) 'I,' 'thou,' 'this' or 'that,' who being of the nature of time is yet without it, whose Atma is void, subtle and universal, but yet without (them), whose Atma is divine and yet without Devas, whose Atma is measurable and yet without measure, whose Atma is without inertness and within every one, whose Jima is devoid of any sankalpa, who thinks always: 'I am Chinmatra, I am simply Paramatman, I am only of the nature of spiritual wisdom, I am only of the nature of Sat, I am afraid of nothing in this world,' and who is without the conception of Devas, Vedas and sciences, 'All this is consciousness, etc.,' and regards all as void. He is a Videhamukta who has realised himself to be Chaitanya alone, who is remaining at ease in the pleasure-garden

[p. 91]

of his own Atma, whose Atma is of an illimitable nature, who is without the conception of the small and the great, and who is the fourth of the fourth state and the supreme bliss. He is a Videhamukta whose Atma is nameless and formless, who is the great spiritual wisdom of the nature of bliss, and of the nature of the state beyond turya, who is neither auspicious nor inauspicious, who has yoga as his Atma, whose Atma is associated with yoga, who is free from bondage or freedom, without guna or non-guna, without space, time, etc., without the witnessable and the witness, without the small or the great, and without the cognition of the universe or even the cognition of the nature of Brahman, but who finds his spiritual effulgence in his own nature, who finds bliss in himself, whose bliss is beyond the scope of words and mind, and whose thought is beyond the beyond. He is said to be a Videhamukta who has gone beyond (or mastered quite) the modifications of chitta, who illumines such modifications, and whose Atma is without any modifications at all. In that case, he is neither embodied nor disembodied. If such a thought is entertained (even), for a moment, then he is surrounded (in thought) by all. He is a Videhamukta whose external Atma invisible to others is the supreme bliss aiming at the highest vedanta, who drinks of the juice of the nectar of Brahman, who has the nectar of Brahman as medicine, who is devoted to the juice of the nectar of Brahman, who is immersed in that juice, who has the beneficent worship of the Brahmic bliss, who is not satiated with the juice of the nectar of Brahman, who realises Brahmic bliss, who cognizes the S'iva bliss in Brahmic bliss, who has the effulgence of the essence of Brahmic bliss, who has become one with it, who lives in the household of Brahmic bliss, has mounted the car of Brahmic bliss, who has an imponderable Chit being one with it, who is supporting (all), being full of it, who associates with me having it, who stays in Atma having that bliss and who thinks: 'All this is of the nature of Atma, there is nothing else beside Atma, all is Atma, I am Atma, the great Atma, the supreme Atma, and Atma of the form of bliss.' He who thinks: 'My nature is full, I am the great Atma, I am the all-contented and the permanent Atma. I am

[p. 92]

the Atma pervading the heart of all, which is not stained by anything, but which has no Atma; I am the Atma whose nature is changeless, I am the quiescent Atma; and I am the many Atma.' He who does not think this is Jivatma and that is Paramatma, whose Atma is of the nature of the emancipated and the non-emancipated, but without emancipation or bondage, whose Atma is of the nature of the dual and the non-dual one, but without duality and non-duality; whose Atma is of the nature of the All and the non-All, but without them; whose Atma is of the nature of the happiness arising from objects obtained and enjoyed, but without it; and who is devoid of any sankalpa--such a man is a Videhamukta. He whose Atma is partless, stainless, enlightened, Purusha, without bliss, etc., of the nature of nectar, of the nature of the three periods of time, but without them; whose Atma is entire and non-measurable, being subject to proof though without proof; whose Atma is the eternal and the witness, but without eternality and witness; whose Atma is of the nature of the secondless, who is the self-shining one without a second, whose Atma cannot be measured by vidya and avidya but without them; whose Atma is without conditionedness or unconditionedness, who is without this or the higher worlds, whose Atma is without the six things beginning with s'ama, who is without the qualifications of the aspirant after salvation, whose Atma, is without gross, subtle, causal, and the fourth bodies, and without the anna, prana, manas, and vijnana sheaths; whose Atma is of the nature of ananda (bliss) sheath, but without five sheaths; whose Atma is of the nature of nirvikalpa, is devoid of sankalpa, without the characteristics of the visible or the audible, and of the nature of void, owing to unceasing samadhi, who is without beginning, middle, or end; whose Atma is devoid of the word Prajnana, who is without the idea 'I am Brahman,' whose Atma is devoid (of the thought) of 'thou art', who is without the thought 'this is Atma', whose Atma is devoid of that which is described by Om, who is above the reach of any speech or the three states, and is the indestructible and the Chidatma, whose Atma is not the one which can be known by Atma and whose Atma has neither

[p. 93]

light nor darkness. Such a personage is a Videhamukta. Look only upon Atma; know It as your own. Enjoy your Atma yourself, and stay in peace. O six-faced one, be content in your own Atma, be wandering in your own Atma, and be enjoying your own Atma. Then you will attain Videhamukti."

  

CHAPTER V

The Sage named Nidagha addressed the venerable Rbhu: "O Lord please explain to me the discrimination of Atma from non-Atma." The Sage replied thus:

"The furthest limit of all vak (speech) is Brahman; the furthest limit to all thoughts is the Guru. [*1] That which is of the nature of all causes and effects but yet without them, that which is without sankalpa, of the nature of all bliss and the auspicious, that which is the great one of the nature of bliss, that which illuminates all luminaries and that which is full of the bliss of nada (spiritual sound), without any enjoyment and contemplation and beyond nadas and kalas (parts)--that is Atma, that is the 'I', the indestructible. Being devoid of all the difference of Atma and non-Atma, of heterogeneity and homogeneity, and of quiescence and non-quiescence--that is the one Jyotis at the end of nada. Being remote from the conception of Maha-vakyartha (i.e., the meaning of Maha-vakyas) as well of 'I am Brahman,' being devoid of or without the conception of the word and the meaning, and being devoid of the conception of the destructible and indestructible--that is the one Jyotis at the end of nada. Being without the conception 'I am the partless non-dual essence' or 'I am the blissful,' and being of the nature of the one beyond all--that is one Jyotis at the end of nada. He who is devoid of the significance of Atma (viz. motion) and devoid of Sachchidananda--he is alone Atma, the eternal. He who is undefinable and unreachable by the words of the Vedas, who has neither externals nor internals, and whose symbol is either the universe or Brahman--he is undoubtedly Atma. He who has no body, nor

[p. 94]

is a Jiva made up of the elements and their compounds, who has neither form nor name, neither the enjoyable nor the enjoyer, neither Sat nor asat, neither preservation nor regeneration, neither guna nor non-guna--that is undoubtedly my Atma. He who has neither the described nor description, neither s'ravana nor manana, neither Guru nor disciple, neither the world of the Devas nor the Devas nor Asuras, neither duty nor non-duty, neither the immaculate nor non-immaculate, neither time nor non-time, neither certainty nor doubt, neither mantra nor non-mantra, neither science nor non-science, neither the seer nor the sight which is subtle, nor the nectar of time--that is Atma. Rest assured that not-Atma is a misnomer. There is no manas as not-Atma. There is no world as not-Atma. Owing to the absence of all sankalpas and to the giving up of all actions, Brahman alone remains, and there is no not-Atma. Being devoid of the three bodies, the three periods of time, the three gunas of Jiva, the three pains and the three worlds, and following the saying 'All is Brahman,' know that there is nothing to be known through the absence of chitta; there is no old age through the absence of body; no motion through the absence of legs; no action through the absence of hands; no death through the absence of creatures; no happiness through the absence of buddhi; no virtue, no purity, no fear, no repetition of mantras, no Guru nor disciple. There is no second in the absence of one. Where there is not the second, there is not the first. Where there is truth alone, there is no non-truth possible; where there is non-truth alone, there is no truth possible. If you regard a thing auspicious as inauspicious, then auspiciousness is desired (as separate) from inauspiciousness. If you regard fear as non-fear, then fear will arise out of non-fear. If bondage should become emancipation, then in the absence of bondage will be no emancipation. If birth should imply death, then in the absence of birth, there is no death. If 'thou' should imply 'I,' then in the absence of 'thou' there is no 'I'. If 'this' should be 'that,' 'this' does not exist in the absence of 'that'. If being should imply non-being, then non-being will imply being. If an effect implies a cause, then in the absence

[p. 95]

of effect, there is no cause. If duality implies non-duality, then in the absence of duality, there is no non-duality. If there should be the seen, then there is the eye (or sight); in the absence of the seen, there is no eye. In the absence of the interior, there is no exterior. If there should be fullness, then non-fullness is possible. Therefore (all) this exists nowhere. Neither you nor I, nor this nor these exist. There exists no (object of) comparison in the true one. There is no simile in the unborn. There is (in it) no mind to think. I am the supreme Brahman. This world is Brahman only. Thou and I are Brahman only. I am Chinmatra simply, and there is no not-Atma. Rest assured of it. This universe is not (really at all). This universe is not (really) at all. It was nowhere produced and stays nowhere. Some say that chitta is the universe. Not at all. It exists not. Neither the universe nor chitta nor ahankara nor Jiva exists (really). Neither the creation of Maya nor Maya itself exists (really). Fear does not (really) exist. Actor, action, hearing, thinking, the two samadhis, the measurer, the measure, ajnana and aviveka--none of these exists (truly) anywhere. Therefore the four moving [*1] considerations and the three kinds of relationship exist not. There is no Ganga, no Gaya, no Setu (bridge), no elements or anything else, no earth, water, fire, vayu, and akas anywhere, no Devas, no guardians of the four quarters, no Vedas, no Guru, no distance, no proximity, no time, no middle, no non-duality, no truth, no untruth, no bondage, no emancipation, no Sat, no asat, no happiness, etc., no class, no motion, no caste, and no worldly business. All is Brahman only and nothing else--all is Brahman only and nothing else. There exists then nothing (or statement) as that 'consciousness alone is'; there is (then) no saying such as 'Chit is I'. The statement 'I am Brahman' does not exist (then); nor does exist (then) the statement: 'I am the eternally pure'. Whatever is uttered by the mouth, whatever is thought by manas, whatever is determined by buddhi, whatever is cognized by chitta--all these do not exist. There is no Yogin or

[p. 96]

yoga then. All are and are not. Neither day nor night, neither bathing nor contemplating, neither delusion nor non-delusion--all these do not exist then. Know that is no not-Atma.

The Vedas, Sciences, Puranas, effect and cause, Is'vara and the world and the elements and mankind--all these are unreal. There is no doubt of it. Bondage, salvation, happiness, relatives, meditation, chitta, the Devas, the demons, the secondary and the primary, the high and the low--all these are unreal. There is no doubt of it. Whatever is uttered by the mouth, whatever is willed by sankalpa, whatever is thought by manas--all these are unreal. Whatever is determined by the buddhi, whatever is cognized by chitta, whatever is discussed by the religious books, whatever is seen by the eye and heard by the ears, and whatever exists as Sat, as also the ear, the eye, and the limbs--all these are unreal. Whatever is described as such and such, whatever is thought as so-and-so, all the existing thoughts such as 'thou art I', 'that is this,' and 'He is I,' and whatever happens in moksha, as also all sankalpas, delusion, illusory attribution, mysteries and all the diversities of enjoyment and sin--all these do not exist. So is also not-Atma. Mine and thine, my and thy, for me and for thee, by me and by thee--all these are unreal. (The statement) that Vishnu is the preserver, Brahma is the creator, Rudra is the destroyer--know that these undoubtedly are false. Bathing, utterings of mantras, japas (religious austerities) homa (sacrifice), study of the Vedas, worship of the Devas, mantra, tantra, association with the good, the unfolding of the faults of gunas, the working of the internal organ, the result of avidya, and the many crores of mundane eggs--all these are unreal. Whatever is spoken of as true according to the verdict of all teachers, whatever is seen in this world and whatever exists--all these are unreal. Whatever is uttered by words, whatever is ascertained, spoken, enjoyed, given or done by anyone, whatever action is done, good or bad, whatever is done as truth--know all these to be unreal. Thou alone art the transcendental Atma and the supreme Guru of the form of akas', which is devoid of fitness (for it) and of the nature of all creatures.

[p. 97]

[paragraph continues] Thou art Brahman; thou art time; and thou art Brahman, that is ever and imponderable. Thou art everywhere, of all forms, and full of consciousness. Thou art the truth. Thou art one that has mastered the siddhis, and thou art the ancient, the emancipated, emancipation, the nectar of bliss, the God, the quiescent, the diseaseless, Brahman the full, and greater than the great. Thou art impartial, Sat and the ancient knowledge, recognised by the words 'Truth, etc'. Thou art devoid of all parts. Thou art the ever-existing--thou appearest as Brahma, Rudra, Indra, etc.--thou art above the illusion of the universe--thou shinest in all elements--thou art without sankalpa in all--thou art known by means of the underlying meaning of all scriptures; thou art ever content and ever happily seated (in thyself); thou art without motion; etc. In all things, thou art without any characteristics; in all things thou art contemplated by Vishnu and other Devas at all times; thou hast the nature of Chit, thou art Chinmatra unchecked, thou stayest in Atma itself, thou art void of everything and without gums, thou art bliss, the great, the one secondless, the state of Sat and asat, the knower, the known, the seer, the nature of Sachchidananda, the lord of Devas, the all-pervading, the deathless, the moving, the motionless, the all and the non-all with quiescence and non-quiescence, Sat alone, Sat commonly (found in all), of the form of Nitya-Siddha (the unconditioned developed one), and yet devoid of all siddhis. There is not an atom which thou dost not penetrate; but yet thou art without it. Thou art devoid of existence and non-existence as also the aim and object aimed at. Thou art changeless, decayless, beyond all nadas, without kala or kashta (divisions of time) and without Brahma, Vishnu, and S'iva. Thou lookest into the nature of each and art above the nature of each. Thou art immersed in the bliss of Self. Thou art the monarch of the kingdom of Self, and yet without the conception of Self. Thou art of the nature of fullness and incompleteness. There is nothing that thou seest which is not in thyself. Thou dost not stir out of thy nature. Thou attest according to the nature of each. Thou art nothing but the nature of each. Have no doubt 'thou art I'.

[p. 98]

"This universe and everything in it, whether the seer or the seen, resembles the horns of a hare (or are illusory). Earth, water, agni, vayu, akas', manas, buddhi, ahankara, tejas, the worlds and the sphere of the universe, destruction, birth, truth, virtue, vice, gain, desires, passion, anger, greed, the object of meditation, wisdom, guru, disciple, limitation, the beginning and end, auspiciousness, the past, present, and future, the aim and the object of aim, mental restraint, inquiry, contentment, enjoyer, enjoyment, etc., the eight parts of yoga, yama, etc., the going and coming (of life), the beginning, middle and end, that which can be taken and rejected, Hari, S'iva, the organs, manas, the three states, the twenty-four tattvas, the four means, one of the same class or different classes, Bhuh and other worlds, all the castes and orders of life with the rules laid down for each, mantras and tantras, science and nescience, all the Vedas, the inert and the non-inert, bondage and salvation, spiritual wisdom and non-wisdom, the enlightened and the non-enlightened, duality and non-duality, the conclusion of all Vedantas and S'astras, the theory of the existence of all souls and that of one soul only, whatever is thought by chitta, whatever is willed by sankalpa, whatever is determined by buddhi, whatever one hears and sees, whatever the guru instructs, whatever is sensed by all the organs, whatever is discussed in mimamsa, whatever is ascertained by nyaya (philosophy) and by the great ones who have reached the other side of the Vedas, the saying 'S'iva destroys the world, Vishnu protects it, and Brahma creates it', whatever is found in the puranas, whatever is ascertained by the Vedas, and is the signification of all the Vedas--all these resemble the horns of a hare. The conception 'I am the body' is spoken of as the internal organ; the conception 'I am the body' is spoken of as the great mundane existence; the conception 'I am the body' constitutes the whole universe. The conception 'I am the body' is spoken of as the knot of the heart, as non-wisdom, as the state of asat, as nescience, as the dual, as the true Jiva and as with parts, is certainly the great sin, and is the disease generated by the fault of thirst after desires. That

[p. 99]

which is sankalpa, the three pains, passion, anger, bondage, all the miseries, all the faults and the various forms of time--know these to be the result of manas. Manas alone is the whole world, the ever-deluding, the mundane existence, the three worlds, the great pains, the old age and others, death and the great sin, the sankalpa, the Jiva, the chitta, the ahankara, the bondage, the internal organ and earth, water, agni, vayu, and akas'. Sound, touch, form, taste, and odour, the five sheaths, the waking, the, dreaming, and dreamless sleeping states, the guardians of the eight quarters, Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, the seen, the inert, the pairs and non-wisdom--all these are the products of manas. Rest assured that there is no reality in all that is sankalpa. The whole world, the guru, disciple, etc., do not exist, yea, do not exist. Thus ends the fifth chapter of this Upanishad."

  

CHAPTER VI

Rbhu continued again: "Know everything as Sachchinmaya (full of Sat and consciousness). It pervades everything. Sachchidananda is non-dual, decayless, alone and other than all. It is 'I'. It alone is akas' and 'thou'. It is I. There is (in it) no manas, no buddhi, no ahankara, no chitta, or the collection of these--neither 'thou' nor I, nor anything else nor everything. Brahman alone is. Sentence, words, Vedas, letters, beginning, middle, or end, truth, law, pleasure, pain, existence, maya, prakrti, body, face, nose, tongue, palate, teeth, lip, forehead, expiration and inspiration, sweat, bone, blood, urine, distance, proximity, limb, belly, crown, the movement of hands and feet, S'astras, command, the knower, the known, and the knowledge, the waking, dreaming and dreamless sleeping and the fourth state--all these do not belong to me. Everything is Sachchinmaya interwoven. No attributes pertaining to body, elements and spirit, no root, no vision, no Taijasa, no Prajna, no Virat, no Sutratma, no Is'vara, and no going or coming, neither gain nor loss, neither the acceptable nor the rejectable, nor the censurable, neither the pure nor the impure, neither the stout nor the lean, no sorrow, time, space, speech,

[p. 100]

all, fear, duality, tree, grass or mountain, no meditation, no siddhi of yoga, no Brahmana, Kshattriya or Vais'ya, no bird or beast, or limb, no greed, delusion, pride, malice, passion, anger or others, no woman, S'udra, castes or others, nothing that is eatable or enjoyable, no increase or decrease, no belief in the Vedas, no speech, no worldliness or unworldliness, no transaction, no folly, no measure or measured, no enjoyment or enjoyed, no friends, son, etc., father, mother, or sister, no birth or death, no growth, body or 'I', no emptiness or fullness, no internal organs or mundane existence, no night, no day, no Brahma, Vishnu, or S'iva, no week, fortnight, month, or year, no unsteadiness, no Brahmaloka, Vaikuntha, Kailasa and others, no Swarga, Indra, Agniloka, Agni, Yamaloka, Yama, vayuloka, guardians of the world, three worlds--Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah, Patala or surface of earth, no science, nescience, maya, prakrti, inertness, permanency, transience, destruction, movement, running, object of meditation, bathing, mantra or object, no adorable object, anointment or sipping with water, no flower, fruit, sandal, light waved before god, praise, prostrations or circumambulation, no entreaty, conception of separateness even, oblation of food, offered food, sacrifice, actions, abuse, praise, Gayatri and sandhi (period of junction, such as twilight, etc.), no mental state, calamity, evil desire, bad soul, chandala (low caste person) pulkasa, unbearableness, unspeakableness, kirata (hunter), kaitava (demon), partiality, partisanship, ornament, chief, or pride, no manyness, no oneness, durability, triad, tetrad, greatness, smallness, fullness, or delusion, no kaitava, Benares, tapas, clan, family, sutra, greatness, poverty, girl, old woman or widow, no pollution, birth, introvision or illusion, no sacred sentences, identity, or the siddhis, anima, etc.

"Everything being consciousness alone, there is no fault in anything. Everything being of the nature of Sat alone, is Sachchidananda only. Brahman alone is everything and there is nothing else. So 'That' is 'I'. 'That' is 'I'. 'That' alone is 'I'. 'That' alone is 'I'. 'That' alone is 'I'. The eternal Brahman alone is 'I'. I am Brahman alone without being subject to mundane existence. I am Brahman alone

[p. 101]

without any manas, any buddhi, organs or body. I am Brahman alone not perceivable. I am Brahman alone and not Jiva. I am Brahman alone and not liable to change. I am Brahman alone and not inert. I am Brahman alone and have no death. I am Brahman alone and have no pranas. I am Brahman alone and greater than the great. This is Brahman. Great is Brahman. Truth is Brahman. It is all-pervading. Time is Brahman. Kala is Brahman. Happiness is Brahman. It is self-shining. One is Brahman. Two is Brahman. Delusion is Brahman. Kama and others are Brahman. Badness is Brahman. Goodness is Brahman. It is of the form of restraint, quiescence, the all-pervading and the all-powerful. The Loka (world) is Brahman. Guru is Brahman. Disciple is Brahman. It is Sadas'iva. (That which) is before is Brahman. (That which will be) hereafter is Brahman. Purity is Brahman. Auspiciousness and inauspiciousness are Brahman. Jiva always is Brahman. I am Sachchidananda. All are of the nature of Brahman. The universe is said to be of the nature of Brahman. Brahman is itself. There is no doubt of it. There is nothing out of itself. The letter Om of the form of consciousness is Brahman alone. Everything is itself. I alone am the whole universe and the highest seat, have crossed the gunas and am greater than the great, the supreme Brahman, Guru of Gurus, the support of all and the bliss of bliss. There is no universe besides Atma. The universe is of the nature of Atma. There is nowhere (or no place) without Atma. There is not even grass different from Atma. There is not husk different from Brahman. The whole universe is of the nature of Atma. All this is of the nature of Brahman. Asat is not of the nature of Brahman. There is not a grass different from Brahman. There is not a seat different from Brahman; there is not a Guru different from Brahman; there is not a body different from Brahman. There is nothing different from Brahman like I-ness or you-ness. Whatever is seen in this world, whatever is spoken of by the people, whatever is enjoyed everywhere--all these are asat (unreal) only. The differences arising from the actor, action, qualities, likes, taste and gender--all these arise from asat and are (but) pleasurable.

[p. 102]

[paragraph continues] The differences arising from time, objects, actions, success or defeat and whatever else--all these are simply asat. The internal organ is asat. The organs are asat. All the pranas, the collections of all these, the five sheaths, the five deities, the six changes, the six enemies, the six seasons, and the six tastes, are asat. I am Sachchidananda. The universe is rootless. I am Atma alone, Chit and Ananda. The scenes of mundane existence are not different. I am the Truth of the nature of Ananda and of the nature of the imponderable Chit. All this is of the nature of jnana.

"I am the secondless, having jnana and bliss. I am of the nature of an illuminator of all things. I am of the nature of all non-being. I alone shine always. Therefore how can I with such a nature become asat? That which is called 'thou' is the great Brahman of the nature of the bliss of consciousness and of the nature of chit having chidakas' and chit alone as the great bliss. Atma alone is 'I'. Asat is not 'I'. I am Kutastha, the great guru and Sachchidananda alone. I am this born universe. No time, no universe, no maya, no prakrti (in me). I alone am the Hari. Personally, I alone am the Sadas'iva. I am of the nature of pure consciousness. I am the enjoyer of pure sattva. I am the only essence full of chit. Everything is Brahman and Brahman alone. Everything is Brahman and is chit alone. I am of the nature of the all-latent and the all-witness. I am the supreme Atma, the supreme Jyotis, the supreme wealth, the supreme goal, the essence of all vedantas, the subject discussed in all the S'astras the nature of yogic bliss, the ocean of the chief bliss, the brightness of all wisdom, of the nature of chief wisdom, the brightness of the fourth state and the non-fourth but devoid of them, the indestructible chit, truth, Vasudeva, the birthless, and the deathless Brahma, Chidakas', the unconditioned, the stainless, the immaculate, the emancipated, the utterly emancipated, the soulless, the formless and of the nature of the non-created universe.

"The universe which is assumed as truth and non-truth does not really exist. Brahman is of the nature of eternal bliss and

[p. 103]

is even by itself. It is endless, decayless, quiescent and of one nature only. If anything is other than myself, then it is as unreal as the mirage in an oasis. If one should be afraid of the son of a barren woman, or if a powerful elephant be killed by means of the horns of a hare, then the world (really is). If one (person) can quench his thirst by drinking the waters of the mirage, or if one should be killed by the horns of a man, then the universe really is. The universe exists always in the true Gandharva city (merely unreal). When the blueness of the, sky really exists in it, then the universe really is. When the silver in mother-of-pearl can be used in making an ornament, when a man is bitten by (the conception of) a snake in a rope, when the flaming fire is quenched by means of a golden arrow, when milky food is obtained in the (barren) forest of Vindhya (mountains), when cooking can take place by means of the fuel of (wet) plantain trees, when a female (baby) just born begins to cook, when curds resume the state of milk, or when the milk (milked) goes back through the teats of a cow, then will the universe really be. When the dust of the earth shall be produced in the ocean, when the maddened elephant is tied by means of the hair of a tortoise, when (mountain) Meru is shaken by the thread in the stalk of a lotus, when the ocean is bound by its rows of tides, when the fire flames downwards, when flame shall become (really) cold, when the lotus shall grow out of flaming fire, when Indranila (sapphire) arises in the great mountains, when Meru comes and sits in the lotus-eye, when a mountain can become the offspring of a black bee, when Meru shall shake, when a lion is killed by a gnat, when the three worlds can be found in the space of the hollow of an atom, when the fire which burns a straw shall last for a long time, when the objects seen in a dream shall come in the waking state, when the current of a river shall stand still (of itself), when the delivery of a barren woman shall be fruitful, when the crow shall walk like a swan, when the mule shall fight with a lion, when a great ass shall walk like an elephant, when the full moon shall become a sun, when Rahu (one of the nodes) shall abandon the sun and the moon, when a good crop shall arise out of the

[p. 104]

waste (burnt) seeds, when the poor shall enjoy the happiness of the rich, when the lions shall be conquered by the bravery of dogs, when the heart of Jnanis is known by fools, when the ocean is drunk by the dogs without any remainder, when the pure akas' shall fall upon men, when heaven shall fall on the earth, when the flower in the sky shall emit fragrance, when a forest appearing in pure akas' shall move, and when reflection shall arise in a glass simply (without mercury or anything else in its back), then the world really is. There is no universe in the womb of Aja (the unborn Brahman)--there is no universe in the womb of Atma. Duality and non-duality, which are but the results of differentiation, are really not. All this is the result of maya. Therefore, there should be Brahma-Bhavana. If misery should arise from the conception of 'I am the body,' then it is certain 'I am Brahman.' The knot of the heart is the wheel of Brahman, which cuts asunder the knot of existence. When doubt arises in one, he should have faith in Brahman. That non-dual Brahman, which is eternal and of the form of unconditioned bliss, is the guard of Atma against the chief of the form of not-Atma. Through instances like the above is established the nature of Brahman. Brahman alone is the all-abode. Abandon the name even of the universe. Knowing for certain 'I am Brahman,' give up the 'I'. Everything disappears as the flower from the hands of a sleeping person. There is neither body nor karma. Everything is Brahman alone. There are neither objects, nor actions, nor the four states. Everything which has the three characteristics of vijnana is Brahman alone. Abandoning all action, contemplate 'I am Brahman,' 'I am Brahman'. There is no doubt of this. I am Brahman of the nature of chit. I am of the nature of Sachchidananda.

"This great science of S'ankara should never be explained to any ordinary person, to an atheist or to a faithless, ill-behaved or evil-minded person. It should be, after due examination, given to the high-souled ones whose minds are purified with devotion to their gurus. It should be taught for a year and a half. Leaving off thoroughly and entirely the practice

[p. 105]

recommended by the (other) Upanishads, one should study the Tejobindu-Upanishad always with delight. By once studying it, he becomes one with Brahman. Thus ends the sixth chapter. Thus ends the Upanishad."

Footnotes

^78:1 Tejas is spiritual light and bindu is seed; hence the seed or source of spiritual light.

^78:2 This probably refers to the triangle appearing in the disciples.

^79:1 All these parts of yoga are explained here from the standpoint of vedanta.

^82:1 Sanaka is one of the four Kumaras in the Puranas who refused to create; Suka is the son of Veda-Vyas.

^82:2 The Kumara is the son of S'iva called Kartikeya the six-faced, symbolising the six-faced Mars in one sense.

^86:1 Sesha, meaning remainder is the serpent representing time.

^93:1 Herein is given the hint as to the difference of functions between an Ishta-devata and a Guru.

^95:1 The four moving considerations (of vedanta) are subject (Brahman), object, relationship, and the qualified person.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 106]

  

BRAHMOPANISHAD [*1]

  

OF

  

KRSHNA-YAJURVEDA

[This Upanishad is intended to give a complete and clear idea of the nature of Atma, that has four avasthas (states of consciousness) and four seats, for the better consummation of the nirguna dhyana.]

OM. S'aunaka Mahas'ala questioned the holy Sage Pippalada of the Angiras gotra thus: "In this beautiful Brahmapura of body, the fit residence of divine beings, how are (the deities of) vak, etc., located? How do they function? To whom belongs this power? He to whom this power belongs, what is He?"

Pippalada then having deeply considered, imparted to him the Brahmavidya (divine wisdom), that most excellent of all things. "It is prana (i.e.,) Atma. It is Atma that exercises this power. It is the life of all Devas. It is their death and (their) life. Brahman that shines pure, nishkala, resplendent, and all-pervading, in this divine Brahmapura (of body), rules (all). The Jiva (identifying himself with) the indriyas, rules them like a spider. The spider throws out from a single thread out of his body a whole web, and draws it into himself by that same thread; so prana, whenever it goes, draws after it the objects of its creation (vak, etc.). During sushupti, (the prana) goes to its seat (Brahman) through the nadis of which is the devata, like an eagle, that making air as the means of communication, reaches his abode. They say, as devadatta, though beaten (during sushupti) by a stick, etc., does not move, so also the actor does not suffer or enjoy for the

[p. 107]

merits or demerits of religious actions. Just as a child obtains happiness without desiring for it (in play), so also devadatta obtains happiness in sushupti. He certainly knows, (being) Param-Jyotis, and the person desiring jyotis, enjoys bliss in the contemplation of jyotis. Then he comes back to the dream-plane by the same way, like a caterpillar. It remaining on a blade of grass, first puts forward its foot on another blade in front, conveys its body to it, and having got a firm hold of it, then only leaves the former and not before. So this is the jagrata state. As this (devadatta) bears at the same time eight skulls, so this jagrata, the source of Devas and Vedas, clings to a man like the breasts in a woman. During the jagrata avastha, merit and demerit are postulated of this Deva (power); he is capable of great expansion and is the inner mover. He is khaga (bird), karkata (crab), pushkara (akas'), prana, pain, parapara, Atma and Brahman. This deity causes to know. He who knows thus obtains Brahman, the supreme, the support of all things, and the Kshetrajna. He obtains Brahman, the supreme, support of all things, and the Kshetrajna.

 [*1] "The Pursuha has four seats--navel, heart, neck, and head. There Brahman with the four feet specially shines. Those feet are jagrata, svapna, sushupti, and turya. In jagrata he is Brahma, in svapna Vishnu, in sushupti Rudra, and in turya the supreme Akshara. He is Aditya, Vishnu, Is'vara, Purusha, prana, jiva, agni, the resplendent. The Para-Brahman shines in the midst of these. He is without manas, ear, hands, feet, and light. There the worlds are no worlds, Devas no Devas, Vedas no Vedas, sacrifices no sacrifices, mother no mother, father no father, daughter-in-law no daughter-in-law, chandala no chandala, paulkasa no paulkasa, s'ramana no s'ramana, hermits no hermits; so one only Brahman shines as different. In the Hrdayakas' (akas' in the heart) is the Chidakas'. That is Brahman. It is extremely subtle. The Hrdayakas' can be known. This moves in it. In Brahman, everything is strung. Those who thus know the Lord know everything. In him the Devas, the worlds, the Pitrs and the Rshis do not rule. He who has awakened knows everything.

[p. 108]

[paragraph continues] All the Devas are in the heart; in the heart are all the pranas: in the heart are prana, jyotis and that three-plied holy thread. In the heart in Chaitanya, it (prana) is.  [*1] Put on the yajnopavita (holy thread), the supreme, the holy, which came into existence along with the Prajapati, which gives long life and which is very excellent; let this give you strength and tejas. The wise man having shaved his head completely, should throw away the external thread. He should wear, as the holy thread, the supreme and indestructible Brahman. It is called sutra, because suchanat (indicating) (that the Atma is in the heart). Sutra means the supreme abode. He who knows that sutra is a vipra (brahmana), he has crossed the ocean of the Vedas. On that sutra (thread), everything is strung, like the beads on the thread. The yogin, well versed in yoga and having a clear perception of Truth, should wear the thread. Practising the noble yoga, the wise man should abandon the external thread. He who wears the sutra as Brahman, he is an intelligent being. By wearing the sutra, he is not polluted. They whose sutra is within, whose yajnopavita is jnana--they only know the sutra, and, they only wear the yajnopavita in this world. Those whose tuft of hair is jnana, who are firmly grounded in jnana and whose yajnopavita is jnana, consider jnana only as supreme. Jnana is holy and excellent. He whose s'ikha (tuft of hair) is jnana like the s'ikhi (flame of agni)--he, the wise one, only wears a true s'ikha; others wear a mere tuft of hair. Those brahmanas and others who perform the ceremonies prescribed in the Vedas--they wear this thread only as a symbol of their ceremonies. Those who know the Vedas say that he only is a true brahmana who wears the s'ikha of jnana and whose yajnopavita is the same (jnana). This yajnopavita (Yajna means Vishnu or sacrifice and Upavita is that which surrounds; hence that which surrounds Vishnu) is supreme and is the supreme refuge. He who wears that really knows--he only wears the sutra, he is Yajna (Vishnu) and he only knows Yajna (Vishnu). One God hidden in all things, pervades all things and is the Inner Life of all things. He awards the fruits

[p. 109]

of karma, he lives in all things, he sees all things without any extraneous help, he is the soul of all, there is nothing like him, and he is without any gunas (being secondless). He is the great wise one. He is the one doer among the many action-less objects. He is always making one thing appear as several (by maya). Those wise men who see him in buddhi, they only obtain eternal peace. Having made Atma as the (upper) arani (attritional piece of wood) and Pranava the lower arani, by constant practice of dhyana one should see the concealed deity. As the oil in the sesamum seed, as the ghee in the curds, as the water in the rivers, and as the fire in the arani, so they who practise truth and austerities see Him in the buddhi. As the spider throws out and draws into itself the threads, so the jiva goes and returns during the jagrata and the svapna states. The heart is in the form of a closed lotus-flower, with its head hanging down; it has a hole in the top. Know it to be the great abode of All. Know that during jagrata it (jiva) dwells in the eye, and during svapna in the throat; during sushupti, it is in the heart and during turya in the head.  [*1] (Because buddhi unites) the Pratyagatma with the Paramatma, the worship of sandhya (union) arose. So we should perform sandhyavandana (rites). The sandhyavandana performed by dhyana requires no water. It gives no trouble to the body or the speech. That which unites all things is the sandhya of the one-staffed (sannyasins). Knowing That from which speech and mind turn back without being able to obtain it and That which is the bliss of jiva, the wise one is freed. The secret of Brahmavidya is to reveal the real nature of the Atma, that is all-pervading, that is like ghee in the milk, that is the source of atmavidya and tapas and to show that everything is in essence one.

"So ends the Brahmopanishad."

Footnotes

^106:1 In this Upanishad, the Southern Indian edition begins later on but the other portions also are given as being fuller.

^107:1 The South Indian Edition begins here.

^108:1 This mantra is repeated whenever the holy thread is newly worn.

^109:1 The five sentences from here relating to Sandhya are not to be found in the South Indian Edition.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 110]

  

VAJRASUCHI [*1]-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

SAMAVEDA

I NOW proceed to declare the vajrasuchi--the weapon that is the destroyer of ignorance--which condemns the ignorant and praises the man of divine vision.

There are four castes--the brahmana, the kshatriya, the vais'ya, and the s'udra. Even the smrtis declare in accordance with the words of the vedas that the brahmana alone is the most important of them.

Then this remains to be examined. What is meant by the brahmana? Is it a jiva? Is it a body? Is it a class? Is it jnana? Is it karma? Or is it a doer of dharma?

To begin with: is jiva the brahmana? No. Since the jiva is the same in the many past and future bodies (of all persons), and since the jiva is the same in all of the many bodies obtained through the force of karma, therefore jiva is not the brahmana.

Then is the body the brahmana? No. Since the body, as it is made up of the five elements, is the same for all people down to chandalas, [*2] etc., since old age and death, dharma and adharma are found to be common to them all, since there is no absolute distinction that the brahmanas are white-coloured, the kshatriyas red, the vais'yas yellow, and the s'udras dark, and since in burning the corpse of his father, etc., the stain of the murder of a brahmana, etc., will accrue to the son, etc., therefore the body is not the brahmana.

[p. 111]

Then is a class the brahmana? No. Since many great Rshis have sprung from other castes and orders of creation--Rshyas'rnga was born of deer; Kaus'ika, of Kus'a grass; Jambuka of a jackal; Valmiki of valmika (an ant-hill); Vyasa of a fisherman's daughter; Gautama, of the posteriors of a hare; Vasishtha of Urvas'i [*1]; and Agastya of a water-pot; thus have we heard. Of these, many Rshis outside the caste even have stood first among the teachers of divine Wisdom; therefore a class is not the brahmana.

Is jnana the brahmana? No. Since there were many kshatriyas and others well versed in the cognition of divine Truth, therefore jnana is not the brahmana.

Then is karma the brahmana? No. Since the prarabdha [*2], sanchita [*3], and agami [*4] karmas are the same for all beings, and since all people perform their actions as impelled by karma, therefore karma is not the brahmana.

Then is a doer of dharma (virtuous actions) the brahmana? No. Since there are many kshatriyas, etc., who are givers of gold, therefore a doer of virtuous actions is not the brahmana.

Who indeed then is brahmana? Whoever he may be, he who has directly realised his Atma and who is directly cognizant, like the myrobalan in his palm, of his Atma that is without a second, that is devoid of class and actions, that is free from the faults of the six stains [*5] and the six changes,  [*6] that is of the nature of truth, knowledge, bliss, and eternity, that is without any change in itself, that is the substratum of all the kalpas, that exists penetrating all things that pervades everything within and without as akas', that is of nature of undivided bliss, that cannot be reasoned about and that is known only by direct cognition. He who by the reason of having obtained his wishes is devoid of the faults of thirst after worldly objects and passions, who is the possessor of the qualifications beginning

[p. 112]

with s'ama [*1], who is free from emotion, malice, thirst after worldly objects, desire, delusion, etc., whose mind is untouched by pride, egoism, etc., who possesses all these qualities and means--he only is the brahmana.

Such is the opinion of the vedas, the smrtis, the itihasa and the puranas. Otherwise one cannot obtain the status of a brahmana. One should meditate on his Atma as Sachchidananda, and the non-dual Brahman. Yea, one should meditate on his Atma as the Sachchidananda Brahman. Such is the Upanishad.

Footnotes

^110:1 Lit., the diamond-needle-Upanishad.

^110:2 The lowest class of persons among the Hindus.

^111:1 One of the celestial nymphs dancing in the court of Indra.

^111:2 The karmic affinities generated by us in our former lives, the fruit of which is being enjoyed in our present life.

^111:3 The karmic affinities generated by us in our former lives and collected together to be enjoyed in our future lives.

^111:4 The affinities generated by us in our present life to be enjoyed hereafter.

^111:5 The six stains--hunger, thirst, grief, confusion, old age, and death.

^111:6 Birth, existence, etc.

^112:1 Sama, dama, uparati, titiksha, samadhana, and sraddha.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 113]

  

S'ARIRAKA-UPANISHAD [*1]

  

OF

  

KRSHNA-YAJURVEDA

OM. The body is a compound of prthivi (earth) and other mahabhutas (primordial elements, as pas or water, agni or fire, vayu or air, and akas'). (In the body), that which is hard is (of the essence of) earth; that which is liquid is (of the essence of) water; that which is hot is (of the essence of) fire; that which moves about is (of the essence of) vayu; that which is perforated is (of the essence of) akas'. The ear and others are the jnanendriyas (organs of sense). The ear is of the essence of akas', the skin of the essence of vayu, the eye of the essence of fire, the tongue of the essence of water, and the nose of the essence of earth; sound, touch, form, taste, and odour being respectively the objects of perception for these organs. These arose respectively out of the primordial elements, beginning with earth. The mouth, the hands, the legs, the organs of excretion and the organs of generation are the karmendriyas (or organs of action). Their functions are respectively talking, lifting, walking, excretion, and enjoyment. Antahkarana (or the internal organ) is of four kinds--manas, buddhi, ahankara, and chitta. Their functions are respectively sankalpa-vikalpa, (or will-thought and doubt), determination, egoism, and memory. The seat of manas is the end of the throat, that of buddhi the face, that of ahankara the heart, and that of chitta the navel. The bone, skin, nadis, nerves, hair, and flesh are of the essence of earth. Urine,

[p. 114]

phlegm, blood, s'ukla (or sperm), and sweat are of the essence of water. Hunger, thirst, sloth, delusion, and (desire of) copulation are of the essence of fire. Walking, scratching, opening and closing the gross eyes, etc., are of the essence of vayu. Desire, anger, avarice, delusion, and fear are of the essence of akas'. Sound, touch, form, taste, and odour are the properties of earth: sound, touch, form, and taste are the properties of water: sound, touch, and form, are the properties of fire: sound and touch are the properties of vayu: sound alone is the property of akas'. There are three gunas (or qualities), sattvika, rajasa, and tamasa. Non-killing, veracity, not stealing, continence, non-covetousness, refraining from anger, serving the guru, purity (in mind and body), contentment, right conduct, abstinence from self-praise, freedom from pompousness, firm conviction in the existence of God, and not causing any injury to others--all these are to be known as sattvika-gunas chiefly. I am the actor, I am the enjoyer, I am the speaker, and I am the egoistic--such are said by knowers of Brahman to be rajasa-gunas. Sleep, sloth, delusion, desire, copulation, and theft are said by expounders of the Vedas to be tamasa-gunas. Those having sattva-guna (go) up (viz., to higher spheres)--those having rajasa-guna (stay) in the middle (viz., the sphere of earth)--those having tamasa-guna (go) down (viz., to hell, etc.). Perfect (or divine) knowledge is of sattvika-guna; knowledge of dharma is of rajasa-guna, and mental darkness is of tamasa. Jagrata (waking state), svapna (dreaming state), sushupti (dreamless sleeping state), and turya (the fourth state beyond these three) are the four states. Jagrata is (the state) having (the play of) the fourteen organs, the organs of sense (five), the organs of action (five), and the four internal organs. Svapna is (the state) associated with the four internal organs. Sushupti is (the state) where the chitta is the only organ. Turya is that state having jiva alone. Regarding jivatma and Paramatma (enjoying the three states) of a person with opened eyes, with closed eyes, and with eyes in an intermediate state with neither, jiva is said to be the Kshetrajna (the lord of the body). The organs of sense

[p. 115]

[paragraph continues] (five), the organs of action (five), pranas (five), manas, and buddhi--all these seventeen are said to constitute the sukshma or linga (viz., subtle) body. Manas, buddhi, ahankara, akas', vayu, fire, water, and earth--these are the eight prakrtis (or matter): ear, skin, eye, tongue, nose the fifth, the organs of excretion, the organs of secretion, hands, legs, speech the tenth, sound, form, touch, taste, and odour are the fifteen modifications (of the above eight prakrtis). Therefore the tattvas are twenty-three. The twenty-fourth is avyakta (the undifferentiated matter) or pradhana. Purusha is other than (or superior to) this. Thus is the Upanishad.

Footnotes

^113:1 This Upanishad treats of Sarira or the body.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 116]

  

GARBHA-UPANISHAD [*1]

  

OF

  

KRSHNA-YAJURVEDA

OM. The body is composed of the five (elements); it exists in the five (objects of sense, etc.); it has six supports: it is associated with the six gunas; it has seven dhatus (essential ingredients) and three malas (impurities); it has three yonis (wombs) and is formed of four kinds of food.

Why is the body said to be composed of five? Because there are five elements in this body (viz.), prthivi, apas, agni, vayu, and akas'. In this body of five elements, what is the prthivi element? what apas? what agni? what vayu? and what akas'? Prthivi is said to be that which is hard; apas is said to be that which is liquid; agni is said to be that which is hot; vayu is that, which moves; akas' is that which is full of holes (or tubes [*2]). Of these, prthivi is seen in supporting (objects), apas in cohesion, tejas (or agni) in making forms visible, vayu in moving, akas' chiefly in avakas'a (viz., giving space). (Then what are the five objects of sense, etc.?) The ear exists in sound, the skin in touch, the eye in forms, the tongue in taste, and the nose in odour. (Then) the mouth (exists) in speech, the hand in lifting, the feet in walking, the anus in excreting, and the genitals in enjoying. (Then) through buddhi, one knows and determines; through manas, he thinks and fancies; through chitta, he recollects; through ahankara, he feels the idea of 'I'. Thus these perform their respective functions.

[p. 117]

Whence the six supports? There are six kinds of rasas (essences or tastes)--sweet, sour, saltish, bitter, astringent, and pungent. The body depends upon them while they depend upon the body. There are six changes of state (viz.), the body exists, is born, grows, matures, decays, and dies. And there are also six chakras (wheels) depending on the dhamani (nerves), (viz.), muladhara, svadhishthana, manipuraka, anahata, vis'uddhi, and ajna. Also the gunas are six--kama (passion) and others and s'ama (mental restraint) and others; there being properly--association (with the former) and devotion (to the latter). Then there are seven kinds of sounds, (viz.), shadja (sa), rshabha (ri), gandhara (ga), madhyama (ma), panchama (pa), daivata (da), and nishada (ni), which are stated to be seven agreeable and disagreeable ones; and there are seven kinds of dhatus having seven colours, (viz.), s'ukla (white), rakta (red), krshna (dark-blue or indigo), dhumra (blue), pita (yellow), kapila (orange-red), and pandara (yellowish white). In whomsoever these substances arise and increase, the rasa (essence) is the cause of the one following and so on (as stated below). (These) rasas are six in number; from the rasas (probably chyme) arises blood: from blood, flesh; from flesh, fat; from fat, bones; from bones, marrow; and from marrow, s'ukla (the male seminal fluid). From the union of s'ukla and s'onita (the female vital energy), occurs garbha (conception in the womb). Being stationed in the heart, it is led. In the heart of persons, (there is) an internal agni; in the seat of agni, there is bile; in the seat of bile, there is vayu; in the seat of vayu, is hrdya (heart or Atma).

Through having connection at the rtu (season) fit for raising issues, it (the embryo formed in the womb) is like water in the first night; in seven nights, it is like a bubble; at the end of half a month, it becomes a ball. At the end of a month, it is hardened; in two months, the head is formed; in three months, the region about the feet; and in the fourth month, the region about the stomach and the loins and also ankle is formed; in the fifth month, the back (or spinal) bone; in the sixth, the face of the nose, eyes, and ears; in the seventh, it becomes united with Jiva (Atma); in the eighth month, it becomes full (of all organs); in the

[p. 118]

ninth, it becomes fatty. S'ukla belongs to men and s'onita to women. Each (by itself) is neutral (or is powerless). (But in their combination) a son is born when the father's seed preponderates. A daughter is born when the mother's seed preponderates. Should both be equal, a eunuch is born. Since females have more of passion, on account of their deriving more pleasure (than males from sexual union), a greater number of females are born. Action corresponds to the mental state (of the actor). Hence the child (born) takes after (the thought of) the parents. From parents with minds full of anxieties (at the time of union) are born the blind, the lame, the hunchback, the dwarf, and the limbless. (From impregnation) during the eclipses of the sun and the moon, children are born with defective limbs. Increase or decrease, similarities or dissimilarities of bodies arise (in children) through the influence of time, place, action, dravya (substance), and enjoyment. From a well-conducted intercourse (or union), the child being born with the form of the father possesses, his qualities, just as the image in a glass reflects truly the original. When s'ukla bursts into two through the interaction (or blowing against one another) of the vayu of both s'ukla and s'onita, then twins (of the same sex) are born. In the same manner when the retas (the seminal fluids), viz., (s'ukla and s'onita) of both the parents burst into two, then mixed progeny (male and female) is the result. Among mankind, five embryos (only can be formed at a pregnancy in the womb). A womb with one embryo is common. There are some with two. Those with three are only to be found (as rarely) as one in a thousand. Where there is a frequent pouring (of seminal fluid into the womb), a greater number of limbs is produced (in the child). When the pouring (within the womb) is only once, then the child becomes dried up (or contracted). By pouring (within) more than once, couples are (sometimes) born.

Then, (viz., in the ninth month), this (in the body) made of the five elements and able to sense odour, taste, etc., through tejas (spiritual fire), etc., which is also made up of the five elements--this cognizes the indestructible Omkara through its deep wisdom and contemplation. It cognizes as the one letter

[p. 119]

[paragraph continues] (Om). Then there arise in the body the eight prakrtis [*1] and the sixteen vikaras (changes). Through the food and drink of the mother transmitted through her nadis, the child obtains prana. In the ninth month, it is full of all attributes.

It then remembers its previous births, finds out what has been done and what has not been done, and discriminates between actions, right and wrong. (Then it thinks thus:) Many thousands of wombs have been seen by me, many kinds of food have been tasted (by me), and many breasts have been suckled (by me). All parts of the world have been my place of birth, as also my burning-ground in the past. In eighty-four lakhs [*2] of wombs, have I been born. I have been often born and have often died. I have been subject to the cycle of rebirths very often. I have had birth and death, again birth and death, and again birth (and so on). There is much suffering whilst living in the womb. Delusion and sorrow attend every birth. In youth are sorrow, grief, dependence on others, ignorance, the non-performance of what is beneficial) laziness, and the performance of what is unfavourable. In adult age, (the sources of sorrow are) attachment to sensual objects and the groaning under the three kinds [*3] of pain. In old age anxiety, disease, fear of death, desires, love of self, passion, anger, and non-independence--all these produce very great suffering. This birth is the seed of sorrow, and being of the form of sorrow is unbearable. I have not attained the dharma of nivrtti, (viz., the means of overcoming the cycle of re-birth) nor have I acquired the means of yoga and jnana. Alas! I am sunk in the ocean of sorrow and find no remedy for it. Fie on ajnana! fie on ajnana! fie on the troubles caused by passion and anger; fie on the fetters of samsara (the mundane existence)! I shall attain wisdom from a guru. If I get myself freed from the womb, then I shall practise sankhya yoga which is the cause of the extinction of all evil and the bestower

[p. 120]

of the fruit of emancipation. If I get myself freed from the womb, I shall seek refuge in Mahes'vara (the great Lord) who is the cause of the extinction of all evil and bestower of the (four [*1]) ends of life. If I get myself freed from the womb, then I shall seek refuge in that Lord of the world who is the Chidatma of all s'aktis and the cause of all causes. If I get myself freed from the womb, then I shall seek refuge in that supreme Lord Bhargah (S'iva or light) who is pas'upati (the lord of pas'us or souls), Rudra, Mahadeva (the great Deva) and the Guru of the world. If I get myself freed from the bondage of the womb, I shall perform great penances. If I get myself freed from the passage of the womb, I shall worship Vishnu in my heart who is the bestower of nectar, who is bliss, who is Narayana, and who never decays. I am now confined in my mother's womb; and were I freed from its bonds, I shall please the divine Vasudeva without diverting my mind from Him. I am burnt through actions, good and bad, committed by me alone before for the sake of others, whilst those who enjoyed the fruits thereof have disappeared. Through non-belief (unspirituality), I formerly gave up all fear (of sin) and committed sins. I now reap their fruits. I shall become a believer hereafter [*2]."

Thus does the Jiva (Atma) within the (mother's womb) contemplate again and again the many kinds of miseries (it had undergone), and remembering always the miseries of the cycle of re-births, becomes disgusted (with the material enjoyments of the world), often fainting in the inmost centre (viz., heart) of all creatures at (the idea of) his avidya, desire, and karma. Then this being, who had entered many hundreds of female wombs of beings (in the previous births), comes to the mouth of the womb wishing to obtain release. Here being pressed by the yantra (neck of the uterus), it suffers much trouble. Moreover it is much affected by prasuti (delivery) vayu. As soon as it is born, it comes in contact with the vaishnavi vayu and ceases to remember anything of the past;

[p. 121]

it also ceases to see far and to be the cognizer of the real. Coming into contact with the earth, it becomes fierce-eyed and debased. The evil of the eye after it is rubbed with (or cleaned by) water vanishes; and with it, vanishes memory of birth and death, good and bad actions and their affinities. Then how does he understand vayu, bile, and s'leshma (phlegm)? When they are in their proper state, they produce health: with their disturbance, diseases are generated. It should be known that one becomes capable of knowing through a proper quantity of bile; through having a little more or a little less of it, he comes to know more. When the bile is changed (otherwise), he becomes changed and acts like a mad man. And that bile is agni. Agni influenced by karma is kindled by vayu, the source (or seat) of virtue and vice, as fuel is kindled within (by fire) from without (by the wind).

And of how many kinds is that agni? It has three bodies, three retas (seeds or progeny), three puras (cities), three dhatus, and three kinds of agni threefold. Of these three, Vais'vanara is bodiless. And that agni becomes (or is subdivided into) Jnanagni (wisdom-fire), Dars'anagni (eye-fire), and Koshthagni (digestive fire). Of these Jnanagni pertains to the mind; Dars'anagni pertains to the senses; and Koshthagni pertains to dahara and daily cooks (or digests) equally whatever is eaten, drunk, licked, or sucked through prana and apana. Dars'anagni is (in) the eye itself and is the cause of vijnana and enables one to see all objects of form. It has three seats, the (spiritual) eye itself being the (primary) seat, and the eyeballs being the accessory seats. Dakshinagni is in the heart, Garhapatya is in the belly, and in the face is Ahavaniya. (In this sacrifice with the three agnis), the Purusha is himself the sacrificer; buddhi becomes his wife; santosha (contentment) becomes the diksha (vow) taken; the mind and the organs of the senses become the sacrificial vessels; the karmendriyas (organs of action) are the sacrificial instruments. In this sacrifice of the body, the several devas who become the rtvijas (sacrificial priests) perform their parts following the master of the sacrifice, (viz., the true individuality), wherever he goes. In this (sacrifice), the body is the sacrificial place,

[p. 122]

the skull of the head is the fire-pit, the hairs are the kus'a grass; the mouth is the antarvedi (raised platform in sacrifice); kama (or passion) is the clarified butter; the period of life is the period of sacrifice; nada (sound) produced in dahara (heart) is the samaveda (recited during the sacrifice); vaikhari is the yajus (or yajurveda hymns); para, pas'yanti, and madhyama [*1] are the rks (or rgveda hymns); cruel words are the atharvas (atharvaveda hymns) and khilas (supplementary texts of each veda); true words are the vyahrtis [*2]. Life, strength, and bile are the pas'us (sacrificial creatures) and death is avabhrta (the bath which concludes the sacrifice). In this sacrifice, the (three) fires blaze up and then according to (the desires of) the , the devas bless him. All who are living (in this world) are the sacrificers. There is none living who does not perform yajna (sacrifice). This body is (created) for yajna, and arises out of yajna and changes according to yajna. If this yajna is continued in a direction changed (from the right course, or is abused), then it leads to an ocean of misery.

In this body, there are sixteen side-teeth, having each a membrane (as its root) and fifteen openings. It (the body) is measured by ninety-six digits. There are in it fourteen nadi seats and 108 joints. There are seventy-two tubes seats with seventy-two nadis between them, of which three are important, viz., ida, pingala, and sushumna, the fourth is puritati, and jivata the fifth. Above jivata is bile and near bile is Puritati. Above the navel, two digits to the left of it, is seated the source of bile. The food taken in is divided into three parts--urine, faeces, and sara (the essence or chyme). The urine dividing itself into two, spreads to the left below the navel. The faeces is in the right side and is of seven kinds. The sara is of five kinds and spreads itself over the body. Hence the semen and blood are produced from food and drink. In this body, vayu which is moving as prana is the Sutratma. Through it, one inspires and expires and moves (his limbs). Without it, no limb of the body will be

[p. 123]

animated. Through vayu, the current of blood is driven into the midis from the chakra (plexus) of the heart, and those which can be touched (on the body) are easily discernible. The juicy essences (of food) which arise out of digestion enter the womb which is suspended in the stomach of the mother and coming near the child's head nourishes the child's prana through the sushumna (on the head or pineal gland). Sushumna is the Brahma-nadi. Prana and others are found there. It (prana) descends lower and lower as the time of birth approaches and settles in the heart when the child is born. Through yoga, it should be brought from the middle of the eyebrows to the end of sushumna (viz., the pineal gland), when he becomes the cognizer of the Real like the child in the womb. In the body of this nature, Atma is latent and deathless, and is the witness and Purusha. It lives in this body, being enveloped (by maya). Prani (or the jiva having prana) has abhimana (identification with the body) on account of avidya. Ajnana which surrounds it is the seed; the antahkarana (internal organ) is the sprout and the body is the tree. In this tree (of body), there are eight crores of hairs, eighty hundreds of joints, nine hundreds of tendons, eight palams of heart [*1], twelve palams of tongue, one prastha (or two palams) of bile; one adhaka of phlegm, one kudupa (or  1/4 prastha) of s'ukla and two prasthas of marrow. One should consider everything as evanescent, like the child in the womb (with its prana, etc.,) stationed in the sushumna (of the head). Then he becomes freed and gets no more body. If not, an ignorant man becomes subject to the cycle of re-births, etc., is exposed like a worm to the drink of urine and faeces, and undergoes in this body the sufferings of hell. Therefore knowing all this, one should be averse to worldly objects. Thus ends the moksha-s'astra of Pippalada--thus ends the moksha-s'astra of Pippalada. Thus ends the Upanishad.

Footnotes

^116:1 The Upanishad treating of embryo, etc.

^116:2 The Sanskrit word 'sushira' means perforated or tubular.

^119:1 The eight prakrtis are mulaprakrti, mahat, ahankara, and the five elements; the sixteen vikaras are the five organs of sense, the five organs of action, the five pranas, and antahkarana.

^119:2 The Hindus believe in so many number of wombs to be born on the earth.

^119:3 Those that arise from the body, the elements, and the devas.

^120:1 They are kama (passion), artha (acquisition of wealth), dharma (performance of duty), and moksha (salvation).

^120:2 The reason why it remembers them seems to be that the jivatma is in the pineal gland then, prior to its coming down.

^122:1 Vaikhari and the three others are the different stages of nada (sound).

^122:2 Vyahrtis are parts of the Gayatri Mantra, viz., Bhuh, Bhuvah, Suvah.

^123:1 Eight palams are 3/5 of a lb. (avdp.)

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 124]

  

TARASARA-UPANISHAD [*1]

  

OF

  

S'UKLA-YAJURVEDA

OM. Brhaspati asked Yajnavalkya: "That which is called Kurukshetra is the place of the sacrifice of the Devas and the spiritual seat of all beings. Therefore where should one go in order that he may cognize Kurukshetra, the place of the sacrifice of the Devas and the spiritual seat of all beings?" (To which Yajnavalkya replied:) "Avimukta [*2] is Kurukshetra, the place of the sacrifice of the Devas and of the study of Brahman, because it is there that Rudra initiates one into the Taraka [*3] Brahman when prana (life) goes out. Through this, one becomes immortal and the enjoyer of moksha. Therefore one should always be in the midst of that place avimukta, and should never leave, O reverend sir, avimukta." Thus said Yajnavalkya.

Then Bharadvaja asked Yajnavalkya: "What is taraka? what is that which causes one to cross (this mundane existence)." To which Yajnavalkya replied: "Om-Namo-Narayanaya is the taraka. It should be worshipped as Chidatma. Om is a single syllable and of the nature of Atma. N amah is of two syllables and is of the nature of prakrti (matter). Narayarnaya is of five syllables and is of the nature of Parabrahman. He who knows this becomes immortal. Through Om, is Brahma produced; through Na is Vishnu produced; through Ma is Rudra produced; through Na is Is'vara produced; through Ra is the Anda-Virat (or Virat of the universe) produced; through Ya is

[p. 125]

[paragraph continues] Purusha produced; through Na is Bhagavan (Lord) produced; and through Ya is Paramatma produced. This Ashtakshara (eight syllables) of Narayana is the supreme and the highest Purusha. Thus is the Rgveda with the first foot (or half). That which is Om is the indestructible, the supreme, and Brahman. That alone should be worshipped. It is this that is of the eight subtle syllables. And this becomes eight, being of eight forms. A is the first letter; U is the second; M is the third; Bindu is the fourth; Nada is the fifth; Kala is the sixth; Kalatita (that beyond kala) is the seventh; and that which is beyond these is the eighth. It is called Taraka, because it enables one to cross this mundane existence. Know that Taraka alone is Brahman and it alone should be worshipped." The (following) verses may be quoted here: "From the letter A came Brahma named Jambavan (the bear [*1]). From the letter U came Upendra [*2], named Hari. From the letter M came S'iva, known as Hanuman [*3]. Bindu is named Is'vara and is S'atrughna, the Lord of the discus itself. Nada should be known as the great Lord named Bharata and the sound of the conch itself. From Kala came the Purusha himself as Lakshmana and the bearer of the earth. Kalatita is known as the goddess Sita Herself. That which is beyond is the Paramatma named S'ri-Rama and is the highest Purusha. All this is the explanation of the letter Om, which is the past, the present, and future, and which is other than these (viz.,) tattva, mantra, varna, (colour), devata (deity), chhandas (metre), rk, kala, s'akti, and srshti (creation). He who knows this becomes immortal. (Thus is) Yajurveda with the second foot."

Then Bharadvaja asked Yajnavalkya: "Through what mantra is Paramatma pleased and shows his own Atma (to persons)? Please tell this." Yajnavalkya replied:

"(1st Mantra:) Om. He who is S'ri-Paramatma, Narayana, and the Lord described by (the letter) A and is Jambavan (the bear) and Bhuh, Bhuvah, and Suvah: Salutation to Him."

[p. 126]

"(2nd Mantra:) He who is Paramatma, Narayana, and the Lord described by (the letter) U and is Upendra (or) Hari and Bhuh, Bhuvah, and Suvah: Salutation to Him.

"(3rd Mantra:) Om. He who is S'ri-Paramatma, Narayana, and the Lord described by (the letter) M and is of the form of S'iva (or), Hanuman and Bhuh, Bhuvah, and Suvah: Salutation to Him.

"(4th Mantra:) Om. He who is S'ri-Paramatma, Narayana, the Lord of S'atrughna [*1] of the form of Bindu and the Bhuh, Bhuvah, and Suvah: Salutation to Him.

"(5th Mantra:) Om. He who is S'ri-Paramatma, Narayana, and the Lord, and is Bharata [*1] of the form of Nada and the Bhuh Bhuvah, and Suvah: Salutation to Him.

"(6th Mantra:) Om. He who is S'ri-Paramatma, Narayana, and the Lord, and is Lakshmana of the form of Kala and the Bhuh, Bhuvah, and Suvah: Salutation to Him.

"(7th Mantra:) Om. He who is S'ri-Paramatma, Narayana, and the Lord, and is Kalatita, the Goddess Sita, of the form of Chit and the Bhuh, Bhuvah, and Suvah: Salutation to Him.

"(8th Mantra:) Om. He who is S'ri-Paramatma, Narayana, and the Lord that is beyond that (Kalatita), is the supreme Purusha, and is the ancient Purushottama, the eternal, the immaculate, the enlightened, the emancipated, the true, the highest bliss, the endless, the secondless, and the all-full--that Brahman is myself. I am Rama and the Bhuh, Bhuvah, and Suvah: Salutation to Him."

He who has mastered this eightfold mantra is purified by Agni; he is purified by Vayu; he is purified by the sun; he is purified by S'iva; he is known by all the Devas. He attains the fruit of reciting Itihasas, Puranas, Rudra (Mantras), a hundred thousand times. He who repeatedly remembers (or recites) the Ashtakshara (the eight-syllabled mantra) of Narayana gains the fruit of the recitation of Gayatri a hundred thousand times or of Pranava (Om) a myriad of times. He purifies (his ancestors) ten (degrees) above and (his descendants) ten

[p. 127]

[paragraph continues] (degrees) below. He attains the state of Narayana. He who knows this (attains the state of Narayana).

Like the eye (which sees without any obstacle) the things spread (in the sky), the wise ever see this supreme seat of Vishnu. Brahmanas who are spiritually awake praise in diverse ways and illuminate the supreme abode of Vishnu. Thus is the Upanishad. (Thus is) the Samaveda with the third foot.

Footnotes

^124:1 This Upanishad treats of the sara (essence) for tara (crossing).

^124:2 It is one of the many names given to Benares.

^124:3 Taraka is Om--from tr, to cross.

^125:1 As the bear, Brahma, incarnated according to the 'Ramayana'.

^125:2 As Upendra, Vishnu incarnates in the lower tala as well in the legs in man.

^125:3 Hanuman is the incarnation of vayu, one of the elements of S'iva.

^126:1 Bharata is rather the incarnation of discus or consciousness and Satrughna, that of conch--via., akasic sound.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 128]

  

NARAYANA-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

KRSHNA-YAJURVEDA

OM. Then Narayana, the supreme Purusha desired. "I shall create offspring." From Narayana emanates prana, manas, the several organs of sense and action, akas', vayu, agni, apas and prthivi that supports all. From Narayana emanates Brahma. From Narayana emanates Rudra. From Narayana emanates Indra. From Narayana emanates Prajapati (the divine progenitor). From Narayana emanates the twelve adityas, rudras, vasus, and all the chhandas (Vedas). From Narayana only do (all these) proceed. Through Narayana do (they) prosper. In Narayana (they) are absorbed. The Rgveda teaches this.

Then Narayana is eternal. Brahma is Narayana, S'iva is Narayana, Indra is Narayana, Kala (time) is Narayana, Dik (space) is Narayana, the intermediate quarters also are Narayana; that which is above is Narayana, that which is below is Narayana, that which is in and out is Narayana, the whole universe which existed and will exist is Narayana. Narayana is the only one that is stainless, sinless, changeless, and unnameable, and that is pure and divine. There is no second. Whoever knows Him thus, becomes Vishnu Himself. The Yajurveda teaches this.

One should utter "Om" first, then "namah," and then "Narayanaya." "Om" (is) a single syllable; "Namah" contains two syllables: "Narayanaya" contains five syllables. This is the sentence known as the Ashtakshara [*1] of Narayana.

[p. 129]

[paragraph continues] Whoever studies this Ashtakshara of Narayana and recites it constantly, attains full life and supremacy over men, enjoys the pleasures of royalty and becomes the master of all souls. He attains moksha; yea, he attains moksha. The Samaveda teaches this.

The Yogin having pronounced (the name of) Him who is complete bliss, who is Brahma-purusha and who is of the nature of Pranava (Om)--a combination of A, U, and M--is released from the bondage of birth and mundane existence. He who practises the mantra "Om-Namo-Narayanaya" reaches Vaikuntha (the abode of Vishnu). It is this lotus (heart). It is replete with vijnana: It has the brilliancy of lightning. The son of Devaki is Brahmanya [*1]. Madhusudana is Brahmanya. Narayana who pervades all elements, who is one only, who is the cause Purusha and who is causeless, is known as Parabrahman. The Atharvana Upanishad teaches this.

Whoever recites (this Upanishad) in the morning destroys the sins committed the night (before). Whoever recites it in the evening destroys the sins committed during the day. Whoever recites morning and evening becomes free from sins, however sinful he may be. Whoever recites (it) in the noon facing the sun is freed from all the five [*2] great sins as well as from the minor ones. He derives the good effects of the recitation of all the Vedas. Whoever knows thus attains Sayujya of Narayana (viz., is absorbed in the essence of Narayana). He attains Sayujya of Narayana. Thus is the Upanishad.

Footnotes

^128:1 The eight syllables.

^129:1 Means Vishnu or Brahma devoted to Tapas, Vedas, Truth, and Jnana.

^129:2 They are theft of gold, drinking alcohol, the murder of a Brahman, and unlawful union with the guru's wife and association with them.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 130]

  

KALISANTARANA UPANISHAD [*1]

  

OF

  

KRSHNA-YAJURVEDA

AT the end of Dvapara yuga, Narada [*2] went to Brahma and addressed him thus: "O Lord, how shall I, roaming [*3] over the earth, be able to cross Kali?" To which Brahma thus replied: "Well asked. Hearken to that which all S'rutis (the Vedas) keep secret and hidden, through which one may cross the samsara (mundane existence) of Kali. He shakes off (the evil effects of) Kali through the mere uttering of the name of the Lord Narayana, who is the primeval Purusha." Again Narada asked Brahma: "What is the name?" To which Hiranyagarbha (Brahma) replied thus: (the words are:) "1. Hare, 2. Rama, 3. Hare, 4. Rama, 5. Rama, 6. Rama, 7. Hare, 8. Hare; 9. Hare 10. Krshna, 11. Hare, 12. Krshna, 13. Krshna, 14. Krshna 15. Hare, 16. Hare. These sixteen names (words) are destructive of the evil effects of Kali. No better means than this is to be seen in all the Vedas. These (sixteen names) destroy the avarana (or the centripetal force which produces the sense of individuality) of jiva surrounded by the sixteen kalas (rays). Then like the

[p. 131]

sphere of the sun which shines fully after the clouds (screening it) disperse, Parabrahman (alone) shines."

Narada asked: "O Lord, what are the rules to be observed with reference to it?" To which Brahma replied that there were no rules for it. Whoever in a pure or an impure state, utters these always, attains the same world of, or proximity with, or the same form of, or absorption into Brahma.

Whoever utters three and a half kotis [*1] (or thirty-five millions) times this mantra composed of sixteen names (or words) crosses the sin of the murder of a Brahmana. He becomes purified from the sin of the theft of gold. He becomes purified from the sin of cohabitation with a woman of low caste. He is purified from the sins of wrong done to pitrs, devas, and men. Having given up all dharmas, he becomes freed at once from all sins. He is at once released from all bondage. That he is at once released from all bondage is the Upanishad.

Footnotes

^130:1 This Upanishad treats of the means of crossing Kali completely: Narada having asked the question in Dvapara yuga--the third of the four yugas.

^130:2 Narada is called Kali-Karaka or the generator of kali or strife and discord. If Narada is himself the strife-maker, why should he go to Brahma for the means of crossing Kali? Narada being himself an adjuster of the laws of karma, this Upanishad gives the means of getting over strife, etc., in this Kali-age when the whole of nature is thrown off its balance by the depraved tendencies of men. The jive, has sixteen kalas, corresponding to which sixteen mantras or words are given.

^130:3 The story is that he was cursed by Daksha to roam over the worlds with a lute in his hand (viz., to adjust the laws of harmony).

^131:1 This number can be reached by uttering the mantra completely within one year if uttered at the rate of a lakh per day: and within ten years if uttered at the rate of 10,000 per day; and within 100 years if uttered at the rate of 1,000 per diem.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 132]

  

BHIKSHUKA [*1]-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

S'UKLA-YAJURVEDA

AMONG bhikshus (religious mendicants) who long for moksha (salvation), there are four [*2] kinds, viz., Kutichaka, Bahudaka, Hamsa, and Paramahamsa. Gautama, Bharadvaja, Yajnavalkya, Vasishtha and others belong to the first kind. They take eight mouthfuls (of food daily) and strive after moksha alone through the path of yoga. The second kind carry three (bamboo) staves (tied together) and a waterpot, and wear tuft of hair (s'ikha), sacred thread (yajnopavita) and red-coloured cloth. They take eight mouthfuls of food in the house of Brahmarshis, abstain from flesh and alcohol and strive after emancipation alone through the path of yoga. Then the Hamsas should live not more than a night in a village, five nights in a town, and seven nights in a sacred place, partaking daily of cow's urine and cow's dung, observing Chandrayana [*3] and striving after moksha alone through the path of yoga. Paramahamsas like Samvartaka, Aruni, S'wetaketu, Jadabharata, Dattatreya, S'uka, Vamadeva, Haritaka and others take eight mouthfuls and strive after moksha alone through the path of yoga. They live clothed or naked at the foot of trees, in ruined houses, or in burning grounds. With

[p. 133]

them, there are no dualities as dharma and adharma, gain and loss, and purity and impurity. They look upon gold and stone and clod of earth with the same eye (of indifference), live on alms, begging from all without any distinction of caste and look upon everything as Atma alone. Being (naked) as nature made them, being free from the sense of duality and from covetousness, being engaged in pure contemplation (s'ukladhyana), meditating on Atma, and begging at stated times, simply to keep the body and soul together, they reside in ruined houses, temples, straw-huts, ant-hills, the foot of trees, potteries, the places of agnihotra, the sand in the bed of rivers, mountain-caves, cavities, the hollows of trees, waterfalls, and sthandila (the level square piece of ground prepared for sacrifice). Having advanced far in the path of Brahman, and being pure in mind, they quit this body through the methods prescribed for Paramahamsa Sannyasins. These are the Paramahamsas. Such is the Upanishad.

Footnotes

^132:1 One who lives on bhiksha or alms. Hence a religious mendicant.

^132:2 In Naradaparivrajaka Upanishad there are stated to be six kinds.

^132:3 A religious expiatory ceremony regulated by the moon's age diminishing the daily consumption of food daily by one mouthful for the dark half of the month beginning with fifteen at the full moon until it is reduced to one at the new moon and then increasing it in like manner during the fortnight of the moon's increase.--WILSON.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 134]

  

NARADAPARIVRAJAKA-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

ATHARVANAVEDA

  

UPAdEs'A I

OM. Once upon a time, Narada, the ornament of Parivrajakas (roaming ascetics), after roaming over all worlds and cleansing, through merely by looking at the places of pilgrimage able to impart rare religious merits, observed, with a mind that had attained purity, without hate, quiescent and patient, and indifferent towards all (objects), the forest of Naimis'a (the modern Nimsar), filled with Rshis that were engaged in the contemplation of Reality and had attained the greatness of the ordained bliss; (there) through the recitation of stories about Hari (Vishnu), associated with the musical motes of Sa, Ri, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha, and Ni (of the gamut), able to impart indifference to objects and to make one look down upon the universe, and instilling divine devotion, fixed and movable (or mental and bodily), he entered (the forest), fascinating the crowds of beings human, animal, Kimpurushas [*1], celestials, Kinnaras, [*2] Apsaras (Houris), and Uragas [*3] (collected there). (Thereupon the) great Rshis S'aunaka and others who had been engaged for twelve years in sattra sacrifice well-skilled in the recitation of Vedas, the knowers of all, and the good practisers of tapas, observed Narada the son of Brahma and the devotee of the Lord, and having

[p. 135]

risen up, paid due respect to him. Then having with due respect requested him to sit down, they also seated themselves and addressed him thus: "O Lord, son of Brahma, what is the means of salvation for us? It is meet that it should be communicated (to us)." Thus addressed, Narada replied to them thus: "One born in a good family and fit to go through the forty-four samskaras, upanayana and others, should, under a teacher to whom he is devoted, study, after the recitation of the Veda of his own s'akha (division), all the different branches of knowledge; then should fulfil, according to the rules ordained, for twelve years the observance of Brahmacharya (celibacy), such as the service of the guru, etc.; then for twenty-five years the as'rama (order of life) of a grhastha (householder), and for twenty-five years the as'rama of a vanaprastha (forester). After thus practising well the fourfold celibacy, [*1] the sixfold [*2] householder's life, and the fourfold [*3] forester's life, and having performed all the duties thereof, he should acquire the fourfold [*4] means of salvation; thus the sannyasin who gives up the desires along with the karmas of mind, speech, and body in this samsara as well as the vasana towards the threefold desire (of son, wife, and wealth), and being without malice and endowed with quiescence and patience, undisturbed in the order of life of Paramahamsa, quits the body in the contemplation of Reality, is an emancipated person. Such is the Upanishad."

  

UPAdEs'A II

All the Rshis, S'aunaka and others addressing Lord Narada said thus: "O Lord, please tell us the rules of sannyasa." At which, seeing them, Narada replied: "It is but meet that we should know the whole truth from the mouth of Brahma

[p. 136]

[paragraph continues] Himself." After the sattra sacrifice was completed, he took the rshis along with him to satyaloka; and after duly making prostrations to and eulogising Brahma engaged in meditation upon Brahman, he along with others was duly seated under the orders of Brahma. Then Narada addressed Brahma thus: "Thou art guru; thou art father; thou art the knower of the secret of all learning; thou art the knower of all; thou shalt therefore tell me one secret. Who else but thee is fit to tell the secret dear unto me? It is this. Please tell us the rules of the real sannyasa (asceticism)."

Thus prayed to by Narada, Brahma surveyed all in the four quarters; and after meditating for one muhurta (48 minutes), and assuring himself that the inquiry was truly for the purpose of escaping from the pain of samsara, Brahma eyeing Narada, said thus: "The mystery that was imparted before by Virat-Purusha of illimitable form according to the Purusha-Sukta-Upanishad is now being divulged to you. It is very mysterious. It is fit to be hearkened to with great attention. O Narada, one born in a good family and obedient to his parents, should, after the performance of upanayana according to the rules, find a virtuous guru that is other than his father, is of good custom and habits, of faith, born of good family, a knower of Vedas, a lover of S'astras, of (good) qualities and free from duplicity. Having made prostrations and rendered useful service to him, he should respectfully acquaint him with his intention. Having studied all departments of knowledge and rendered service for twelve years, he should, under his (the guru's) orders, marry a girl fit for his family and dear unto him. Then having performed for twenty-five years the karmas incidental to a householder and attained the status of a Brahmana that has performed sacrifices and the rest, he should beget a son with the only desire of perpetuating the family. After thus spending twenty-five years in the performance of household dharma, he should bathe thrice daily for twenty-five years and take only one meal in the fourth period; he should live alone in the forest, after giving up his previous wanderings in city and village; and without desire for fruit, should perform the karmas incidental to that (forester's) order .of life, and be

[p. 137]

without desire for objects seen and heard. Being skilled in the forty samskaras, he should be devoid of desire for all, have a purified mind, have burnt up desire, jealousy, envy and egoism, and have developed the four means of salvation. Then he becomes fit for sannyasa. Such is the Upanishad."

  

UPAdEs'A III

Then Narada addressed the grandfather thus:

"O Lord, by whom, after attaining the qualifications of sannyasa, is it fit to be taken?" To which Brahma, replied: "After first expounding the qualifications of sannyasa, the rules of sannyasa will then be stated. Hearken carefully. A eunuch, the outcaste, the maimed, the lewd, the deaf, the youth, the dumb, the heretic, the discus-bearer, the Linga-wearer, the vaikhanasa (forester), the Haradhvaja (carrier of S'iva's flag), the reciter of Vedas for hire, the bald-headed, one without (sacrificial) fire--all these, even though they have attained vairagya are unfit for sannyasa. Even though they have become sannyasins, they are unfit to be initiated into the mahavakyas (sacred vedic sentences). The Paramahamsa sannyasin stated before (as fit to take sannyasa) is the one qualified. It is stated in the smrtis that he is a parivrat who is not afraid of others, as others are not afraid of him. The eunuch, the limbless, the blind, the youth, the sinful, the outcaste, the door-keeper, the vaikhanasa, the Haradhvaja, the chakri (discus-bearer), the Lingi (Linga-wearer), the heretic, the bald-headed, one without fire (sacrifice), one that had undergone sannyasa twice or thrice, the reciter of Vedas for hire--all these are not fit for regular sannyasa but only for atura-sannyasa (viz., sannyasa taken while a person is afflicted, etc.). What is the opinion of aryas (Hindus) on the (fit) time for atura-sannyasa (being taken)? The time when prana (life) is about to rise (out of the body) is called atura. The time other than it is incapable of conferring (upon one) the path of salvation and is not atura. Even in atura-sannyasa, the wise should according to rules, initiate themselves into sannyasa after reciting the

[p. 138]

mantras again and again in the course of respective mantras. There is no difference between regular and atura-sannyasa in the mantras to be uttered at the time of taking sannyasa. There is no karma without mantras; (hence) karma needs mantras. Anything done without mantra cannot be termed karma. Hence mantras should not be given up. Any karma done without mantra is like an offering made in ashes. Through the conciseness (of the performance) of the karmas, it is stated to be atura-sannyasa.

"Therefore, O Muni, the recitation of mantras is stated to be in atura-sannyasa. One who is always duly doing agnihotra (fire-sacrifice) should, when he quits (the house) for foreign places through indifference, perform the prajapatya sacrifice in water and then take up sannyasa. After completing in water the observances of karma through the mind, or the recitation of mantras, the wise man should attain sannyasa. Else he becomes a fallen man. When, in the mind, indifference to all objects arises, then men should long after sannyasa, (that being the best time for it); otherwise they are fallen. One who attains vairagya should take sannyasa. One who does not, should remain at home. That vile twice-born with desire, should he take sannyasa, reaches hell. That Brahmana who is a celibate, who has under control his tongue, sexual organ, stomach, and hand may become a sannyasin without undergoing the ceremony of marriage. Having known samsara as one without sara (or essence) and not having undergone any marriage on account of the desire to know the sara (or essence of God), they become sannyasins on account of the practice of the supreme vairagya. The characteristic of pravrtti (path) is the performance of karma; that of nivrtti is jnana. Therefore placing jnana in the forefront, the wise man should take up sannyasa. When the reality of the eternal Parabrahman is understood, then he should take up one danda (staff) and abandon the holy thread and tuft of hair. Then he becomes fit to eat the alms-food (of sannyasa), having become devoted to Paramatma, indifferent to those that are not-Paramatma and freed from all desires. He becomes fit to be the eater of

[p. 139]

alms-food who preserves the same countenance when he is beaten, as when he is worshipped or prostrated to. He becomes fit to be the eater of alms-food who is of the firm certitude that he is no other than the non-dual and indestructible Brahman, otherwise named Vasudeva. He in whom are existent s'anti (control of the organs), s'ama (control of mind), purity (of mind and body), satya (truth), santosha (contentment), arjava (straightforwardness), poverty, and non-ostentatiousness should be in the order of life of kaivalya (sannyasa). When one does not, through actions, mind, or speech, commit any sinful action to any being, then he becomes fit for eating alms-food. Having become quiescent (through the control of the mind), having practised the ten kinds of dharmas, having, according to rules, studied vedanta, and having paid the three debts (to devas, rshis, and pitrs), one should take up sannyasa. Courage, fortitude, the control of the body, honesty, purity of (mind and body), control of the (inner) organs, shame, knowledge, truth, and absence of anger--these ten are the characteristics of dharma. One who does not look back (with pleasure) upon past enjoyments, nor forward into the future, and one who does not rejoice in the present, is fit to become a sannyasin. One who is able to control within, the inner organs and without, the external organs, may be in the order of life of kaivalya. One who while in life is not affected by pleasures and pains, as the body is unaffected by them after death, may be in the order of life of kaivalya.

"An ascetic of the Paramahamsa (order) shall wear two loin-cloths, one ragged cloth, and one staff. Nothing more is ordained (in his case). Should he through desire wear more than these, he will fall into the hell of raurava and be born into the womb of an animal. Having stitched together old and clean cloths into one and having coloured it with red (ochre), he should wear it as his upper cloth. He may be with one cloth or even without it. He should roam about alone with the sole vision (of Brahman), devoid of desires; but he may be in one place alone in the rainy season. Having quite abandoned his family, including son and wife, vedanta, sacrifice, and the sacred thread, the ascetic should wander incognito.

[p. 140]

[paragraph continues] Having given up all faults, such as passion, anger, pride, desire, and delusion, the parivrat (ascetic) should become one that owns nothing. He is a muni who is devoid of love and hate, who regards equally a clod of earth, stone, or gold, who does no injury to any living creature, and is freed from all. That ascetic reaches salvation who is associated with Atmajnana, who is freed from ostentation and egoism, from doing injury and tale-bearing. Through attraction to the senses, he becomes subject to fault, there is no doubt: through their control, he gains perfection. Lust when enjoyed is never gratified. Just as fire increases with the oblation (of ghee, etc., poured into it) so also lust waxes strong (with enjoyment). It should be known that that man who does not rejoice or grieve through hearing, touching, eating, seeing, or smelling is a jitendriya (conqueror of the organs). He whose speech and mind are well brought under control attains, completely and always, all the fruits of vedanta.

"That Brahmana who is always afraid of respect as poison and always longs after disrespect as nectar, sleeps soundly and rises happily even though he is treated with disrespect. He moves about happily in this world. The one who treats him with disrespect perishes. All cruel words should be endured. None should be treated with disrespect. On account of bodily relationship, none should be made inimical. No anger should be directed in turn towards one who is angry. Soft words (only) should be spoken, even when (violently) pulled by another. No untrue words should be uttered, even should afflictions arise to the seven gates (of the body). One desirous of bliss should dwell in this universe through the aid of Atma alone, intent upon Atma, free from desires, and without the desire of blessing (others). He becomes fit for salvation through the control of the organs, the destruction of love and hate and non-injury to beings. He should abandon (all identification with) this feeble, perishable, and impure body of five elements whereof the bones are the pillars, which is strung by the nerves, coated over with flesh and blood, covered up by the skin, is of bad odour, full of urine and faeces is ever haunted by dotage and miseries and is the seat of all ills. If an ignorant man be fond of this body firmly knit together

[p. 141]

with flesh, blood, pus, faeces, and urine, nerves, fat, and bones, he would, a fortiori, be fond of hell. That (identification of the body with the Self) is alone the seat of the Kalasutra hell. That is alone the Maha-Vichi-Vagura (hell). That is alone the Asipatravanas'reni (hell). Such an idea of the body being the Self should be strenuously abandoned, though all should perish. That love of the body is not fit to be felt by one intent upon his welfare, just as a low-caste woman eating dog's flesh is unfit to be touched.

"One (fit to reach salvation), after leaving all meritorious actions to those dear to him and all sins to those not dear, attains the eternal Brahman through dhyana-yoga. Such a man, through the ordinances, gives up little by little all associations, and being freed from all pairs of opposites, remains in Brahman alone. On account of the accomplishment (of salvation), he should be moving about alone and without any help. He who having understood the effect of being alone never derogates from it, is never left in want. The bowl, the foot of the tree, the tattered robe,. the state of being without help, the equality of vision in all these are the characteristics of the emancipated one. One intent upon the welfare of all beings, with a quiescent mind, having the three-knotted staff and bowl, and ever devoted to the One (Brahman), after taking up sannyasa, may enter a village. Such one is a bhikshu (alms-taker). Should two unite, it is called mithuna (a pair or union); with three, it becomes a grama (or village); with more, it is a nagara (or city). No city or village, or, mithuna should be made, and an ascetic who commits these three (offences) falls from his duty. Through such intercourse (of ascetics), all kinds of talks connected with the king and alms, friendship, tale-bearing, and malice occur between them. There is no doubt of it.

"He (the ascetic) should be alone and desireless. He should not converse with anybody. The ascetic should ever be uttering the word Narayana in each sentence. Being alone, he should be meditating upon Brahman in all mental, spoken, and bodily actions. He should neither rejoice at dying or living. He should be anticipating the time when life will close. He should

[p. 142]

not be glad of dying; nor should he be glad of living. He should be biding his time like a hireling (for his pay). An ascetic who plays the part of the dumb, the eunuch, the lame, the blind, the deaf, and the idiot is emancipated through the (above six) means. There is no doubt of this. He who has not fondness for eating, saying that this is good and that is bad, who speaks only words that are beneficial, true, and moderate is said to be the dumb. He is a eunuch who is no more affected by the sight of a sixteen years old girl than of a new-born female baby or a hundred-years old woman. He who does not move about for more than the distance of a yojana for alms or for the calls of nature is a lame man. That parivrat (ascetic) is said to be a blind man, who whether sitting or walking, has his vision extended to no more than four yokes' distance on the ground. He is said to be deaf who, though hearing words, beneficial or non-beneficial, pleasant or painful to the mind, is as if he does not hear them. That clever ascetic is said to be an idiot who is ever in a state of sleep, as it were, having his organs non-agitated by objects, even though near. He should never observe the following six--the scenes of dancing, etc., gambling, lovely women, eatables, enjoyables, and women in their monthly course.

"The ascetic should never in thought even think of others with the six (viz.,) love, hate, pride, deceit, treachery, and the illusion (of confounding them). To the ascetics, the following six are sinful: cot, white cloth, the stories of women, love towards women, sleep during the day, and vehicles. He who is engaged in Atmic contemplation should carefully avoid a long journey. He should ever practise the upanishadic vidya tending to salvation. The ascetic need not bathe daily. He need not observe upavasa (fast). He need not be one that had studied Vedas. He need not be one that is able to produce a commentary (lecture). He should daily observe acts without sin, deceit, or falsehood. He who, having withdrawn the organs within, like a turtle its limbs (within its shell), is with the actions of the organs and the mind annihilated, without desires, without possessing any object as his own, without dualities, without prostrations, without the oblations to pity devatas (they being with desires), without

[p. 143]

mine or I, without awaiting anything, without the desire to be happy, and living in places where men do not live--he alone is emancipated. There is no doubt of this.

"A celibate, or householder, or forester, who is (ever) vigilant, has karma, devotion, and knowledge and is independent, after understanding his peculiar tendency and having become indifferent (to his order of life), may become an householder after ending the celibate life, or may from the householder's life enter the life of a foresters and then the life of an ascetic; or from the life of a celibate, or householder, or forester may (directly) enter that of an ascetic. The moment vairagya arises in him, he may become an ascetic that moment, whether he is with vrata (religious observance) or not, is snataka [*1] or not, or with a discontinued fire-sacrifice or not. On account of that, some perform Prajapatya-sacrifice alone; or Agneya-sacrifice may be performed. Is not agni, prana? Through this alone, one should perform that sacrifice only which is connected with the three dhatus. The three dhatus are sattva, rajas, and tamas alone. With the mantra,

,

agni (fire) should be taken in. Thus it is said (in the S'rutis):

.

The agni from ahavaniya should be brought and taken in as before (with the mantras above mentioned). Should such an agni be not obtainable, the homa (oblation) should be done in water with the mantra,

.

[paragraph continues] After performing homa, the water should be taken in and sipped. After uttering the mantra,

,

he abandons the tuft of hair in the head, the holy thread, father, son, wife, karma, vedic study and mantra and becomes an ascetic. The S'rutis say that a knower of Atma should be engaged in meditation upon Brahman, through the three mantras tending to salvation."

Then Narada asked Brahma thus: "How can one, without the holy thread, be a Brahmana?" To which Brahma replied: "The wise should, after shaving (the head) together with the

[p. 144]

tuft of hair, cast off the holy thread. He should wear, as his sutra (thread), the indestructible and supreme Brahman. On account of (suchanat) its being an indication, it (thread) is called sutra. Sutra is the Paramapada (supreme seat). He by whom that sutra is known is Brahman. That sutra (thread of Brahman) in which is strung the whole universe like beads on a sutra (string), should be worn by the yogin that has known yoga and tattva. The wise man that is in supreme yoga should abandon the outer sutra (thread). He who wears (in his heart) this sutra of Brahmic Reality is alone Brahmana. Through wearing this higher sutra, it becomes not a rejected one, not an impure one. Those only whose sutra is internal, having the holy thread as jnana are the real knowers of the sutra; they are said to possess the yajnopavita (holy thread). To those whose s'ikha (tuft of hair) is jnana, whose holy thread is jnana, and whose meditation is upon jnana, jnana alone is supreme. It is said that jnana alone is able to purify. That wise man alone who possesses the jnana-s'ikha like the s'ikha (flame) of agni (fire) is said to possess s'ikha (tuft of hair). Those that have mere s'ikha are no s'ikhis. The Brahmanas and others that are entitled to perform the vedic karmas are allowed to wear the (external) thread, only as an auxiliary to the karmas. It is only vedic. The knowers of Brahman know that all Brahmanya (the state of Brahman) accrues to him only that has the jnanamaya s'ikha (knowledge-tuft of hair) and the tanmaya (That or Brahman-ful) upavita (holy thread).

"Having known it, a Brahmana should take up sannyasa. Such a sannyasin, should be, in order to bear the bodily afflictions, with one cloth, bald-headed and without having anything as being required (for his use); or according to rules, he may be (naked) as nature made his body, and should abandon his son, friend, wife, trustworthy relatives, etc., as well as all karmas and love for the universe, the loin-cloth, staff, and covering. Enduring all pairs of opposites without cold or heat, happiness or grief, fame or disgrace, without the six changes, I-ness, malice, pride, ostentation, jealousy, slander of others, love and hate, pleasure and pain, passion, anger, greed and

[p. 145]

delusion and regarding his body as a mere carcase, without thinking of all the things, internal and external, that are other than Self. Without prostrations, without the worship of devas and pitrs and without praise or condemnation, he should wander about of his own accord. He should not receive gold and others. For him, there is no invocation or dismissal (of deities), mantra or non-mantra, meditation or worship, aim or non-aim, others or not-others; without having another's or (his own) settled place of residence, and having a firm conviction, he should be in a desolate house or at the foot of trees, or in a temple, a plenteous turfed spot, a potter's place or that of agnihotra or sacrifice, river, tank, sand-heap, subterranean vault, cave, mountain-rill, the place prepared for sacrifice or forest; or like the naked personages, S'vetaketu, Rbhu, Nidagha, Jadabharata, Rshabha, Durvasas, Samvartaka, Sanatsujata, Vaideha (Janaka), Vatasiddha, S'uka, Vamadeva, Dattatreya, Raivataka, and Goraksha, he should roam about as nature made him, without being recognised and without any means of discovery of his course of life, like a lad, or an insane man, or a ghost, with the actions of a madman though not mad, after discarding in water the three-knotted staff, the stringed sling (bag), vessel, bowl, waist-string, loin-cloth, stick, and cloth. He should ever be engaged in Atmic deliberation. Being in his natural state without being affected by the pairs, without receiving anything, being ever settled firmly in the Brahmic path, having a pure mind, eating the food that is obtained without asking, in the palm as vessel, or in another's vessel in order to merely protect the body at the  required, being of equal mind whether the object is gained or not, without having aught of his own, always meditating upon Brahman, being with Atma-nishtha, having eradicated all actions, virtuous and sinful, and having given up all--that one who ever utters Brahma-Pranava, that "I am Brahman" alone, with the blissful and non-dual jnana, and after rising above the three bodies (to Brahman), like the analogy of the wasp and the worm, [*1] gives up the body as a

[p. 146]

sannyasin, is said to have done all his work (in this world). Such is the Upanishad."

  

UPAdEs'A IV

"One who after giving up the world, the Vedas, the objects and the organs is in Atma alone, attains the supreme abode. A good ascetic should not make known his caste, name, gotra (clan), etc., his place and time, the Vedas, etc. studied by him, his family, age, history, observance, and conduct. He should neither converse with women nor remember the women he had seen. He should give up all stories connected with women. He should not even see the figure of a woman in a picture. The mind of an ascetic who through delusion adopts the above four things connected with women is necessarily affected and thereby perishes. The following are prohibited (in his case): Thirst, malice, falsehood, deceit, greed, delusion, the pleasant and the unpleasant, manual work, lecture, yoga, kama (passion), desire, begging, I-ness, mine-ness, the obstinacy of curing diseases, penance, pilgrimage and the accomplishment of fruits of mantras, and medicines. He who performs these interdicted things, goes into a debased state. A muni who has moksha as his supreme seat should address such respectful words as "Please come, please go, please stay, and welcome" to one, even though he be his intimate friend. He should neither receive presents, etc., nor ask for them to be given to others. Even in dream, an ascetic should never direct a person (to do work for him). Even should he witness or hear of the happiness or grief of his wife, brother, son, and other relatives, he should not be affected thereby. He should abandon all joy and sorrow.

"To the ascetics controlling their mind, the following are their svadharmas (own duties): Harmlessness, truth, honesty, celibacy, non-coveting, humility, high-spiritedness, clearness of mind, steadiness of mind, straightforwardness, non-attachment (to any), service to the guru, faith, patience, bodily restraint, mental restraint, indifference, firm and sweet words, endurance, compassion, shame, jnana, vijnana, yoga, moderate food, and

[p. 147]

courage. That paramahamsa of an ascetic in the order of life of a sannyasin who is without dualities, always follows the pure sattvaguna and sees all equally, is no other than the actual Narayana Himself. He may live one day in a village and five days in a city, but five months in the wintry season. At other times he should live in other places (such as forest, etc.). He should not live in a village for two days (even); should he do so, desires and the rest will arise in him and thereby he becomes fit for hell. He should live like a (harmless) worm on the earth with his mind under control and with no settled place of residence, at the end of the village where there are no persons. He may live in the same place in the wintry season. He should roam about on the earth with one or no cloth, with the one vision (of Brahman) alone, with no desires (of objects), with no condemnation of the actions of the wise and with meditation. That yogin of an ascetic should go about, observing the duties of his order of life, and with the eyes cast on the earth, in pure places. He should not roam about in night, midday or the two twilight periods in which are places void or difficult to be waded through or likely to injure living creatures. He may live for one day in a village, for three days in a town, for two days in a hamlet and for five days in a city. He may live in the wintry season (longer) in one place surrounded fully by water. The ascetic should regard all creatures as Self and dwell upon earth like the blind, the hunchback, the deaf, the insane, and the dumb. The bahudaka and the forester should bathe thrice a day. In the case of hamsa, one bath only is ordained; but none in the case of a paramahamsa. In the case of the one having one staff, seven things are ordained, viz., silence, yoga-posture, yoga, endurance, solitariness, desirelessness, and equal vision over all. Bathing being not prescribed for a paramahamsa, he should abandon all the modifications of the mind only; what is the difference between the worms and the men that rejoice over this ill-smelling body which is but a collection of skin, flesh, blood, nerves, fat, marrow, bone, offal and urine? What is the body but a collection of all, phlegm, etc.? And what are the qualities, the vasana of the

[p. 148]

body, effulgence, beauty, etc.? (They are opposed to one another.) The ignorant man that is fond of this body, which is but a compound of flesh, blood, the ill-smelling urine and offal, nerve, fat and bone, will be fond of hell too. Though there is no difference between the women's secret parts that cannot be described by words and an (ever) oozing tubular wound, yet through the difference of the mind, (men are deluded). Such men are said to be without prana, (viz., dead) though alive. Prostrations to those that sport in that piece of flesh which is rent in twain and tainted with the breaking of the wind, etc. What more revolting thing is there than this?

"To the wise, there is nothing to do, no sign (of identification). The muni who is without 'mine' and fear, with quiescence, without duality and eating leaf (alone), should ever be in meditation with either loin-cloth or no cloth. A yogin who is thus in meditation becomes fit to be Brahman. Though he may have some signs (of identification to pass under this order of life or that), such signs are useless for gaining moksha. The cause of salvation is jnana alone. He is a (true) brahmana who cannot be identified as sat (good person) or asat, knower of religious books or not, follower of good conduct or bad conduct. Therefore that learned man who is without signs, a knower of dharma, engaged in the actions of Brahman and a knower of the secret mysteries, should roam about, incognito. He should go about on this earth without any caste or order of life and without being (even) doubted (regarding his identity) by any beings, like the blind, the idiot, or the mute. Then (even) the angels become fond of him who has a quiescent mind. It is the dictate of the Vedas that the sign (of non-identification) itself is Kaivalya."

Then Narada asked the Grandfather about the rules of sannyasa. To which Brahma- assented and said: "Before either the atura or regular sannyasa is taken, krchchhra penance should be done and then the eight s'raddhas. In each of the (eight) s'raddhas, two brahmanas should be fed, in lieu of Vis'vedevas called Satyavasu and the (Trimurtis called) Brahma, Vishnu, and Mahes'vara, in Devas'raddha first; then in Rshis'raddha in lieu of Devarshi, Rajarshi, and Manushyarshi; then

[p. 149]

in Divyas'raddha, in lieu of Vasu, Rudra, and Adityas; then in manushyas'raddha in lieu of Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatkumara, and Sanatsujata; then in bhutas'raddha, in lieu of the five great elements, prthivi, etc., eye and other organs and the four kinds of collections of bhutas; then in Pitrs'raddha, in lieu of father, grandfather and great-grandfather; then in matrs'raddha, in lieu of mother, mother's father and mother's grandfather; and then in Atmas'raddha, in lieu of himself, his father and grandfather or of himself, grandfather and great-grandfather, should his father be alive. He should perform the eight s'raddhas in one day, or eight days, with the mantras of his s'akha in one yajnapaksha or eight yajnapakshas. Then he should worship and feed the brahmanas according to the rules contained in pitryajna. Then offering the pindas (balls of rice to the pitrs), he should gladden the brahmanas with the tambula (nut and betel, etc.,) presents and dismiss them. Then for the accomplishment of the remaining karmas, he should pluck off seven hairs; then again for finishing the rest of the karmas, he should hold seven or eight hairs and have the head shaved. Except his arm-pit and secret parts, he should have the hairs of his head, whiskers and mustache and nails shaved. After shaving, he should bathe and perform the evening sandhya, uttering Gayatri a thousand times. Then performing brahmayajna, he should establish his own fire and acting up to his s'akha, should perform the oblation of ghee according to what is said therein till the ajya portion with those (mantras beginning with) Atma, etc.; he should eat thrice the fried rice-powder, and then sipping the water, he should maintain the fire; then seated north of the fire on a deer-skin, he should be engaged in the study of Puranas; without sleeping, he should bathe at the end of the four yamas and after cooking the oblation of (rice) in the fire, he should offer it to the fire in sixteen oblations according to (the mantras of) Purusha-Sukta. Then having done virajahoma and sipped water, he should close it with the gift (to brahmanas) of cloth, golden vessel, and cows along with presents of money and then dismiss Brahma (who had been invoked). With the prescribed mantra, he should attract Agni (fire) unto

[p. 150]

himself. After meditating upon and coming round and prostrating before the fire, he should dismiss it. Then in the morning performing sandhya and uttering Gayatri a thousand times, he should make upasthana (worship) to the sun. Then descending into water up to the navel, he should make arghya (water-offering) to the guardians of the eight quarters; then he should give leave to Gayatri, making Savitri enter into vyahrti.

The mantra prescribed for this should be uttered through the mind and voice in high, middling, and low tones. With the mantra, a  the water should be sipped and having taken the water with the two hands, it should be dropped on the east. Having uttered , he should pluck his hair (yet left) and uttering the prescribed mantra and having torn off the sacred thread and taken it in the hand with water, should utter : 'go to the ocean' and cast them down as oblation in water:-- Having uttered thrice and saturated thrice (the water) with (the influence of) the mantra, he should sip the water; and then uttering the mantras , etc., he should cast aside in water the cloth and waist-cord. Having thought himself to be the abdicator of all karmas, he, being in the meditation of his own Reality as nature made him, should go as before northwards with hands upraised. Should he be a sannyasin learned (in the Vedas, etc.), he should get himself initiated into Pranava from his teacher and go about at his own free will with the thought of there being none other but his Self, and feeding his body with fruits, leaves and water, live in mountains, forest and temples. That lover of salvation who after sannyasa roams about naked in all places with his heart full of the enjoyment of Atmic bliss, with the fruit of avoidance of karmas and maintaining his life with fruits, juice, barks, leaves, roots and water should abandon his body in mountain caves, uttering the Pranava. But an aspirant after wisdom, should he become a sannyasin, should, after walking a hundred steps, be addressed by the teacher and other Brahmans thus: "O Mahabhaga (very fortunate person), stay,

[p. 151]

stay, wear the staff, cloth and bowl, come to the teacher in order to learn the meaning of Pranava mantra vakya". He should then take up the waist-cord, loin-cloth, red-coloured cloth and bowl. A bamboo staff which is not injured from top to bottom, equal, beautiful, and not spotted with black, should be worn by him, after sipping the water and uttering the mantra prescribed for the purpose. Then the bowl should be taken up, after uttering the mantra with the Pranava preceding it:-- Then after first uttering (the mantra)  he should take up the waist-cord, loin-cloth and cloth with the achamana (sipping of water) preceding it.

"Thus consecrated with yoga and thinking that he had done all that should be done, he should be firm in the observances of his order of life. Thus is the Upanishad."

  

UPAdEs'A V

Then Narada said to the Grandfather thus:--

"You said that sannyasa was the liberator of all karmas. Now you say again that the sannyasin is one that should be in the observance of his as'rama (order of life). (How to reconcile the two?)" To which the Grandfather replied thus: "To the jiva possessing the body, there are three avasthas--the waking, the dreaming, and the dreamless sleeping with turya (the fourth). Those beings of Purushas that are subject to these avasthas follow the observances, incidental to them, of karma, jnana and vairagya." Narada said: "O Lord, if so, what are the differences of different orders of sannyasa? And what are the differences of their observances? Please tell us truly."

Therefore the differences of sannyasas, and the differences of observances were related for the sake of Narada by Brahma, after assenting to his (Narada's) question thus:--

"Truly sannyasa is of one kind only. On account of ajnana, inability and non-performance of karmas (of persons), it is divided into three and then into four, thus: vairagya-sannyasa, jnana-sannyasa, jnanavairagya-sannyasa and karma-sannyasa.

[p. 152]

[paragraph continues] The vairagya-sannyasin is one who becomes an ascetic after being in a vicious condition of lust, etc., and then, becomes disgusted with the objects through his former good karmas. A jnana-sannyasin is one who becomes an ascetic with the four means of salvation, after controlling the organs through book-wisdom, and becoming familiar with the experiences of the world of virtue and vice, after abandoning anger, jealousy, envy, ahankara and all sannyasa productive of identification, after giving up the three vasanas of the body, books and world, which are of the form of desires for women, wealth and earth, and after thinking that the whole of the universe should be given up, like vomited food. A jnanavairagya- is one who becomes an ascetic as nature made him, after practising and enjoying all, and having the body alone remaining, through jnana and vairagya, in the realisation of the Reality. A karma-sannyasin is one who, though he has no vairagya, becomes an ascetic by regularly passing from one as'rama to another, from the celibate, to the householder and then to the forester. A vairagya-sannyasin is one who becomes an ascetic from the celibate order (directly), being as nature made him.

"(There is another fourfold classification.) The four kinds are: vidvat-sannyasa, jnana-sannyasa, vividisha-sannyasa and karma-sannyasa. In karma-sannyasa, there are two (sub-) divisions, nimitta (causal) and animitta (non-causal). Atura-sannyasa (on account of the cause of approaching death, disease, etc.), is nimitta-sannyasa. The krama (regular) sannyasa is animitta. Atura-sannyasa is on account of defective karmas. When sannyasa is taken at the time of death, it is called nimitta. Animitta is that when one becomes duly a sannyasin when the body is strong, (after being convinced) that all created things are subject to destruction, that body and others should be given up, that all Atmas (souls)--each one shining in the pure Akas, dwelling in all, moving in the antariksha (middle world) as of the form of vayu, in the sacrificial pit as of the form of fire, in the moon, in all men, in the supreme angels, in the form of truth, in akas', in the form of the conch, pearl, fish, etc., in water, in the form of grain, etc., on earth, in the form of the

[p. 153]

limbs of Vedas, in the form of the rivers from the mountains, in the form of truth and the great one--are no other than Brahman and that others are but perishable.

"There are six classes of sannyasins--kutichaka, bahudaka, hamsa, paramahamsa, turiyatita and avadhuta. Kutichaka is one who wears the tuft of hair, holy thread, staff, bowl, loin-cloth and tattered cloth, who worships mother, father, and teacher, who has potsherd and sling, who is uttering mantras, who takes food in one and the same place, who wears, vertically, the white earth (on the forehead as sect-mark) and who has a staff. Bahudaka is one who, like kutichaka, wears the tuft of hair, tattered cloth, etc., as well as the three (sect-) marks, but who eats eight morsels of food through getting alms. The hamsa is one who wears matted hair and the three vertical sect-marks and eats the alms-food without any limit (as to the morsel) and wears the bare loin-cloth only. The paramahamsa is he who is without tuft of hair and holy thread, begs food in one day from five houses, has one loin-cloth, wears one red cloth alone and sacred ashes and has given up all. The turiyatita is one who either may take fruits, eating them with his mouth like cows, or if he is an eater of food, may beg food from three houses. The naked man having the body alone has the bodily actions (quiescent), like the dead body. Such an one is the turiyatita. The avadhuta is he who is without any rules, gets his food (in his mouth), following the course of the boa constrictor, [*1] from all persons except persons of ill-repute and outcastes, and is ever engaged in the realisation of the Real. Should the atura-sannyasin be alive (after taking sannyasa), he should take up regular sannyasa. The rules to be observed in the case of the (three), kutichaka, bahudaka and hamsa are the same as for the orders of life from the celibate to the sannyasin. For the three, paramahamsa upwards, they have no waist-cord, loin-cloth, cloth, bowl and staff. They may get food from all castes and should be as nature made them. Such are the rules.

[p. 154]

"At the time of the sannyasa, the recitation of the Vedas should be made till the mind is cleared; and after casting aside in water the waist-cord, loin-cloth, staff, cloth, bowl, etc., he should roam about. He should be without even the slightest tattered cloth. He should neither utter anything other than Pranava, nor talk nor hear. He should not study logic or grammar. He should not talk many words; they will but pain his vocal organ. He should not converse with people through the vocal organ. He should not talk in other language (than Samskrt). He has no worship of God and no witnessing of festivals; he should be free from pilgrimage. The other rules of ascetics are: The kutichaka should beg alms in one house only; for the bahudaka, eight morsels in eight houses; for the hamsa, there is no limit; for paramahamsa, he should beg with his hand as the vessel in five houses; for the turiyatita, he should eat fruits with his mouth like cows; (for avadhuta), he should take food like a boa constrictor in all castes. The ascetic should not dwell in one place for many days. He should not make prostrations to any one. Among the turiyatita and avadhuta (ascetics), even though one is junior, he should not make prostrations to another, a senior who has known the Reality. He should not swim with his hands and cross the river. He should not climb up a tree, nor get into a carriage. Nothing should be purchased or sold (by him). No exchange should be made, no ostentation for him. There is nothing for the ascetic to do. If there is anything for him to do, he will perish. Therefore the only thing he is qualified to do is reflection, etc.

"To the aturas and kutichakas, the world they attain is bhurloka and bhuvarloka; to the bahudakas, swargaloka; to the hamsas, tapoloka; to the paramahamsas, satyaloka. To the turiyatita and avadhuta, Kaivalya in Atma according to the analogy of the wasp and the worm through the realisation of Reality. It is the command of the Vedas that whatever form one thinks of at the last (death) moment and before leaving the body is attained by him and no other. Knowing it thus, he should not be a practiser of anything but the realisation of Reality.

[p. 155]

[paragraph continues] Through the observance of any other, he goes to the world of that other. To one that has attained jnana-vairagya, his salvation is in the Self, as there is no other observance for him. The same one (Atma) alone is styled Vis'va in the waking state, Taijasa in the dreaming state and Prajna in the dreamless sleeping state. Through the difference of states, there is the difference of the agent presiding over them. To the fourteen organs (the ten organs of sense and actions and the four organs of the mind in these states,) the outer and inner vrttis (modifications) are the material cause. There are four vrttis, viz., manas, buddhi, ahankara and chitta. Through the differences of actions of the vrttis, there arise the differences of separate functions. When (the presiding agent is) in the eyes, there is the waking state; in the throat, the dreaming state; in the heart, the dreamless sleeping state; and in the head, the turya (or fourth) state. Knowing these and that the turya is the indestructible, one should not hear or see anything in the waking state, as if he were in dreamless sleeping state, To such a one who does not apparently know them, even the dreaming state forms the same (dreamless sleeping) state. Such a one is termed Jivanmukta. All the Vedas say that there is salvation to such a one.

"To the ascetic, there should be no desire of this world or the higher. Then he will be one that will practise accordingly. Through the practices of (the study of) books foreign to the realisation of Reality, he becomes a useless person like a camel bearing saffron paint. To him, there is no entry into yoga books, no study of sankhya books, no practise of mantra or tantra. Should there be any entry into other books (than the one treating of Reality), then it will be like an ornament to a dead body. Like a cobbler, he should be beyond karma and knowledge and unfit for salutation and repeating the names of the Lord. He will duly get the benefit of the karmas (of his order of life). Having given up all like the foam (separating itself) from the castor oil, having the mental staff which controls the mind clinging to objects, having the hand as the vessel (for eating) and having the quarters alone as the cloth, the ascetic

[p. 156]

should go about like a lad, idiot, or ghost. He should neither desire to live nor die. Like a coolie abiding his appointed time (of pay), the ascetic should bide his time (of death). One who lives by taking alms without (the qualifications of) patience, wisdom, vairagya and the qualifications beginning with s'ama (control of mind) is the spoiler of the order of life of an ascetic. There is no salvation obtained through the mere assumption of the staff or making the head bald or other disguise or through ostentatious observances. That man who has jnana as his staff is said to be the ekadandi (one having Brahman alone as the staff). An ascetic who, having merely a wooden staff without jnana, eats all (indiscriminately) in all places, goes to the terrible hells called Maharaurava. (The sense of) greatness in his case is likened by the rshis to the pig's dung. Having given it up, he should move about like a worm. Food and cloth without being begged for by him should be obtained involuntarily through the will of others. A naked (ascetic) may bathe at the wish of another. A man who practises  meditation upon Self in the dreaming state as in the waking is said to be the foremost and first of Brahmavadins. He should neither grieve for things not obtained, nor rejoice at things obtained. With the organs not attached to objects, he should be engaged in the sole protection of life. He should always look down upon the gains obtained with much respect (shown to him). Through the gains obtained with much respect, the ascetic though released becomes bound. What is meant by the protection of life, is this: When the fire (of the hearth in a house) had been extinguished and all have taken food, he may go to the houses of caste people that are fit for taking alms from. The yogin who has his hand only as his alms-bowl should not often take alms. He may take (food) standing or sitting; so in the middle (of taking food), he may sip water. Those who have pure mind should not over-step the limits like the ocean. The great ones do not give up their self-restraint like the sun. When the muni takes, like a cow, the food with the mouth only (without the use of the hand), he becomes of equal vision to all beings. Then

[p. 157]

he becomes fit for salvation. He may, for alms, go from a forbidden house to a non-forbidden one. He should go (for alms) to a house where the door is ajar, but not to a house where it is closed. The muni who has a dusty body, an uninhabited house or the foot of a tree as his abode, without anything dear or not dear to him, sleeping where the sun sets, without any fire-warship, without any settled place and with patience and the organs under control, should live without any desire in any place obtained. He who after going to the forest dwells with jnana as the sacrifice and the organs under his mastery and awaits his time (of death), is fit to be of the nature of Brahman. A muni who goes about with no cause for instilling fear into all beings need never have any fear from them. One without any abhimana (identification with body) or egoism or dualities or doubt, never is angry, never hates, never lies through the vocal organ. That person who, having visited all sacred places, does not do any injury to any living creature and gets alms at the proper time, is fit to be of the nature of Brahman. He should not associate with a forester or householder. He should conduct himself in such manner as not to be known to others. He should not be glad of anything. He should roam about on earth like a worm, according to the direction pointed out by the sun. He should not do or cause to do works tending to (his) fame or pains or people's benefit. He should not be inclined towards vicious books. He should not live dependent upon any. He should give up all over-disputatious reasoning. He should not join any party (fighting with another). He should not take any disciples. He should not study many books. He should not discourse. Neither should he commence any works. Without any distinguishing characteristics and without letting others know his opinions, that wise man, or muni, ever intent upon the Brahmic vision, should exhibit himself to people like an idiot, or a lad, or a mute person. He should neither do nor talk anything. He should not think of a good or bad thing. Rejoicing in That within himself, the muni should go about like an idiot. He should roam about alone without associating with any, and

[p. 158]

with the senses under control. The clever jnani sporting in Atma, ever delighting in Atma, looking upon all with equal vision like an Atma-jnani, and playing like a child, should wander about like an idiot. That learned man versed in Brahma-vidya should talk like a madman. He should follow the observances of cows (by eating with the mouth, causing no trouble to anybody). A good jnani whether pushed, disregarded, slighted, beaten, or hindered by the vicious, or burnt by their acts, or having urine and faeces thrown upon him by them, or afflicted in various other ways, should always think well of them though pained, and thus make them lift themselves through their own Selves. A yogin whether praised or afflicted by others, never thinks of it in order to reach a superior state in yoga. A yogin who is slighted by people, attains a higher state in yoga. A yogin never goes against the actions of the virtuous. He is the same whether people slight him or do not desire his association. He should do all that is right through the actions of mind, speech and body to all beings born out of the embryo or the egg, etc. He should harbour no malice against any and give up all clinging to things. The ascetic after giving up passion, anger, pride, desire, delusion and other faults should be without fear. Eating alms-food, preserving silence, tapas, special meditation, a good jnana, and vairagya--these are said, in the opinion (of the great), to be the dharma of the ascetic. Wearing the red cloth, and being ever in dhyana-yoga, he should live either at the foot of a tree, outside the village, or in the temple. Daily he should live upon begging. He should not eat one food alone (from one only). Till the mind becomes pure, the learned man should thus be moving about. Then when the mind is purified, he may be anywhere as a parivrajaka. Seeing Janardana in and out everywhere, preserving silence, being without stain like vayu, roaming everywhere, being equal in happiness and pains, and with patience, eating whatever comes to hand, equally regarding without any hate brahmana, cow, horse, beasts and others, meditating through the mind upon Vishnu that is Paramatma and Is'vara, thinking ever of Brahmic

[p. 159]

bliss and thinking himself to be Brahman alone--such a one having known thus, regarding the staff to be no other than the certitude of the mind as above, having no desire, being naked and having abandoned all samsara through the actions ever done through the mind, speech, and body, attains salvation, according to the analogy of the wasp and the worm, through the practice of the realisation of Reality without ever seeing the universe. Such is the Upanishad."

  

UPAdEs'A VI

Narada addressing Brahma asked: "O Lord! You said of abhyasa (practice) according to the analogy of wasp and the worm. What is that practice?"

To which the Grandfather replied thus:--

"One (viz., an ascetic) should live with true speech and jnana-vairagya and with the body alone as the remaining (possession). Know jnana alone as the body, vairagya alone as prana, s'anti (mental control) and danti (bodily control) as the eyes, manas alone as the face, buddhi alone as kala (parts of effulgence), the twenty-five tattvas as the limbs, the avasthas as the five great elements, karma, bhakti, jnana, and vairagya as the branches (or parts) and that the waking, dreaming, dreamless sleeping, and turya avasthas and the fourteen organs as being of the nature of a pillar planted in the mud. Though such is the case, the man who masters these through his buddhi like a boatman regarding the boat immersed in the mire, or the elephant-driver regarding the elephant (under his control), and has known that all else beside Self is illusory and destructible and become indifferent, should ever utter: 'I am Brahman alone.' He should not know anything as other than Self. A Jivanmukta who lives thus is a doer of that which should be done. He should not discourse that he is other than Brahman. But he should ever be discoursing: 'I am Brahman'. From the waking, dreaming and dreamless sleeping states, he should reach the turya state and then turyatita (the state beyond turya). The waking state is in the day; the dreaming in the night and the

[p. 160]

dreamless sleeping in tie midnight. Each avastha (or state) has its sub-states. The functions of the fourteen organs, eye and others mutually dependent are the following: The eyes perceive forms; the ears, sounds; the tongue perceives tastes; the nose, odours; the vocal organ speaks; the hand lifts; the leg walks; the anus excretes; the sexual organ enjoys; the skin feels; the buddhi perceives objects, being under the control of the organs; through buddhi, he understands; through chitta, he thinks; through ahankara, he says I'. All these should be abandoned. Through the identification with the house (the body), he, like a householder, becomes a jiva thinking that the body is itself.

"The jiva is dwelling in this body. When he is in the eastern petal (of the heart), he inclined to virtuous actions; in the south-eastern petal, to sleep and laziness; in the southern petal, to cruel actions; in the south-western petal, to sinful actions; in the western petal, to love of sport (or to flirt); in the north-western petal, to travelling; in the northern petal, to peace of mind; in the north-eastern petal, to jnana; in (the middle of) the pericarp, to vairagya; in the filament, to Atma-deliberation. Such are the different aspects to be understood (in the heart). The first living avastha (of jiva) is the waking; the second is the dreaming; the third is the dreamless sleeping; the fourth turya; that which is not these four is turyatita. The one Lord alone that is witness and without qualities appears (as many) through the differences of Vis'va, Taijasa, Prajna, and Tatastha (the neutral). One should (always) utter: 'I am Brahman alone.' Else in the waking state, (he is) in the four states of the waking state and others: [*1] in the dreaming state, (he is) in the four states of the dreaming state and others; in the dreamless sleeping state, (he is) in the four states of the dreamless sleeping and others; in the turya, (he is) in the four states of turya and others; to the turyatita that is nirguna, such states are not. There is only one witness in all the states of Vis'va, Taijasa and Prajna, who is presiding over the gross, the subtle and the causal

[p. 161]

[paragraph continues] (bodies). Is Tatastha the seer? or is he not? As (to Tatastha), there is the property of seeing; the jiva that is affected by the egoism, etc., of agency and enjoyment is not the seer. The one other than jiva (viz., Tatastha) is not concerned (with egoism, etc.). If it is said that the jiva is not so (concerned with egoism), then it is not a fact. Through the abhimana of the jiva, there is the abhimana of the body. And (conversely) through the abhimana of the body, there is the abhimana of the jiva. The state of the jiva is as a screen (to screen Brahman) like (the pot and house in) the pot-akas' and the house-akas'. Through such a screen, he reaches self-realisation through the mantra--'Hamsa-So'ham' [*1] having the characteristics of inspiration and expiration. Having known thus, if he should give up the identification with the body, then he does not identify himself with the body (i.e., not attain the state of jiva). Such a one is stated to be Brahman. Having given up abhimana and anger, being content with moderate food, having conquered the organs and having controlled the avenues (of the organs), one should make the mind enter into meditation. The yogin who has always controlled (his mind and organs) should ever diligently commence his meditation in empty places, caves and forests. The knower of yoga who is bent upon accomplishing the end should never be engaged in giving feasts to Brahmanas, in s'raddha sacrifices, etc., or in going to places of pilgrimages, festivals or crowds. The well-controlled yogin should go about as if people had treated him with disrespect. He should not go against the actions of the wise. That great ascetic is said to be a tridandin (or having a three-knotted staff) who holds firmly the three-danda (control) of mind, speech, and body. That ascetic is said to be a supreme person who begs alms-food of worthy brahmanas, when smoke has ceased and fire has been extinguished (in their houses). Is he not a degraded ascetic who, though holding the staff and begging food, is without vairagya and is not intent upon the observances of his order? He is an ascetic--not any other--who does

[p. 162]

not go to the house where he expects to find special alms or which he already visited. He is said to transcend all castes and orders of life who realises the self-shining supreme Tattva that is without body and organs, the all-witness, the real vijnana that is of the form of bliss. To the Atma that is of the nature of jnana, such an idea as: 'the order of life, etc., is mine,' being generated out of maya in this body, can never exist. He who knows thus through vedanta is beyond all castes and orders of life. He from whom all castes and orders of life slip away through Atmic vision, transcends them all and remains in Atma alone. That person is said by knower of the meaning of the Vedas to be ativarnas'rami (beyond caste and order of life) who after crossing all castes and orders of life abides in Atma alone. Therefore, O Narada, the castes and orders of life which are foreign (to Atma) are attributed falsely, by the ignorant, to Atma. O Narada, for those that are Brahma-jnanis, there are no rules ordained nor prohibited; there is nothing to be given up or not; similarly nothing else (for them). Having attained indifference to all objects even up to Brahma's seat, having destroyed (or done away with) all fondness for everything, as for son, relatives, wife, etc., and having faith in the path of salvation, and through love of vedanta-jnana, he should approach a guru who is a knower of Brahman with gift (in his hand). Having an equilibrated mind, he should satisfy the guru for a long time through service, etc., and learn with a steady firm mind the meaning of the sentences of the Vedas. Then being devoid of 'I' and 'mine' and of all attractions, and having attained peace of mind, etc., he sees Atma in himself. Through observing the faults of samsara, there arises indifference. There is no doubt that sannyasa arises in one who becomes disgusted with samsara. The aspirant after salvation who is called paramahamsa should, through the hearing, etc., of vedanta, practise Brahma-jnana, which is the direct and chief means of salvation. In order to attain Brahma-jnana, the one named paramahamsa should possess the qualities of the control of mind and body, etc. He should always he a practiser of vedanta, being master of the mind, the body

[p. 163]

and the organs, being without fear and egoism, with a firm mind, without the pairs (of opposites), without attaching himself to any, having a worn-out loin-cloth, and being bald-headed or naked. He should have the great intelligence of the knower of vedanta, a yogin without 'I' and 'mine' and being equal and friendly to friends and other beings. That jnani alone and none else is able to cross samsara who has his mind at peace. With the grace of the guru towards him, he should live with him for one year. He should be careful to observe yama (restraint) and niyama (religious observance). At the end of that (year), he should attain the supreme jnana-yoga, and roam about on this earth without going against dharma; (or) at the end of one year, he should give up the three orders of life and attain the chief as'rama (of sannyasa), as well as the supreme jnana-yoga. Then, taking leave of the guru, he should wander over the earth, having given up association (with wife, etc., as well as anger, and being content with moderate food and having controlled the senses. The householder who does not perform karma, and the ascetic who performs karma--both become fallen through their perverse doings. Each becomes intoxicated through seeing women. Each becomes intoxicated through drinking alcohol. Therefore women, mere sight of whom is poison, should be shunned at a distance. Such things as conversation and proximity with, and sight of, women, dancing, singing, using violence against persons, and disputatious arguments should be given up. Therefore, O Narada, to such a one, there is neither bath nor muttering of mantras nor worship nor homa, nor means of accomplishment, nor any karma of fire-sacrifice, etc., nor worshipping with flowers, etc., nor karmas to the pitrs nor pilgrimages, nor religious observances, nor dharmas, nor adharmas, nor any rules of observance, nor any other worldly karmas. He should give up all karmas and worldly observances. That yogin of an ascetic who is a learned person, having his intelligence directed towards Reality, should never injure any worm or insect, bird or tree. O Narada, roam through the world with vision ever directed inwards, with purity, with mind under control, with a mind that is full of Brahman

[p. 164]

and all attraction given up within. The muni that goes about alone, does (or should) not dwell in countries where there is no king. (In his case), there is neither praise nor prostration, nor the propitiation of devas or pitrs. Thus the ascetic who has his abode changeful (in body), or changeless (in Atma), should be content with whatever he gets. Thus is the Upanishad."

  

UPAdEs'A VII

The Grandfather, after eulogizing Narada who asked about the observance of ascetics, replied thus:--

"The ascetic that has attained indifference (to objects), should stay in one and the same place in the rainy season (for four months), and then for (the remaining) eight months should wander alone. Then also the ascetic should not stay in one and the same place for more than a day. Like a deer that does not stay in one place on account of fear, he should not stay in one place. He should not create an attraction (in his mind) that may serve as an obstacle to his going about. He should not cross a stream (by swimming) with his hand, nor ascend a tree, nor witness the festival of a God, nor partake of regal food, nor do the external worship of God. Having discarded all things other than the Self, he should be with his body emaciated by taking food (from each house) like the bees (from each flower). He should not increase the fat (in the body); he should discard ghee like blood. Regarding such royal food as flesh, sandal-coating, etc., as offal, the different tastes as the degraded caste, the cloth as a defiled vessel, the oil-bath as sexual union, the gladdening of a friend as urine, desires as cow's flesh, the country known to him as the outcastes' place, gold and women as cobra or deadly poison, the place of assembly as the burning ground, the capital of the town as the hell called Kumbhipaka, and royal food as balls of rice offered to the dead, he should be without any worship of God other than the Self; and having given up all the actions of the world and his own country, and ever thinking of the bliss of his Self like the bliss arising from the discovery of a lost object, forgetting his country and the

[p. 165]

fondness for his body, and knowing that his body should be slighted like a carcase, he should dwell away from son, relations and native place, like a thief released from prison. Taking whatever comes to him without effort, ever intent upon the realisation, through meditation, of Brahma-Pranava, being freed from all karmas, having burnt up all passion, anger, greed, delusion, pride, malice, etc., having transcended the three gunas, being without the six human infirmities, [*1] without the six changes, [*2] speaking the truth and being opposed to all savoury things, he should live for one day in a village, five days in a town, five days in a sacred place, and five days in sacred waters. With no settled place of residence and with a firm mind, he should dwell alone in mountain caves without uttering falsehood. Two persons should not join together. Should three join, there is created a village thereby; with four, is formed a city. Therefore he should live alone in a village. In it, the ascetic should not give scope to his fourteen organs. Having attained wealth of vairagya through the non-dissipated jnana, and having deliberated within himself that there is none other than the Self, he should attain Jivanmukti, having seen the Reality everywhere. Till prarabdha karma is over, he should understand the four kinds of svarupa [*3] (in Tattvamasi) and should live in the realisation of Reality, till his body falls (a prey to death).

"To the kutichaka there is (prescribed) a bath three times daily; to the bahudaka, twice; to the hamsa, once; to the paramahamsa there is the mental bath; to the turyatita, there is the holy-ashes bath; to the avadhuta, there is the wind as the bath. For the kutichaka, there is the vertical sect-mark; for the bahudaka, there is the three-lined (horizontal) sect-mark; for the hamsa, both; for the paramahamsa, there is the holy-ashes sect-mark; for the turyatita, there is the spot-sect-mark; for the

[p. 166]

avadhuta or for the turyatita and avadhuta, there is none. For the kutichaka, shaving takes place once in two months; for the bahudaka, once in four months; for the hamsa and paramahamsa, none, or if wanted, once in a year; for the turyatita and avadhuta, none at all. The kutichaka should take the food in one (place only); the bahudaka should take alms (in many places); for the hamsa and paramahamsa, the hand is the vessel; the turyatita, should take food with the mouth as the cow; for the avadhuta, it is like the action of the boa constrictor (opening the mouth and taking whatever comes into it). For the kutichaka, there are two cloths; for the bahudaka, there is one cloth; for the hamsa there is a piece of cloth; and the paramahamsa should be naked or have only a loin-cloth; in the case of the turyatita and avadhuta, they should be as nature made them. For the hamsa and paramahamsa, there is (prescribed) a deerskin, and for no others. For the kutichaka and bahudaka, there is the worship of the divine (image); for the hamsa and paramahamsa, there is mental worship; for the turyatita and avadhuta, there is the idea that they alone are Brahman. The kutichaka and bahudaka are entitled to mantras and japas; the hamsa and paramahamsa, to dhyana (meditation); the turyatita and avadhuta are entitled to none; but they are entitled to the initiation of the sacred sentences of the Vedas; so also the paramahamsa. The kutichaka and bahudaka are not entitled to initiate others; for them, there is (the uttering of) the mental pranava; for the hamsa and paramahamsa, there is the internal pranava (in the heart); for the turyatita and avadhuta, there is the Brahma-pranava (always). For the kutichaka and bahudaka, there is s'ravana (hearing and study); for the hamsa and paramahamsa, there is manana (thinking and remembering); for the turyatita and avadhuta there is nididhyasana (profound meditation ever). For all these, there is necessarily the meditation upon Atma. Thus the aspirant after salvation should ever be uttering the Pranava which enables one to cross samsara, and be living as a Jivanmukta. Thus the ascetic, according to each one's capacity, should ever be seeking the means to attain Kaivalya. Such is the Upanishad."

[p. 167]

  

UPAdEs'A VIII

Then Narada, asked Parameshthi (Brahma) to enlighten him, who had surrendered himself to Him, about samsara-taraka (or that taraka or Pranava which lifts one out of samsara).

Assenting to which, Brahma began thus: "Omkara that is Brahman is the vyashti (individual) and the samashti (cosmic). What is the individual? What is the cosmic? Brahma-pranava is of three kinds, samhara- (destructive) pranava, srshti- (creative) pranava, and ubhayatmaka (belonging to both) pranava, as being of two forms, internal and external. (It is also eight:) Antah-pranava, Vyavaharika-pranava, bahya-pranava, arsha-pranava, ubhayatmaka or virat-pranava, samhara-pranava, brahma-pranava, and ardhamatra pranava. Om is Brahman. Know that the mantra of the one-syllabled Om is Pranava. It has the eight differences of akara, ukara, makara, ardhamatra, nada, bindu, kala, and s'akti. Know it is not four (alone). Akara is associated with ten thousand limbs; ukara, with one thousand limbs; makara with one hundred limbs; ardhamatra is of the nature of endless limbs. That which is saguna (associated with gunas) is virat- (preservation) pranava; that which is nirguna (not associated with gunas) is samhara- (or destruction) pranava; that which is associated with gunas and is not so associated, is utpatti- (or origination) pranava. Pluta (the elongated accent) is virat: plutapluta is samhara. The virat-pranava is of the form of sixteen matras and is above the thirty-six tattvas. The sixteen matras are thus: Akara is the first matra; ukara is the second; makara is the third; ardhamatra is the fourth; nada is the fifth; bindu is the sixth; kala is the seventh; kalatita is the eighth; s'anti is the ninth; s'antyatita is the tenth; unmani is the eleventh; manonmani is the twelfth; puritati is the thirteenth; tanumadhyama is the fourteenth; pati is the fifteenth; para is the sixteenth. Then (again) having sixty-four matras and their division into the two, Prakrti and Purusha and resolving themselves into the one hundred and twenty-eight differences of matras, it becomes saguna and nirguna. Though Brahma-pranava is one only, it is the substratum of all, the support

[p. 168]

of the whole universe, of the form of all aksharas (letters), time, Vedas, and S'iva. This Omkara should be sought after, that is mentioned in the Vedas of the nature of the Upanishads. Know that this Omkara is the Atma that is indestructible during the three periods of time, past, present, and future, able to confer salvation and eulogized by Brahma-sound (Vedas). Having experienced this one Om as immortal and ageless, and having brought about the Brahma-nature in this body, become convinced that your Atma, associated with the three bodies, is Parabrahman. Through Vis'va and others (viz., Taijasa, Prajna, and Turya) in order, the realisation of Parabrahman should be attained, since Atma is of four kinds through his identification with, and the enjoying of, the gross as well as the enjoyer of the gross, the subtle as well as the enjoyer of the subtle, and through his identification (with the third body) enjoying bliss in the fourth. He has four feet. The one presiding over the waking state is gross; and since he is the enjoyer of Vis'va (the universe), he becomes the sthula-prajna (gross consciousness). He has nineteen [*1] facets and eight parts. He is pervading everywhere and the Lord. He is the enjoyer of the gross and is the chaturatma called Vis'va. He alone is the Purusha called Vais'vanara. He alone is Vis'vajit (the conqueror of the universe). This is the first foot. When this Lord attains the dreaming condition, he is the sukshma-prajna (subtle consciousness). O conqueror of all, he is the one having eight limbs, and there is none else. He is the enjoyer of the subtle and is chaturatma, named Taijasa and the protector of elements. He alone is the Hiranyagarbha, presiding over the gross (or subtle matter rather). He is said to form the second foot. Sushupti (or the dreamless sleep) is that state where one sleeps without any desire and where one sees not any dreams. The one identified with this dreamless sleep is Prajnana-ghana, is blissful, of the nature of eternal bliss and the Atma in all creatures; yet he is enjoyer of bliss, has chetas (consciousness) as his (one) foot, is all-pervading, indestructible,

[p. 169]

chaturatma and the Lord, and is named Prajna, the third foot. He alone is the Lord of all, the knower of all, the subtle-thoughted, the latent one, and the cause of all creation. He alone is the origin and the destruction. These three (states) are obstacles to all creatures obtaining (the final) peace. As is svapna, so is sushupti, it (also) being said to be illusory. The chaturatma, the fourth, as he is Sat, Chit and Ekarasa (the one essence), ends as the fourth and follows (upon the heels of each of the above states), is the knower of the means of vikalpa-jnana and is the anujnata (the one following knower). Having known them, and known as maya the three vikalpas of sushupti, svapna and antara (the inner), even in this state, is he not (to be known as) Sat-Chit-Ekarasa? This shall be expressed as differentiated thus: It is not even the gross prajna; nor is it the very subtle prajna; nor is it prajna itself (of the causal body): O muni neither is it the trifling prajna; nor is it the non-prajna; nor is it the dual prajna; nor is it the internal prajna, though it is without prajna; it is Prajnana-ghana. It can never be known by the organs; nor it can be known by the reason; it cannot be grasped by the organs of action. It cannot be proved. It cannot be reached by thought. It cannot be proved by analogy. It can be realised by Self-realisation alone. It is with the waking state, etc. It is the auspicious, with changes, without a second. Such a one is thought to be Turya. This alone is Brahman, Brahma-pranava. This should be known. There is no other Turya. To the aspirants after salvation, it is the support, like the sun everywhere; it is the Self-light. As it alone is Brahman, this Brahma-Akas is shining always. Thus is the Upanishad."

  

UPAdEs'A IX

Narada asked: "Who is Brahma-swarupa?" To which Brahma replied thus: "Brahma-swarupa is thus: Those who know that 'he (Brahman) is one and I am another' are only pas'us (animals). The real pas'us (animals) are no animals. The wise man who knows Brahman thus (as himself, and himself

[p. 170]

as Brahman) escapes out of the mouth of death. There is no other path to salvation.

"Is time the cause (of origination of universes)? [*1] or nature? or karma? or accident? or the (great) elements? or Purusha? This should be considered. It is not the union of them. (Then) there is the Atma, but (jiva-) Atma is not the Lord, as it is subject to pleasures and pains. Those (Rshis) following dhyana-yoga have beheld, as the cause, the devatma-s'akti concealed by its own qualities of that One that presides over all the causes associated with time and Atma. Him (the Universal Soul), we consider as the wheel which has one circumference, which is covered by three (layers), which has sixteen end-parts, which has fifty spokes and twenty counter-spokes, which has six times eight (nails), which has one rope of various forms, which has the threefold path, and which has delusion arising from the twofold cause. Him (we worship as a river) which has (water) oozing out of the five currents (of organs), which is terrible and crooked through the five causes (of elements), whose pranas are the five waves, which has buddhi, etc., as the root cause, which has five whirlpools, which is impelled by the velocity of the five pains, which has fifty differences (or has the five miseries), and which has the five obstacles. In this wheel of Brahman, which is the support of life and the last abiding place of all beings, and which is infinite, is whirling deluded the jiva, thinking that it is different from the one (Lord) Ordainer. Being blessed by Him, he gains salvation through such (a blessing). This is declared as Brahman, as the supreme and the indestructible. In it, are the three (the enjoyer, the enjoyed and enjoyment). Hence it is the firm abode (of all). The knowers of Brahman having known Brahman within (the universe, etc.,) attain samadhi in Brahman and are absorbed in Brahman. Is'vara upholds this universe, closely associated with the destructible and the indestructible, which are manifest and unmanifest; but the not-ruler of (jiva-) Atma is bound through the thought of its being the enjoyer; and having known the Lord is freed from all

[p. 171]

fetters. Both Is'vara and jiva are birthless; one (the former; is jnani and the other (latter) is ajnani. (The goddess of) Brahmatma-s'akti, is birthless, is alone engaged (in this world), on account of the enjoyment of the enjoyers. Atma is endless. The universe is His form. He is not the agent. Whoever knows the Brahman that is threefold (as jiva, Is'vara and the universe) is released from bondage. It is pradhana alone that is destructible. It is Is'vara that is immortal and indestructible. The one Lord (Is'vara) ordains Pradhana and Purusha.

"The illusion of the universe disappears through meditation on union (or absorption) and sattva-bhava of Parames'vara always. Through knowing the Lord, avidya and the rest are destroyed. Through the removal of such pains, there is freedom from birth and death. Through the meditation of that Parames'vara, the third body is acquired after this (physical) body, all wealth is enjoyed, and he attains whatever should be attained. He should know with certitude that all the three things (viz.,) the enjoyer, the enjoyed, and enjoyment are nothing but Brahman, and are of the nature of his own Self. There is none but It to be known. All Atmic knowledge is through tapas (only). That, Brahman contains in itself all excellence. Having known thus, whoever meditates upon the (Atma-) svarupa, to him where then is grief? Where then is delusion? Therefore the Virat is the past, present, and future time, and is of indestructible nature.

"Atma, that is the atom of atoms and the greatest of the greatest, is in the cave of the heart of all creatures. One without the thought of objects and without grief, knows the Atma capable of neither increase nor decrease through the grace of Is'vara or through the non-attraction to the objects of the senses. He (Atma) walks speedily without legs, lifts objects without hands, sees without eyes and hears without ears. He knows all, but none knows Him. He is said to be the foremost Maha-Purusha. Having known Atma that is bodiless in this fleeting body, the great, the all-pervading, the support of all, with incomprehensible power, fit to be known through the meaning, etc., of all the Upanishads, the supreme of the supreme, the supreme object fit to be known, the one remaining after all,

[p. 172]

the all-knowing, the eternal, the foremost of all foremost beings, the ordainer of all, the one fit to be worshipped by all angels, the one without beginning, end, and middle, without limit or destruction, the cause of Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra, the one that has all the universe latent in himself, of the nature of the five elements with the expansion of all the quintuplicated creation, without being enveloped by his own limbs of quintuplicated objects, superior to the supreme, greater than the greatest, of the nature of effulgence, the eternal and the auspicious, the undaunted personage never grieves. One who has neither given up vicious actions, nor controlled his organs, nor mastered his mind, nor given up longing after fruits of actions though the mind is undisturbed, nor brought his mind to one state (or point), will not attain this Atma.

"This (Brahman) is neither internal nor external consciousness; is neither gross, nor jnana, nor ajnana; nor is it the state between the waking and the dreaming states. It cannot be cognised by the organs; is not subject to proof; is within. He who knows that which is by Itself alone is an emancipated person."

The Lord Brahma said that he becomes an emancipated person. He who knows Reality is a Parivrat. Such a Parivrat roams about alone. Through fear, he is like a terrified deer. He will not be opposed to going anywhere. Having given up all but his body, he will live like a bee, and without considering others as foreign to himself; ever meditating upon Reality, he attains liberation in himself. Such a Parivrat will be without delusion, without action or causing others to act, being absolved from teacher, disciple, books, etc., and having abandoned all samsara. Such a Parivrat roams about thus--without wealth, being happy, able to get wealth (if wanted), having crossed jnana and ajnana as well as happiness and grief, being Self-effulgence, being fit to be known by the Vedas, having known all, able to confer siddhis and remaining himself as Brahman, the Lord. Such a Parivrat attains the supreme abode of Vishnu, from which a yogin that has gone to it does not return, and where the sun and the moon do not shine. He does not return. Such is Kaivalya. Such is the Upanishad.

Footnotes

^134:1 A higher being with the form of a horse but with a human head.

^134:2 A higher being with a human form but with the head of a horse.

^134:3 A semidivine serpent with a human face.

^135:1 The four Brahmacharyas are: (1) Gayatri; (2) Prajapatya; (3) Vaidika; (4) Naishtika.

^135:2 The six Grhasthas are: (1) Vartavrtti; viz., Agriculture; (2) Salinavrtti; (3) Yayavara; (4) Ghorasannyasin; etc.

^135:3 The four Vanaprasthas are: (1) Audumbara; (2) Vaikhanasa; (3) Samprakshali; (4) Pournama.

^135:4 They are Viveka, Vairagya, etc.

^143:1 A celibate who has completed his first Asrama.

^145:1 Referring to the idea of the worm becoming the wasp, with the latter's frequent stinging.

^153:1 The snake, or boa constrictor, is said to remain in one place only on account of its huge body, taking any food that may come to its mouth as it is lying there.

^160:1 Probably "others" refer to the subdivisions of the dreaming; so also of other states.

^161:1 With Hamsa, there is the inspiration, and with So'ham, there is the expiration.

^165:1 The six human infirmities are hunger, thirst, grief, delusion, dotage, and death.

^165:2 The six changes are birth, existence, growth, transformation, decrease, and annihilation.

^165:3 "Tat" has its two aspects of the word and its meaning which is Nirguna. In "Tvam" also there are two, viz., the disciple and the jiva.

^168:1 The nineteen are the five organs of sense, the five organs of action, the five pranas, and the four of the mind.

^170:1 The Svetasvatara Upanishad begins thus.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 173]

  

S'ANDILYA-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

ATHARVANAVEDA

  

CHAPTER I

OM. S'andilya questioned Atharvan thus: "Please tell me about the eight angas (parts) of Yoga which is the means of attaining to Atma."

Atharvan replied: "The eight angas of yoga are yama, niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana, and samadhi. Of these, yama is of ten kinds: and so is niyama. There are eight asanas. Pranayama is of three kinds; pratyahara is of five kinds: so also is dharana. Dhyana is of two kinds, and samadhi is of one kind only.

"Under yama (forbearance) are ten: [*1] ahimsa, satya, asteya brahmacharya, daya, arjava, kshama, dhrti, mitahara, and s'aucha. Of these, ahimsa is the not causing of any pain to any living being at any time through the actions of one's mind, speech, or body. Satya is the speaking of the truth that conduces to the well-being of creatures, through the actions of one's mind, speech, or body. Asteya is not coveting of another's property through the actions of one's mind, speech, or body. Brahmacharya is the refraining from sexual intercourse in all places and in all states in mind, speech or body. Daya is kindliness towards all creatures in all places. Arjava is the preserving of equanimity of mind, speech, or body in the performance or non-performance of the actions ordained or forbidden to be done. Kshama is the bearing patiently of all pleasant or unpleasant things, such as praise or blow. Dhrti is

[p. 174]

the preserving of firmness of mind during the period of gain or loss of wealth or relatives. Mitahara is the taking of oily and sweet food, leaving one-fourth of the stomach empty. S'aucha is of two kinds, external and internal. Of these, the external is the cleansing of the body by earth and water; the internal is the cleansing of the mind. This (the latter) is to be obtained by means of the adhyatma-vidya (science of Self).

"Under niyama (religious observances), are ten, viz., tapas, santosha, astikya, dana, Is'varapujana, siddhanta-s'ravana, hrih, mati, japa, and vrata. Of these tapas, is the emancipation of the body through the observances of such penances as krchchhra, chandrayana, etc., according to rules. Santosha is being satisfied with whatever comes to us of its own accord. Astikya is the belief in the merits or demerits of actions as stated in the Vedas. Dana is the giving with faith to deserving persons, money, grains, etc., earned lawfully. Is'varapujana is the worshipping of Vishnu, Rudra, etc., with pure mind according to one's power. Siddhanta-s'ravana is the inquiry into the significance of Vedanta. Hrih is the shame felt in the performance of things contrary to the rules of the Vedas and of society. Mati is the faith in the paths laid down by the Vedas. Japa is the practising of the mantras into which one is duly initiated by his spiritual instructor, and which is not against (the rules of) the Vedas. It is of two kinds--the spoken and the mental. The mental is associated with contemplation by the mind. The spoken is of two kinds--the loud and the low. The loud pronunciation gives the reward as stated (in the Vedas): (while) the low one (gives) a reward thousand times (that). The mental (gives) a reward a crore (of times that). Vrata is the regular observance of or the refraining from the actions enjoined or prohibited by the Vedas.

"Asanas (the postures) are (chiefly) eight, viz., svastika, gomukha, padma, vira, simha, bhadra, mukta, and mayura.

"Svastika is the sitting at ease with the body erect, placing each foot between the thighs and knees of the other. Gomukha is (the sitting at ease with the body erect,) placing the hollow

[p. 175]

of the left foot under the side of the right posteriors and the hollow of the right foot under the side of the left posteriors, resembling Gomukha (cow's face). Padma is (the sitting at ease with the body erect) placing the back of each foot in the thigh of the other, the right hand grasping the right toe and the left hand the left toe. This, O S'andilya, is praised by all. Vira is the sitting at ease (with the body erect), placing one foot (on the thigh of the other and the other foot underneath the corresponding (opposite thigh.) Simha is (the sitting at ease with the body erect,) pressing the right side (of the thigh) with the hollow of left heel and vice versa. Rest your hands on the knees, spread out the fingers, open your mouth and carefully fix your gaze on the tip of your nose. This is always praised by the yogins. Siddha [*1] is (the sitting at ease with the body erect), pressing the perineum with the left heel and placing the heel of the right foot above the genital organ, concentrating the mind between the two eyebrows. Bhadra is (the sitting at ease with the body erect,)pressing the two ankles of the two feet firmly together against the Sivini (viz., lower part of the seed) and binding the knees firmly with the hands. This is the bhadra which destroys all diseases and poisons. Mukta is (the sitting at ease with the body erect,) pressing with the left heel the right side of the tender part of the Sivini, and with the right heel the left side of the tender part of the Sivini. Mayura--(lit., peacock). Rest your body upon the ground with both palms and place your elbows on the sides of the navel, lift up the head and feet and remain like a stick in the air, (like the plant balance in gymnastics). This is the mayura posture which destroys all sins. By these, all the diseases within the body are destroyed; all the poisons are digested. Let the person who is unable to practise all these postures betake himself to any one (of these) which he may find easy and pleasant. He who conquers (or gets mastery over) the postures--he conquers the three worlds. A person who has the practice of yama and niyama should practise pranayama; by that the nadis become purified."

Then S'andilya questioned Atharvan thus: "By what means are the nadis purified? How many are they in number?

[p. 176]

[paragraph continues] How do they arise? What vayus (vital airs) are located in them? What are their seats? What are their functions? Whatever is worthy of being known in the body, please tell me." To that Atharvan replied (thus): "This body is ninety-six digits in length. Prana extends twelve digits beyond the body. He who through the practice of yoga reduces his prana within his body to make it equal to or not less than the fire in it becomes the greatest of the yogins. In men, the region of fire which is triangular in form and brilliant as the molten gold is situated in the middle of the body. In four-footed animals, it (fire) is quadrangular. In birds, it is round. In its (the region of fire's) centre, the purifying, beneficial, and subtle flame is situate. Two digits above the anus and two digits below the sexual organ is the centre of the body for men. For four-footed animals, it is the middle of the heart. For birds, it is the middle of the body. Nine digits from (or above) the centre of the body and four digits in length and breadth is situated an oval form. In its midst is the navel. In it, is situated the chakra (viz., wheel) with twelve spokes. In the middle of the chakra, the jiva (Atma) wanders, driven by its good and bad deeds. As a spider flies to and fro within a web of fine threads, so prana moves about here. In this body, the jiva rides upon prana. Lying in the middle of the navel and above it, is the seat of kundalini. The kundalini s'akti is of the form of eight prakrtis (matter) and coils itself eight ways or (times). The movement of vayus (vital airs) checks duly the food and drink all round by the side of skandha. [*1] It closes by its head (the opening of) the brahmarandhra, and during the time of (the practice of) yoga is awakened by the fire (in the apana); then it shines with great brilliancy in the akas' of the heart in the shape of wisdom. Depending upon kundalini which is situated in the centre, there are fourteen principal nadis (viz.,) Ida, Pingala, Sushumna, Sarasvati, Varuni, Pusha, Hastijihva, Yas'asvini, Vis'vodhari, Kuhuh, S'ankhini, Payasvini, Alambusa, and Gandhari. Of them, Sushumna is said to be the

[p. 177]

sustainer of the universe and the path of salvation. Situated at the back of the anus, it is attached to the spinal column and extends to the brahmarandhra of the head and is invisible and subtle and is vaishnavi (or has the s'akti force of Vishnu). On the left of Sushumna is situated Ida, and on the right is Pingala. The moon moves in Ida and the sun in Pingala. The moon is of the nature of tamas and the sun of rajas. The poison share is of the sun and the nectar of the moon. They both direct (or indicate) time and Sushumna is the enjoyer (or consumer) of time. To the back and on the side of Sushumna are situate Sarasvati and Kuhuh respectively. Between Yas'asvini and Kuhuh stands Varuni. Between Pasha and Sarasvati lies Payasvini. [*1] Between Gandhari and Sarasvati is situated Yas'asvini. [*2] In the centre of the navel is Alambusa. In front of Sushumna there is Kuhuh, which proceeds as far as the genital organ. Above and below kundalini is situated Varuni, which proceeds everywhere. Yas'asvini which is beautiful (or belonging to the moon), proceeds to the great toes. Pingala goes upwards to the right nostril. Payasvini goes to right ear. Sarasvati goes to the upper part or the tongue and S'ankhini to the left ear, (while) Gandhari goes from the back of Ida to the left eye. Alambusa goes upwards and downwards from the root of the anus. From these fourteen nadis, other (minor) nadis spring; from them springing others, and from them springing others; so it should be known. As the leaf of the as'vattha tree (ficus religiosa) etc., is covered with minute fibres so also is this body permeated with nadis.

"Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana, Vyana, Naga, Karma, Krkara, Devadatta, and Dhananjaya--these ten vayus (vital airs) move in all the nadis. Prana moves in the nostrils, the throat, the navel, the two great toes and the lower and the upper parts of kundalini. Vyana moves in the ear, the eye, the loins, the ankles, the nose, the throat and the buttocks. Apana moves in the anus, the genitals, the thighs, the knees. the stomach, the seeds, the loins, the calves, the navel, and the

[p. 178]

seat of the anus of fire. Udana lives in all the joints and also in the hands and legs. Samana lives, permeating in all parts of the body. Along with the fire in the body, it causes the food and drink taken in, to spread in the body. It moves in the seventy-two thousand nadis and pervades all over the body along with the fire. The five vayus beginning with Naga go towards the skin, the bones, etc. The Prana which is in the navel separates the food and drink which is there and brings about the rasas (juices) and others. [*1] Placing the water above the fire and the food above (or in) the water, it goes to the Apana and along with it, fans up the fire in the centre of the body. The fire thus fanned up by the Apana gradually increases in brightness in the middle of the body. Then it causes through its flames the water which is brought in the bowels by the Prana to grow hot. The fire with the water causes the food and condiments, which are placed above, to be boiled to a proper degree. Then Prana separates these into sweat, urine, water, blood, semen, the faeces and the like. And along with the Samaria, it takes the juice (or essence) to all the nadis and moves in the body in the shape of breath. The vayus excrete the urine, the faeces, etc., through the nine openings in the body which are connected with the outside air. The functions of Prana are inspiration, expiration, and cough. Those of Apana are the excretion of the faeces and the urine. Those of Vyana are (such actions as) giving and taking. Those of Udana are keeping the body straight, etc. Those of Samana are nourishing the body. Those of Naga are vomiting, etc.; of Kurma, the movement of the eyelids; of Krkara, the causing of hunger, etc., of Devadatta, idleness, etc., and Dhananjaya, phlegm.

"Having thus acquired a thorough knowledge of the seat of the nadis and of the vayus with their functions, one should begin with the purification of the nadis. A person possessed of yama and niyama, avoiding all company, having finished his course of study, delighting in truth and virtue, having conquered (his) anger, being engaged in the service of his spiritual instructor and having been obedient to his parents

[p. 179]

and well instructed in all the religious practices and the knowledge of his order of life, should go to a sacred grove abounding in fruits, roots, and water. There he should select a pleasant spot always resounding with the chanting of the Vedas, frequented by the knowers of Brahman that persevere in the duties of their orders of life and filled with fruits, roots, flowers, and water. (Else) either in a temple or on the banks of a river or in a village or in a town, he should build a beautiful monastery. It should be neither too long nor too high, should have a small door, should be besmeared well with cow-dung and should have every sort of protection. [*1] There listening to the exposition of vedanta, he should begin to practise yoga, In the beginning having worshipped Vinayaka [*2] (Ganes'a), he should salute his Ishta-Devata (tutelary deity) and sitting in any of the above-mentioned postures on a soft seat, facing either the east or the north and having conquered them, the learned man keeping his head and neck erect and fixing his gaze on the tip of his nose, should see the sphere of the moon between his eyebrows and drink the nectar (flowing therefrom through his eyes. Inhaling the air through Ida [*3] for the space of twelve matras, [*4] he should contemplate on the sphere of fire [*5] situated in the belly as surrounded with flames and having as its seed ###2352### (ra); then he should exhale it through Pingala. Again inhaling it through Pingala [*3] and retaining it (within), he should exhale it through Ida. For the period of twenty-eight months, [*6] he should practise six times at every sitting through the three sandhyas (morning, noon, and evening)

[p. 180]

and during the intervals. By this, the nadis become purified. Then the body becomes light and bright, the (gastric) fire is increased (within) and there is the manifestation of nada (internal sound).

"Pranayama is said to be the union of Prana and Apana. It is of three kinds--expiration, inspiration, and cessation. They are associated with the letters of the (Samskrt) alphabet [*1] (for the right performance of pranayama). Therefore Pranava (OM) only is said to be Pranayama. Sitting in the padma posture, the person should meditate that there is at the tip of his nose Gayatri, [*2] a girl of red complexion surrounded by the numberless rays of the image of the moon and mounted on a hamsa (swan) and having a mace in her hand. She is the visible symbol of the letter A. The letter U has as its visible symbol Savitri, [*2] a young woman of white colour having a disk in her hand and riding on a garuda (eagle). The letter M has as its visible symbol Sarasvati, [*2] an aged woman of black colour riding on a bull, having a trident in her hand. He should meditate that the single letter--the supreme light--the pranava (OM)--is the origin or source of these three letters A, U, and M. Drawing up the air through Ida for the space of sixteen matras, he should meditate on the letter A during that time; retaining the inspired air for the space of sixty-four matras, he should meditate on the letter U during the time; he should then exhale the inspired air for the space of thirty-two matras, meditating on the letter M during that time. He should practise this in the above order over and over again.

"Then having become firm in the posture and preserved perfect self-control, the yogin should, in order to clear away the impurities of the Sushumna, sit in the padmasana (padma posture), and having inhaled the air through the left nostril, should retain it as long as he can and should exhale it through the right. Then drawing it again through the right and having retained it, he should exhale it through the left in the order

[p. 181]

that he should draw it through the same nostril by which he exhaled it before and retained it. In this context, occur (to memory) the following verses: "In the beginning having inhaled the breath (Prana) through the left nostril, according to the rule, he should exhale it through the other; then having inhaled the air through the right nostril, should retain it and exhale it through the other." To those who practise according to these rules through the right and left nostrils, the nadis become purified within three months. He should practise cessation of breath at sunrise, in the midday, at sunset and at midnight slowly till eighty (times a day) for four weeks. In the early stages, perspiration is produced; in the middle stage the tremor of the body, and in the last stage levitation in the air. These (results) ensue out of the repression of the breath, while sitting in the padma posture. When perspiration arises with effort, he should rub his body well. By this, the body becomes firm and light. In the early course of his practice, food with milk and ghee is excellent. One sticking to this rule becomes firm in his practice and gets no tapa (or burning sensation in the body). As lions, elephants and tigers are gradually tamed, so also the breath, when rightly managed (comes under control); else it kills the practitioner. [*1]

"He should (as far as is consistent with his health and safety) properly exhale it, properly inhale it or retain it properly. Thus (only) will he attain success. By thus retaining the breath in an approved manner and by the purification of the nadis, the brightening of the (gastric) fire, the hearing distinctly of (spiritual) sounds and (good) health result. When the nervous centres have become purified through the regular practice of Pranayama, the air easily forces its way up through the mouth of the Sushumna which is in the middle. By the contraction of the muscles of the neck and by the contraction of the one below (viz.,) Apana, the Prana (breath) goes into the Sushumna which is in the middle from the west nadi. [*2] Drawing

[p. 182]

up the Apana and forcing down the Prana from the throat, the yogin free from old age becomes a youth of sixteen.

"Seated in a pleasant posture and drawing up the air through the right nostril and retaining it inside from the top of the hair to the toe nails, he should exhale it through the same nostril. Through it, the brain becomes purified and the diseases in the air nadis are destroyed. Drawing up the air through the nostrils with noise (so as to fill the space) from the heart to the neck, and having retained it (within) as long as possible, he should exhale it through the nose. Through this, hunger, thirst, idleness and sleep do not arise.

"Taking in the air through the mouth (wide open) and having retained it as long as possible, he should expel it through the nose. Through this, (such diseases as) gulma, pleeha (both being splenetic diseases), bile and fever as also hunger, etc., are destroyed.

"Now we shall proceed to kumbhaka (restraint of breath). It is of two kinds--sahita and kevala. That which is coupled with expiration and inspiration is called sahita. That which is devoid of these is called kevala (alone). Until you become perfect in kevala, practise sahita. To one who has mastered kevala, there is nothing unattainable in the three worlds. By kevala-restraint of breath, the knowledge of kundalini arises. Then he becomes lean in body, serene in face and clear-eyed, hears the (spiritual) sounds distinctly, becomes free from all diseases and conquers his (bindu) seminal fluid, [*1] his gastric fire being increased. [*2]

"Centring one's mind on an inward object whilst his eyes are looking outside without the shutting and opening of his eyelids, has been called Vaishnavimudra. This is kept hidden in all the

[p. 183]

[paragraph continues] tantric works. With his mind and breath absorbed in an internal object, the yogin, though he does not really see the objects outside and under him, still (appears to) see them with eyes in which the pupils are motionless. This is called Khecharimudra. It has as its sphere of extension one object and is very beneficial. (Then) the real seat of Vishnu, which is void and non-void, dawns on him. With eyes half closed and with a firm mind, fixing his eyes on the tip of his nose and becoming absorbed in the sun and moon, he after remaining thus unshaken (becomes conscious of) the thing which is of the form of light, which is free from all externals, which is resplendent, which is the supreme truth and which is beyond. O S'andilya, know this to be Tat (That). Merging the sound in the light and elevating the brows a little, this is of the way of (or is a part of) the former practice. This brings about the state of Unmani which causes the destruction of the mind. Therefore he should practise the Khecharimudra. Then he attains to the state of Unmani and falls into the yoga sleep (trance). To one who obtains this yoga sleep, time does not exist. Placing the mind in the midst of s'akti and s'akti [*1] in the midst of the mind and looking on the mind with the mind, O S'andilya be happy. Place the Atma in the midst of akas' and akas' in the midst of Atma, and having reduced everything to akas', do not think of anything else. You should not (then) entertain thoughts, either external or internal. Abandoning all thoughts, become abstract thought itself. As camphor in fire and salt in water become absorbed, so also the mind becomes absorbed in the Tattva (Truth). What is termed manas (mind) is the knowledge of everything that is known and its clear apprehension. When the knowledge and the object cognised are lost alike, there is no second path (or that is the only path). By its giving up all cognition of objects, it (the mind) is absorbed and when the mind is absorbed, kaivalya (isolation) alone remains.

"For the destruction of the chitta, there are two ways--yoga and jnana. O prince of sages! yoga is the (forcible)

[p. 184]

repression of the modifications of the mind, and jnana is the thorough inquiry into them. When the modifications of the mind are repressed, it (the mind) verily obtains peace. Just as the actions of the people cease with the stopping of the fluctuations of the sun (viz., with sunset), so when the fluctuations of the mind cease, this cycle of births and deaths comes to an end. (Then) the fluctuations of prana are prevented, when one has no longing for this mundane existence or when he has gratified his desires therein--through the study of religious books, the company of good men, indifference (to enjoyments), practice and yoga or long contemplation with intentness on any desired (higher) object or through practising one truth firmly.

"By the repression of the breath through inhalation, etc., by continual practice therein which does not cause fatigue, and by meditating in a secluded place, the fluctuations of the mind are arrested. Through the right realisation of the true nature of the sound which is at the extreme end of the pronunciation of the syllable OM (viz., Ardhamatra), and when sushupti (dreamless sleeping state) is rightly cognised through consciousness, the fluctuations of prana are repressed. When the passage at the root of the palate which is like the bell, viz., uvula, is closed by the tongue with effort and when the breath goes up through (the upper hole), then the fluctuations of prana are stopped. When the consciousness (samvit) is merged in prana, and when through practice the prana goes through the upper hole into the dvadasanta [*1] (the twelfth centre) above the palate, then the fluctuations of prana are stopped. When the eye of consciousness (viz., the spiritual or third eye) becomes calm and clear so as to be able to distinctly see in the transparent akas' at a distance of twelve digits from the tip of his nose, then the fluctuations of prana are stopped. When the thoughts arising in the mind are bound up in the calm contemplation of the world of taraka (star or eye) between one's eyebrows and are (thus) destroyed, then the fluctuations cease. When the  which is of the form of the knowable,

[p. 185]

which is beneficent and which is untouched by any modifications arises in one and is known as OM only and no other, then the fluctuations of prana cease. By the contemplation for a long time of the akas' which is in the heart, and by the contemplation of the mind free from vasanas, then the fluctuations of prana cease. By these methods and various others suggested by (one's) thought and by means of the contact of the many (spiritual) guides, the fluctuations cease.

"Having by contraction opened the door of kundalini, one should force open the door of moksha. Closing with her mouth the door through which one ought to go, the kundalini sleeps spiral in form and coiled up like a serpent. He who causes this kundalini to move--he is an emancipated person. If this kundalini were to sleep in the upper part of the neck of any yogin, it goes towards his emancipation. (If it were to sleep) in the lower part (of the body), it is for the bondage of the ignorant. Leaving the two nadis, Ida and the other (Pingala), it (prana) should move in the Sushumna. That is the supreme seat of Vishnu. One should practise control of breath with the concentration of the mind. The mind should not be allowed by a clever man to rest on any other thing. One should not worship Vishnu during the day alone. One should not worship Vishnu during the night alone; but should always worship Him, and should not worship Him merely during day and night. The wisdom-producing opening (near uvula) has five passages. O S'andilya this is the khecharimudra; practise it. With one who sits in the khecharimudra, the vayu which was flowing before through the left and right nadis now flows through the middle one (Sushumna). There is no doubt about it. You should swallow the air through the void (Sushumna) between Ida and Pingala. In that place is khecharimudra situated, and that is the seat of Truth. Again that is khecharimudra which is situated in the akas'a-chakra (in the head) in the niralamba (supportless) seat between the sun and moon (viz., Ida and Pingala). When the tongue has been lengthened to the length of a kala (digit) by the incision (of the fraenum lingum) and by rubbing and milking it (viz., the tongue), fix the gaze between the two eyebrows and close the hole in the skull with

[p. 186]

the tongue reversed. This is khecharimudra. When the tongue and the chitta (mind) both move in the akas' (khechari), then the person with his tongue raised up becomes immortal. Firmly pressing the yoni (perineum) by the left heel, stretching out the right leg, grasping the feet with both hands and inhaling the air through the nostrils, practise kantha-bandha, [*1] retaining the air upwards. By that, all afflictions are destroyed; then poison is digested as if it were nectar. Asthma, splenetic disease, the turning up of the anus and the numbness of the skin are removed. This is the means of conquering prana and destroying death. Pressing the yoni by the left heel, place the other foot over the left thigh: inhale the air, rest the chin on the chest, contract the yoni and contemplate, (as far as possible), your Atma as situated within your mind. Thus is the direct perception (of truth) attained.

"Inhaling the prana from outside and filling the stomach with it, centre the prana with the mind in the middle of the navel, at the tip of the nose and at the toes during the sandhyas (sunset and sunrise) or at all times. (Thus) the yogin is freed from all diseases and fatigue. By centring his prana at the tip of his nose, he obtains mastery over the element of air; by centring it at the middle of his navel, all diseases are destroyed; by centring it at the toes, his body becomes light. He who drinks the air (drawn) through the tongue destroys fatigue, thirst and diseases. He who drinks the air with his mouth during the two sandhyas and the last two hours of the night, within three months the auspicious Sarasvati (goddess of speech) is present in his vak (speech) viz., (he becomes eloquent and learned in his speech). In six months, he is free from all diseases. Drawing the air by the tongue, retain the air at the root of the tongue. The wise man thus drinking nectar enjoys all prosperity. Fixing the Atma in the Atma itself in the middle of the eyebrows, (having inhaled) through Ida and breaking through that (centre) thirty times, even a sick man is freed from disease. He who draws the air through the nadis and retains it for twenty-four minutes in the navel and in

[p. 187]

the sides of the stomach becomes freed from disease. He who for the space of a month during the three sandhyas (sunset, sunrise, and midnight or noon) draws the air through the tongue, pierces thirty times and retains his breath in the middle of his navel, becomes freed from all fevers and poisons. He who retains the prana together with the mind at the tip of his nose even for the space of a muhurta (forty-eight minutes), destroys all sins that were committed by him during one hundred births.

"Through the samyama of tara (OM), he knows all things. By retaining the mind at the tip of his nose, he acquires a knowledge of Indra-world; [*1] below that, he acquires a knowledge of Agni-(fire) world. [*1] Through the samyama of chitta in the eye, he gets a knowledge of all worlds: in the ear, a knowledge of Yama-(the god of death) world: [*1] in the sides of the ear, a knowledge of Nrrti-world: [*1] in the back of it (the ear), a knowledge of Varuna-world: [*1] in the left ear, a knowledge of Vayu-world: [*1] in the throat, a knowledge of Soma-(moon) world: [*1] in the left eye, a knowledge of S'iva-world: [*1] in the head, a knowledge of Brahma-world: [*1] in the soles of the feet, a knowledge of Atala world: [*2] in the feet, a knowledge of Vitala world: in the ankles, a knowledge of Nitala (rather Sutala) world: in the calves, a knowledge of Sutala (rather Talatala world): in the knees, a knowledge of Mahatala world: in the thighs, a knowledge of Rasatala world: in the loins, a knowledge of Talatala (rather Patala) world: in the navel, a knowledge of Bhurloka (earth-world): in the stomach, a knowledge of Bhuvar (world): in the heart, a knowledge of Suvar (world): in the place above the heart, a knowledge of Mahar world: in the throat, a knowledge of Jana world: in the middle of the brows, a knowledge of Tapa world: in the head, a knowledge of Satya world.

"By conquering dharma and adharma, one knows the past and the future. By centring it on the sound of every creature, a knowledge of the cry (or language) of the

[p. 188]

animal is produced. By centring it on the sanchita-karma (past karma yet to be enjoyed), a knowledge of one's previous births arises in him. By centring it on the mind of another, a knowledge of the mind (or thoughts) of others is induced. By centring it on the kaya-rupa (or form of the body), other forms are seen. By fixing it on the bala (strength), the strength of persons like Hanuman is obtained. By fixing it on the sun, a knowledge of the worlds arises. By fixing it on the moon, a knowledge of the constellation is produced. By fixing it on the Dhruva (Polar star) a perception of its motion is induced. By fixing it on his own (Self), one acquires the knowledge of Purusha; on the navel, he attains a knowledge of the kaya-vyuha (mystical arrangement of all the particles of the body so as to enable a person to wear out his whole karma in one life): on the well of the throat, freedom from hunger and thirst arises: on the Kurma nadi (which is situated in the well of the throat), a firmness (of concentration) takes place. By fixing it on the tara (pupil of the eye), he obtains the sight of the siddhas (spiritual personages). By conquering the akas' in the body, he is able to soar in the akas': (in short) by centring the mind in any place, he conquers the siddhis appertaining to that place.

"Then comes pratyahara, which is of five kinds. It is the drawing away of the organs from attaching themselves to the objects of senses. Contemplating upon everything that one sees as Atma is pratyahara. Renouncing the fruits of one's daily actions is pratyahara. Turning away from all objects of sense is pratyahara. Dharana in the eighteen important places (mentioned below) is pratyahara, (viz.,) the feet, the toes, the ankles, the calves, the knees, the thighs, the anus, the penis, the navel, the heart, the well of the throat, the palate, the nose, the eyes, the middle of the brows, the forehead, and the head in ascending and descending orders.

"Then (comes) dharana. It is of three kinds, (viz.,) fixing the mind in the Atma, bringing the external akas' into the akas' of the heart and contemplating the five murtis (forms of devatas) in the five elements--earth, apas, fire, vayu, and akas'.

[p. 189]

"Then comes dhyana. It is of two kinds, saguna (with gunas or quality) and nirguna (without quality). Saguna is the meditation of a murti. Nirguna is on the reality of Self.

"Samadhi is the union of the Jivatma (individual self) and the Paramatma (higher self) without the threefold state, (viz., the knower, the known, and the knowledge). It is of the nature of extreme bliss and pure consciousness.

"Thus ends the first chapter of S'andilya Upanishad."

  

CHAPTER II

Then the Brahmarshi S'andilya not obtaining the knowledge of Brahman in the four Vedas, approached the Lord Atharvan and asked him: "What is it? Teach me the science of Brahman by which I shall obtain that which is most excellent."

Atharvan replied: "O S'andilya, Brahman is satya, vijnana and ananta in which all this (world) is interwoven, warp-wise and woof-wise, from which all originated and into which all are absorbed, and which being known makes everything else known. It is without hands and feet, without eyes and ears, without tongue or without body, and is unreachable and undefinable. From which, vak (speech) and mind return, being unable to obtain (or reach) It. It is to be cognised by jnana and yoga. [*1] From which, prajna of old sprang. That which is one and non-dual, that which pervades everything like akas', which is extremely subtle, without a blemish, actionless, sat (be-ness) only, the essence of the bliss of consciousness, beneficent, calm and immortal and which is beyond. That is Brahman. Thou art That. Know That by wisdom. He who is the one, the shining, the giver of the power of Atma, the omniscient, the lord of all, and the inner soul of all beings, who lives in all beings, who is hidden in all beings and the source of all beings, who is reachable only through yoga and who creates, supports and destroys everything--He is Atma. Know the several worlds in the Atma. Do not grieve, O knower of Atma, thou shalt reach the end of pains."

[p. 190]

  

CHAPTER III

Then S'andilya questioned Atharvan thus: "From the Brahman that is OM, imperishable, actionless, beneficial, sat (be-ness) only and supreme, how did this universe arise? How does it exist in It? And how is it absorbed in It? Please solve me this doubt."

Atharvan replied: The Supreme Brahman, the Truth, is the imperishable and the actionless. Then from the formless Brahman, three forms (or aspects) arose, (viz.,) nishkala (partless,) sakala (with parts), and sakala-nishkala (with and without parts). That which is satya, vijnana and ananda, That which is actionless, without any impurity, omnipresent, extremely subtle, having faces in every direction, undefinable and immortal--that is His nishkala aspect. Mahes'vara (the great Lord) who is black and yellow rules, with avidya, mulaprakrti or maya that is red, white, and black, and that is co-existent with Him. This is his sakala-nishkala aspect. Then the Lord desired (or willed) by his spiritual wisdom (thus): May I become many?; may I bring forth? Then from this Person who was contemplating and whose desires are fulfilled, three letters sprang up. Three vyahrtis, [*1] the three-footed Gayatri, [*1] the three Vedas, the three devas, the three varnas (colours or castes) and the three fires sprang. That Supreme Lord who is endowed with all kinds of wealth, who is all pervading, who is situated in the hearts of all beings, who is the Lord of maya and whose form is maya--He is Brahma. He is Vishnu: He is Rudra: He is Indra: He is all the devas: He is all the bhutas (elements or beings): He only is before: He only is behind: He only is on our left: He only is on our right: He only is below: He only is above: He only is the all. That form of him as Dattatreya, [*2] who sports with his S'akti, who is kind to his devotees, who is brilliant as fire, resembling the petals or a red lotus and is of four hands, who is mild and shines sinlessly--this is His sakala form."

[p. 191]

Then S'andilya questioned Atharvan, "O Lord, that which is Sat only and the essence of the bliss of consciousness--why is He called Parabrahman?"

Atharvan replied: "Because He increases brhati and causes to increase everything (brhanti); so he is called Parabrahman. Why is He called Atma? Since He obtains (apnoti) everything, since He takes back everything and since He is everything, so he is called Atma. Why is He called Mahes'vara (the great Lord)? Since by the sound of the words Mahat-Is'a (the great Lord) and by His own power, the great Lord governs everything. Why is He called Dattatreya? Because the Lord being extremely pleased with Atri (Rshi) who was performing a most difficult penance and who had expressed his desire to see Him who is light itself, offered Himself (datta) as their son, and because the woman Anasuya was his mother and Atri was his father. Therefore he who knows the (secret) meaning knows everything. He who always contemplates on the supreme that It is himself becomes a knower of Brahman. Here these s'lokas (stanzas) occur (to memory). 'He who contemplates always the Lord of Lords and the ancient thus--as Dattatreya, the beneficent, the calm, of the colour of sapphire, one who delights in his own maya and the Lord who has shaken off everything, as naked and as one whose whole body is besmeared with the holy ashes, who has matted hair, who is the Lord of all, who has four arms, who is bliss in appearance, whose eyes are like full-blown lotus, who is the store of jnana and yoga, who is the spiritual instructor of all the worlds and who is dear to all the yogins, and one who is merciful towards His devotees, who is the witness of all and who is worshipped by all the siddhas is freed from all sins and will attain (the Spirit).'

"OM Satyam (truth). Thus ends the Upanishad."

Footnotes

^173:1 Under yama and niyama Patanjali has five kinds only.

^175:1 In the explanation one more posture is introduced.

^176:1 In Varaha Upanishad and later on, this is named "Kandha". Herein is described the web of life.

^177:1 This should be perhaps--between Pingala and Payasvini is Pusha.

^177:2 Yas'asvini should be "S'ankhini."

^178:1 Here the process of digestion of food is described.

^179:1 Both by physical protection and that of mantras to scare away evil spirits.

^179:2 He is the son of S'iva, having an elephant's face symbolical of wisdom. He is considered as the remover of all obstacles, and as such is he invoked and worshipped in the beginning of every religious rite.

^179:3 Ida and Pingala are the two nadis upon which our breaths alternate from the left nostril to the right and vice versa and between which is Sushumna. Hence these two terms are applied to and mean the left and right nostrils.

^179:4 According to Yogatattva-Upanishad, a matra is the time occupied in circling the knee once with the palm of the hand and filliping the fingers.

^179:5 According to Varaha-Upanishad the seat of fire is the muladhara (sacral plexus).

^179:6 The original is not clear. It says, "For the space of 3, 4, 3, 4, 7, 3 and 4 months" which when added becomes 28.

^180:1 According to the Mantra Sastra, Pranayama is performed through the letters of Samskrt alphabet, the vowels corresponding to inspiration, etc.

^180:2 These are the Goddesses representing S'akti and being the wives of Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra.

^181:1 This passage clearly indicates the dreadful consequences of the performance of Pranayama rashly and without a guru.

^181:2 As already pointed out, the Sushumna nadi is between Ida and Pingala. If Prana which alternates ordinarily between Ida and Pingala is restrained by long [p. 182] kumbhaka, then it along with the soul, its attendant will enter the Sushumna (central nadi) at one of the three places where it yields space for entrance through such restraint of breath and in the navel, from the Sarasvati nadi on the west. After such entry it is that the yogin becomes dead to the world, being in the state called trance.

^182:1 Through such and other methods of Pranayama prescribed in this passage and the subsequent ones, chronic diseases that defy European doctors will be rooted out.

^182:2 He becomes an Urdhva-retas--his vital energy goes up.

^183:1 There are six centres of energy in the body (muladhara, sacral plexus, etc.), which are presided over by six saktis (goddesses of energy).

^184:1 This twelfth centre is identified by some with the pituitary body in the head, there being six centres in the brain besides the six below the brain.

^186:1 Lit., binding the air up the throat.

^187:1 These correspond severally to the several directions and the devatas presiding over them, corresponding respectively to east, south-east, south, southwest, west, north-west, north, and north-east.

^187:2 The fourteen worlds, lokas and talas are referred to; the order in talas seems to be wrong, Talatala should be in the middle.

^189:1 Some texts leave the words "and yoga".

^190:1 These relate to the Gayatri mantras depending upon sound.

^190:2 According to Bhagavata, he is one of the minor incarnations of Vishnu.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 192]

  

YOGATATTVA-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

KRSHNA-YAJURVEDA

I SHALL now describe yoga-tattva (yoga-truth) for the benefit of yogins who are freed from all sins through the hearing and the studying of it. The supreme Purusha called Vishnu, who is the great yogin, the great being and the great tapasvin, is seen as a lamp in the path of the truth. The Grandfather (Brahma) having saluted the Lord of the universe (Vishnu) and having paid Him due respects, asked Him (thus): "Pray, explain to us the truth of yoga which includes in it the eight subservients." To which Hrshikes'a (the Lord of the senses or Vishnu) replied thus: "Listen. I shall explain its truth. All souls are immersed in happiness and sorrow through the snare of maya. Kaivalya, the supreme seat, is the path which gives them emancipation, which rends asunder the snare of maya, which is the destroyer of birth, old age and disease and which enables one to overcome death. There are no other paths to salvation. Those who go round the net of S'astras are deluded by that knowledge. It is impossible even for the Devas to describe that indescribable state. How can that which is self-shining be illuminated by the S'astras? That only which is without parts and stains and which is quiescent beyond all and free from decay becomes the jiva (self) on account of the results of past virtues and sins. How did that which is the seat of Paramatma, is eternal, and above the state of all existing things and is of the form of wisdom and without stains attain the state of jiva? A bubble arose in it as in water and in this (bubble) arose

[p. 193]

ahankara. To it arose a ball (of body) made of the five (elements) and bound by dhatus. Know that to be jiva which is associated with happiness and misery and hence is the term jiva applied to Paramatma which is pure. That jiva is considered to be the kevala (alone) which is freed from the stains of passion, anger, fear, delusion, greed, pride, lust, birth, death, miserliness, swoon, giddiness, hunger, thirst, ambition, shame, fright, heart-burning, grief and gladness.

"So I shall tell you the means of destroying (these) sins. How could jnana capable of giving moksha arise certainly without yoga? And even yoga becomes powerless in (securing) moksha when it is devoid of jnana. So the aspirant after emancipation should practise (firmly) both yoga and jnana. The cycle of births and deaths comes only through ajnana and perishes only through jnana. Jnana alone was originally. It should be known as the only means (of salvation). That is jnana through which one cognises (in himself) the real nature of kaivalya as the supreme seat, the stainless, the partless, and of the nature of Sachchidananda without birth, existence and death and without motion and jnana.

"Now I shall proceed to describe yoga to you. Yoga is divided into many kinds on account of its actions: (viz.,) Mantrayoga, Layayoga, Hathayoga, and Rajayoga. There are four states common to all these: (viz.,) Arambha, Ghata, Parichaya, and Nishpatti. O Brahma, I shall describe these to you. Listen attentively. One should practise the Mantra along with its matrikas (proper intonations of the sounds) and others for a period of twelve years; then he gradually obtains wisdom along with the siddhis, (such as) anima, etc. Persons of weak intellect who are the least qualified for yoga practise this. The (second) Laya-yoga tends towards the absorption of the chitta and is described in myriads of ways; (one of which is)--one should contemplate upon the Lord who is without parts (even) while walking, sitting, sleeping, or eating. This is called Laya-yoga. Now hear (the description of) Hatha-yoga. This yoga is said to possess (the following) eight subservients, yama (forbearance), niyama (religious observance), asana

[p. 194]

[paragraph continues] (posture), pranayama (suppression of breath), pratyahara (subjugation of the senses), dharana (concentration), dhyana, the contemplation on Hari in the middle of the eyebrows and samadhi that is the state of equality. Mahamudra, Mahabandha and Khechari, Jalandhara, Uddiyana, and Mulabandha, uttering without intermission Pranava (OM) for a long time, and hearing the exposition of the supreme truths, Vajroli, Amaroli and Sahajoli, which form a triad--all these separately I shall give a true description of. O four-faced one (Brahma), among (the duties of) yama moderate eating--and not others--forms the principal factor; and non-injury is most important in niyama. (The chief postures are) four (viz.,) Siddha, Padma, Simha and Bhadra. During the early stages of practice, the following obstacles take place, O four-faced one, (viz.,) laziness, idle talk, association with bad characters, acquisition of mantras, etc., playing with metals (alchemy) and woman, etc., and mirage. A wise man having found out these should abandon them by the force of his virtues. Then assuming Padma posture, he should practise pranayama. He should erect a beautiful monastery with a very small opening and with no crevices. It should be well pasted with cow-dung or with white cement. It should be carefully freed from bugs, mosquitoes and lice. It should be swept well every day with a broom. It should be perfumed with good odours; and fragrant resins should burn in it. Having taken his seat neither too high nor too low on a cloth, deerskin and kus'a grass spread, one over the other, the wise man should assume the Padma posture and keeping his body erect and his hands folded in respect, should salute his tutelary deity. Then closing the right nostril with his right thumb, he should gradually draw in the air through the left nostril. Having restrained it as long as possible, be should again expel it through the right nostril slowly and not very fast. Thon filling the stomach through the right nostril, he should retain it as long as he can and then expel it through the left nostril. Drawing the air through that nostril by which he expels, he should continue this in uninterrupted succession. The time taken in making a round of the knee with the palm of the

[p. 195]

hand, neither very slowly nor very rapidly, and snapping the fingers once is called a matra. Drawing the air through the left nostril for about sixteen matras and having retained it (within) for about sixty-four matras, one should expel it again through the right nostril for about thirty-two matras. Again fill the right nostril as before (and continue the rest). Practise cessation of breath four times daily (viz.,) at sunrise, noon, sunset and midnight, till eighty (times are reached). By a continual practice for about three months, the purification of the nadis takes place. When the Midis have become purified, certain external signs appear on the body of the yogin. I shall proceed to describe them. (They are) lightness of the body, brilliancy of complexion, increase of the gastric fire, leanness of the body, and along with these, absence of restlessness in the body. The proficient in yoga should abandon the food detrimental to the practice of yoga. He should give up salt, mustard, things sour, hot, pungent, or bitter, vegetables, asafoetida, etc., worship of fire, women, walking, bathing at sunrise, emaciation of the body by fasts, etc. During the early stages of practice, food of milk and ghee is ordained; also food consisting of wheat, green pulse and red rice are said to favour the progress. Then he will be able to retain his breath as long as he likes. By thus retaining the breath as long as he likes, kevala kumbhaka (cessation of breath without inspiration and expiration) is attained. When kevala kumbhaka is attained by one, and thus expiration and inspiration are dispensed with, there is nothing unattainable in the three worlds to him. In the commencement (of his practice), sweat is given out; he should wipe it off. Even after that, owing to the retaining of the breath, the person practising it gets phlegm. Then by an increased practice of dharana, sweat arises. As a frog moves by leaps, so the yogin sitting in the Padma posture moves on the earth. With a (further) increased practice, he is able to rise from the ground. He, while seated in Padma posture, levitates. There arises to him the power to perform extraordinary feats. He does (or should) not disclose to others his feats of great powers (in the path). Any pain small or

[p. 196]

great, does not affect the yogin. Then excretions and sleep are diminished; tears, rheum in the eye, salivary flow, sweat and bad smell in the mouth do not arise in him. With a still further practice, he acquires great strength by which he attains Bhuchara siddhi, which enables him to bring under his control all the creatures that tread this earth; tigers, s'arabhas, [*1] elephants, wild bulls or lions die on being struck by the palm of the yogin. He becomes as beautiful as the god of love himself. All females being taken up with the beauty of his person will desire to have intercourse with him. If he so keeps connection, his virility will be lost; so abandoning all copulation with women, he should continue his practice with great assiduity. By the preservation of the semen, a good odour pervades the body of the yogin. Then sitting in a secluded place, he should repeat Pranava (OM) with three pluta-matras (or prolonged intonation) for the destruction of his former sins. The mantra, Pranava (OM) destroys all obstacles and all sins. By practising thus he attains the arambha (beginning or first) state.

"Then follows the ghata (second state)--one which is acquired by constantly practising suppression of breath. When a perfect union takes place between prana and apana, manas and buddhi, or jivatma and Paramatma without opposition, it is called the ghata state. I shall describe its signs. He may now practise only for about one-fourth of the period prescribed for practice before. By day and evening, let him practise only for a yama (3 hours). Let him practise kevala kumbhaka once a day. Drawing away completely the organs from the objects of sense during cessation of breath is called pratyahara. Whatever he sees with his eyes, let him consider as Atma. Whatever he hears with his ears let him consider as Atma. Whatever  smells with his nose let him consider as Atma. Whatever he tastes with his tongue let him consider as Atma. Whatever the yogin touches with his skin let him consider as Atma. The yogin should thus unwearied gratify his organs of sense for a period of one yama every day with great effort. Then various wonderful powers are attained by the yogin, such as clairvoyance,

[p. 197]

clairaudience, ability to transport himself to great distances within a moment, great power of speech, ability to take any form, ability to become invisible, and the transmutation of iron into gold when the former is smeared over with his excretion.

"That yogin who is constantly practising yoga attains the power to levitate. Then should the wise yogin think that these powers are great obstacles to the attainment of yoga, and so he should never take delight in them. The king of yogins should not exercise his powers before any person whatsoever. He should live in the world as a fool, an idiot, or a deaf man, in order to keep his powers concealed. His disciples would, without doubt, request him to show his powers for the gratification of their own desires. One who is actively engaged in one's duties forgets to practise (yoga); so he should practise day and night yoga without forgetting the words of the guru. Thus passes the ghata state to one who is constantly engaged in yoga practice. To one nothing is gained by useless company, since thereby he does not practise yoga. So one should with great effort practise yoga. Then by this constant practice is gained the parichaya state (the third state). Vayu (or breath) through arduous practice pierces along with agni the Kundalini through thought and enters the Sushumna uninterrupted. When one's chitta enters Sushumna along with prana, it reaches the high seat (of the head probably) along with prana.

"There are the five elements (viz.,) prthivi, apas, agni, vayu and akas'. To the body of the five elements, there is the fivefold dharana. From the feet to the knees is said to be the region of prthivi, is four-sided in shape, is yellow in colour and has the varna (or letter) La. Carrying the breath with the letter La along the region of earth (viz., from the foot to the knees) and contemplating upon Brahma with four faces and four mouths and of a golden colour, one should perform dharana there for a period of two hours. He then attains mastery over the earth. Death does not trouble him, since he has obtained mastery over the earth element. The region of apas is said to

[p. 198]

extend from the knees to the anus. Apas is semi-lunar in shape and white in colour and has Va for its bija (seed) letter. Carrying up the breath with the letter Va along the region of apas, he should contemplate on the God Narayana having four arms and a crowned head, as being of the colour of pure crystal, as dressed in orange clothes and as decayless; and practising dharana there for a period of two hours, he is freed from all sins. Then there is no fear for him from water, and he does not meet his death in water. From the anus to the heart is said to be the region of agni. Agni is triangular in shape, of red colour, and has the letter Ra for its (bija) seed. Raising the breath made resplendent through the letter Ra along the region of fire, he should contemplate on Rudra, who has three eyes, who grants all wishes, who is of the colour of the midday sun, who is daubed all over with holy ashes and who is of a pleased countenance. Practising dharana there for a period of two hours, he is not burnt by fire even though his body enters the fire-pit. From the heart to the middle of the eyebrows is said to be the region of vayu. Vayu is hexangular in shape, black in colour and shines with the letter Ya. Carrying the breath along the region of vayu, he should contemplate on Is'vara, the Omniscient, as possessing faces on all sides; and practising dharana there for two hours, he enters vayu and then akas'. The yogin does not meet his death through the fear of vayu. From the centre of the eyebrows to the top of the head is said to be the region of akas', is circular in shape, smoky in colour and shining with the letter Ha. Raising the breath along the region of akas', he should contemplate on Sadas'iva in the following manner, as producing happiness, as of the shape of bindu, as the great deva, as having the shape of akas', as shining like pure crystal, as wearing the rising crescent of moon on his head, as having five faces, ten heads and three eyes, as being of a pleased countenance, as armed with all weapons, as adorned with all ornaments, as having Uma (the goddess) in one-half of his body, as ready to grant favours, and as the cause of all the causes. By practising dharana in the region of akas', he obtains

[p. 199]

certainly the power of levitating in the akas' (ether). Wherever he stays, he enjoys supreme bliss. The proficient in yoga should practise these five dharanas. Then his body becomes strong and he does not know death. That great-minded man does not die even during the deluge of Brahma.

"Then he should practise dharana for a period of six ghatikas (2 hours, 24 minutes). Restraining the breath in (the region of) akas' and contemplating on the deity who grants his wishes--this is said to be saguna [*1] dhyana capable of giving (the siddhis) anima, etc. One who is engaged in nirguna [*1] dhyana attains the stage of samadhi. Within twelve days at least, he attains the stage of samadhi. Restraining his breath, the wise one becomes an emancipated person. Samadhi is that state in which the jivatma (lower self) and the Paramatma (higher self) are differenceless (or of equal state). If he desires to lay aside his body, he can do so. He will become absorbed in Parabrahman and does not require utkranti (going out or up). But if he does not so desire, and if his body is dear to him, he lives in all the worlds possessing the siddhis of anima, etc. Sometimes he becomes a deva and lives honoured in svarga; or he becomes a man or an yaksha through his will. He can also take the form of a lion, tiger, elephant, or horse through his own will. The yogin becoming the great Lord can live as long as he likes. There is difference only in the modes of procedure but the result is the same.

"Place the left heel pressed on the anus, stretch the right leg and hold it firmly with both hands. Place the head on the breast and inhale the air slowly. Restrain the breath as long as you can and then slowly breathe out. After practising it with the left foot, practise it with the right. Place the foot that was stretched before on the thigh. This is mahabandha and should be practised on both sides. The yogin sitting in mahabandha and having inhaled the air with intent mind, should stop the course of vayu (inside) by means of the throat-mudra, and occupying the two sides (of the throat) with speed. This is called mahavedha and is frequently practised by the siddhas. With the tongue thrust

[p. 200]

into the interior cavity of the head (or throat) and with the eyes intent on the spot between the eyebrows, this is called khecharimudra. Contracting the muscles of the neck and placing the head with a firm will on the breast, this is called the jalandhara (bandha) and is a lion to the elephant of death. That bandha by which prana flies through Sushumna is called uddiyanabandha by the yogins. Pressing the heel firmly against the anus, contracting the anus and drawing up the apana, this is said to be yonibandha. Through mulabandha, prana and apana as well as nada and bindu are united and gives success in yoga: there is no doubt about this. To one practising in a reversed manner (or on both sides) which destroys all diseases, the gastric fire is increased. Therefore a practitioner should collect a large quantity of provisions, (for) if he takes a small quantity of food, the fire (within) will consume his body in a moment.

"On the first day, he should stand on his head with the feet raised up for a moment. He should increase this period gradually every day. Wrinkles and greyness of hair will disappear within three months. He who practises only for a period of a yama (twenty-four minutes) every day conquers time. He who practises vajroli becomes a yogin and the repository of all siddhis. If the yoga siddhis are ever to be attained, he only has them within his reach. He knows the past and the future and certainly moves in the air. He who drinks of the nectar thus is rendered immortal day by day. He should daily practise vajroli. Then it is called amaroli. Then he obtains the rajayoga and certainly he does not meet with obstacles. When a yogin fulfils his action by rajayoga, then he certainly obtains discrimination and indifference to objects. Vishnu, the great yogin, the grand one of great austerities and the most excellent Purusha is seen as a lamp in the path of truth.

"That breast from which one suckled before (in his previous birth) he now presses (in love) and obtains pleasure. He enjoys the same genital organ from which he was born before. She who was once his mother will now be wife and she who is now wife is (or will be) verily mother. He who is now father will be

[p. 201]

again son, and he who is now son will be again father. Thus are the egos of this world wandering in the womb of birth and death like a bucket in the wheel of a well and enjoying the worlds. There are the three worlds, three vedas, three sandhyas, (morning, noon and evening), three svaras (sounds), three agnis, and gunas, and all these are placed in the three letters (OM). He who understands that which is indestructible and is the meaning of the three (OM)--by him are all these worlds strung. This is the Truth, the supreme seat. As the smell in the flower, as the ghee in the milk, as the oil in the gingelly seed and as the gold in the quartz, so is the lotus situated in the heart. Its face is downwards and its stem upwards. Its bindu is downwards and in its centre is situated manas. By the letter A, the lotus becomes expanded; by the letter U, it becomes split (or opened), by the letter M, it obtains nada; and the ardhamatra (half-metre) is silence. The person engaged in yoga obtains  supreme seat, which is like a pure crystal, which is without parts and which destroys all sins. As a tortoise draws its hands and head within itself, so drawing in air thus and expelling it through the nine holes of the body, he breathes upwards and forwards. Like a lamp in an air-tight jar which is motionless, so that which is seen motionless through the process of yoga in the heart and which is free from turmoil, after having been drawn from the nine holes, is said to be Atma alone."

Footnotes

^196:1 An animal said to have eight legs and to be stronger than lion.

^199:1 .Lit., "with gunas" and "without gunas".

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 202]

  

DHYANABINDU-UPANISHAD [*1]

  

OF

  

SAMAVEDA

EVEN if sin should accumulate to a mountain extending over many yojanas (distance), it is destroyed by dhyanayoga. At no time has been found a destroyer of sins like this. Bijakshara (seed-letter) is the supreme bindu. Nada (spiritual sound) is above it. When that nada ceases along with letter, than the nada-less is supreme state. That yogin who considers as the highest that which is above nada, which is anahata, [*2] has all his doubts destroyed. If the point of a hair be divided into one-hundred thousand parts, this (nada) is one-half of that still further divided; and when (even) this is absorbed, the yogin attains to the stainless Brahman. One who is of a firm mind and without the delusion (of sensual pleasures) and ever resting in Brahman, should see like the string (in a rosary of beads) all creatures (as existing) in Atma like odour in flowers, ghee in milk, oil in gingelly seeds and gold in quartz. Again just as the oil depends for its manifestation upon gingelly seeds and odour upon flowers, so does the Purusha depend for its existence upon the body, both external and internal. The tree is with parts and its shadow is without parts but with and without parts, Atma exists everywhere.

The one akshara (letter OM) should be contemplated upon as Brahman by all who aspire for emancipation. Prthivi, agni, rgveda, bhuh and Brahma--all these (are absorbed) when Akara

[p. 203]

[paragraph continues] (A), the first ams'a (part) of pranava (OM) becomes absorbed. Antariksha, yajurveda, vayu, bhuvah and Vishnu, the Janardana--all these (are absorbed) when Ukara (U), the second ams'a of pranava becomes absorbed. Dyur, sun, samaveda, suvah and Mahes'vara--all these (are absorbed) when Makara (M), the third ams'a of pranava becomes absorbed. Akara is of (pita) yellow colour and is said to be of rajoguna; Ukara is of white colour and of sattvaguna; Makara is of dark colour and of tamoguna. He who does not know Omkara as having eight angas (parts), four padas (feet), three sthanas (seats) and five devatas (presiding deities) is not a Brahmana. Pranava is the bow. Atma is the arrow and Brahman is said to be the aim. One should aim at it with great care and then he, like the arrow, becomes one with It. When that Highest is cognised, all karmas return (from him, viz., do not affect him). The Vedas have Omkara as their cause. The swaras (sounds) have Omkara as their cause. The three worlds with (all) the locomotive and the fixed (ones in them) have Omkara as their cause. The short (accent of OM) burns all sins, the long one is decayless and the bestower of prosperity. United with ardhamatra (half-metre of OM), the pranava becomes the bestower of salvation. That man is the knower of the Vedas who knows that the end (viz., ardhamatra) of pranava should be worshipped (or recited) as uninterrupted as the flow of oil and (resounding) as long as the sound of a bell. One should contemplate upon Omkara as Is'vara resembling an unshaken light, as of the size of a thumb and as motionless in the middle of the pericarp of the lotus of the heart. Taking in vayu through the left nostril and filling the stomach with it, one should contemplate upon Omkara as being in the middle of the body and as surrounded by circling flames. Brahma is said to be inspiration; Vishnu is said to be cessation (of breath), and Rudra is said to be expiration. These are the devatas of pranayama. Having made Atma as the (lower) arani (sacrificial wood) and pranava as the upper arani, one should see the God in secret through the practice of churning which is dhyana. One should practise restraint of breath as much as it lies in his power along with (the uttering of)

[p. 204]

[paragraph continues] Omkara sound, until it ceases completely. Those who look upon OM as of the form of Hamsa staying in all, shining like crores of suns, being alone, staying in gamagama (ever going and coming) and being devoid of motion--at last such persons are freed from sin. That manas which is the author of the actions (viz.), creation, preservation and destruction of the three worlds, is (then) absorbed (in the supreme One). That is the highest state of Vishnu.

The lotus of the heart has eight petals and thirty-two filaments. The sun is in its midst: the moon is in the middle of the sun. Agni is in the middle of the moon: the prabha (spiritual light) is in the middle of agni. Pitha (seat or centre) is in the midst of prabha, being set in diverse gems. One should meditate upon the stainless Lord Vasudeva as being (seated) upon the centre of Pitha, as having S'rivatsa [*1] (black mark) and Kaustubha (garland of gems) on his chest and as adorned with gems and pearls resembling pure crystal in lustre and as resembling crores of moons in brightness. He should meditate upon Maha-Vishnu as above or in the following manner. (That is) he should meditate with inspiration (of breath) upon Maha-Vishnu as resembling the atasi flower and as staying in the seat of navel with four hands; then with restraint of breath, he should meditate in the heart upon Brahma, the Grandfather as being on the lotus with the gaura (pale-red) colour of gems and having four faces: then through expiration, he should meditate upon the three-eyed S'iva between the two eyebrows shining like the pure crystal, being stainless, destroying all sins, being in that which is like the lotus facing down with its flower (or face) below and the stalk above or like the flower of a plantain tree, being of the form of all Vedas, containing one hundred petals and one hundred leaves and having the pericarp full-expanded. There he should meditate upon the sun, the moon and the agni, one above another. Passing above through the lotus which has the brightness of the sun, moon and agni, and taking its Hrim bija (letter), one leads his Atma firmly. He is the knower of Vedas

[p. 205]

who knows the three seats, the three matras, the three Brahmas, the three aksharas (letters) and the three matras associated with the ardhamatra. He who knows that which is above bindu, nada and kala as uninterrupted as the flow of oil and (resounding) as long as the sound of a bell--that man is a knower of the Vedas. Just as a man would draw up (with his mouth) the water through the (pores of the) lotus-stalk, so the yogin treading the path of yoga should draw up the breath. Having made the lotus-sheath of the form of ardhamatra, one should draw up the breath through the stalk (of the nadis Sushumna, Ida and Pingala) and absorb it in the middle of the eyebrows. He should know that the middle of the eyebrows in the forehead which is also the root of the nose is the seat of nectar. That is the great place of Brahman.

Postures, restraint of breath, subjugation of the senses dharana, dhyana and samadhi are the six parts of yoga. There are as many postures as there are living creatures; and Mahes'vara (the great Lord) knows their distinguishing features. Siddha, bhadra, simha and padma are the four (chief) postures. Muladhara is the first chakra. Svadhishthana is the second. Between these two is said to be the seat of yoni (perineum), having the form of Kama (God of love). In the Adhara of the anus, there is the lotus of four petals. In its midst is said to be the yoni called Kama and worshipped by the siddhas. In the midst of the yoni is the Linga facing the west and split at its head like the gem. He who knows this, is a knower of the Vedas. A four-sided figure is situated above agni and below the genital organ, of the form of molten gold and shining like streaks of lightning. Prana is with its sva (own) sound, having Svadhishthana as its adhishthana (seat), (or since sva or prana arises from it). The chakra Svadhishthana is spoken of as the genital organ itself. The chakra in the sphere of the navel is called Manipuraka, since the body is pierced through by vayu like manis (gems) by string. The jiva (ego) urged to actions by its past virtuous and sinful karmas whirls about in this great chakra of twelve [*1] spokes, so long as it

[p. 206]

does not grasp the truth. Above the genital organ and below the navel is kanda of the shape of a bird's egg. There arise (from it) nadis seventy-two thousand in number. Of these seventy-two are generally known. Of these, the chief ones are ten and carry the pranas. Ida, Pingala, Sushumna, Gandhari, Hastijihva, Pasha, Yas'asvini, Alambusa, Kuhuh and S'ankhini are said to be the ten. This chakra of the midis should ever be known by the yogins. The three nadis Ida, Pingala and Sushumna are said to carry prana always and have as their devatas, moon, sun and agni. Ida is on the left side and Pingala on the right side, while the Sushumna is in the middle. These three are known to be the paths of prana. Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana, and Vyana; Naga, Karma, Krkara, Devadatta and Dhananjaya; of these, the first five are called pranas, etc., and last five Naga, etc. are called vayus (or sub-pranas). All these are situated (or run along) the one thousand nadis, (being) in the form of (or producing) life. Jiva which is under the influence of prana and apana goes up and down. Jiva on account of its ever moving by the left and right paths is not visible. Just as a ball struck down (on the earth) with the bat of the hand springs up, so jiva ever tossed by prana and apana is never at rest. He is knower of yoga who knows that prana always draws itself from apana and apana draws itself from prana, like a bird (drawing itself from and yet not freeing itself) from the string (to which it is tied).

The jiva comes out with the letter Ha and gets in again with the letter Sa. Thus jiva always utters the mantra 'Ham-sa,' 'Hamsa'. The jiva always utters the mantra twenty-one thousand and six hundred times in one day and night. This is called Ajapa Gayatri and is ever the bestower of nirvana to the yogins. Through its very thought, man is freed from sins. Neither in the past nor in the future is there a science equal to this, a japa equal to this or a meritorious action equal to this. Parames'vari (viz., kundalini s'akti) sleeps shutting with her mouth that door which leads to the decayless Brahma-hole. Being aroused by the contact of agni with manas and prana, she takes the form of a needle and pierces up through Sushumna. The

[p. 207]

yogin should open with great effort this door which is shut. Then he will pierce the door to salvation by means of kundalini. Folding firmly the fingers of the hands, assuming firmly the Padma posture, placing the chin firmly on the breast and fixing the mind in dhyana, one should frequently raise up the apana, fill up with air and then leave the prana. Then the wise man gets matchless wisdom through (this) s'akti. That yogin who assuming Padma posture worships (i.e., controls) vayu at the door of the nadis and then performs restraint of breath is released without doubt. Rubbing off the limbs the sweat arising from fatigue, abandoning all acid, bitter and saltish (food), taking delight in the drinking of milk and rasa, practising celibacy, being moderate in eating and ever bent on yoga, the yogin becomes a siddha in little more than a year. No inquiry need be made concerning the result. Kundalini s'akti, when it is up in the throat, makes the yogi get siddhi. The union of prana and apana has the extinction of urine and faeces.

One becomes young even when old through performing mulabandha always. Pressing the yoni by means of the heels and contracting the anus and drawing up the apana--this is called mulabandha. Uddiyana bandha is so called because it is (like) a great bird that flies up always without rest. One should bring the western part of the stomach above the navel. This Uddiyana bandha is a lion to the elephant of death, since it binds the water (or nectar) of the akas' which arises in the head and flows down. The Jalandhara bandha is the destroyer of all the pains of the throat. When this Jalandhara bandha which is destroyer of the pains of the throat is performed, then nectar does not fall on agni nor does the vayu move. When the tongue enters backwards into the hole of the skull, then there is the mudra of vision latent in the eyebrow called khechari. He who knows the mudra, khechari has not disease, death, sleep, hunger, thirst, or swoon. He who practises this mudra is not affected by illness or karma; nor is he bound by the limitations of time. Since chitta moves in the kha (akas') and since the tongue has entered (in the mudra) kha (viz., the hole in the mouth), therefore the mudra is called khechari and worshipped by

[p. 208]

the siddhas. He whose hole (or passage) above the uvula is closed (with the tongue backwards) by means of khecharimudra never loses his virility, even when embraced by a lovely woman. Where is the fear of death, so long as the bindu (virility) stays in the body. Bindu does not go out of the body, so long as the khecharimudra is practised. (Even) when bindu comes down to the sphere of the perineum, it goes up, being prevented and forced up by violent effort through yonimudra. This bindu is twofold, white and red. The white one is called s'ukla and the red one is said to contain much rajas. The rajas which stays in yoni is like the colour of a coral. The bindu stays in the seat of the genital organs. The union of these two is very rare. Bindu is S'iva and rajas is s'akti. Bindu is the moon and rajas is the sun. Through the union of these two is attained the highest body; when rajas is roused up by agitating the s'akti through vayu which unites with the sun, thence is produced the divine form. S'ukla being united with the moon and rajas with the sun, he is a knower of yoga who knows the proper mixture of these two. The cleansing of the accumulated refuse, the unification of the sun and the moon and the complete drying of the rasas (essences), this is called mahamudra. Placing the chin on the breast, pressing the anus by means of the left heel, and seizing (the toe of) the extended right leg by the two hands, one should fill his belly (with air) and should slowly exhale. This is called mahamudra, the destroyer of the sins of men.

Now I shall give a description of Atma. In the seat of the heart is a lotus of eight petals. In its centre is jivatma of the form of jyotis and atomic in size, moving in a circular line. In it is located everything. It knows everything. It does everything. It does all these actions attributing everything to its own power, (thinking) I do, I enjoy, I am happy, I am miserable, I am blind, I am lame, I am deaf, I am mute, I am lean, I am stout, etc. When it rests on the eastern petal which is of s'veta (white) colour, then it has a mind (or is inclined) to dharma with bhakti (devotion). When it rests on the southeastern petal, which is of rakta (blood colour), then it is inclined

[p. 209]

to sleep and laziness. When it rests on the southern petal, which is of krshna (black) colour, then it is inclined to hate and anger. When it rests on the south-western petal which is of nila (blue) colour, then it gets desire for sinful or harmful actions. When it rests on the western petal which is of crystal colour, then it is inclined to flirt and amuse. When it rests on the north-western petal which is of ruby colour, then it has a mind to walk, rove and have vairagya (or be indifferent). When it rests on, the northern petal which is pita (yellow) colour, then it is inclined to be happy and to be loving. When it rests on the north-eastern petal which is of vaidurya (lapis lazuli) colour, then it is inclined to amassing money, charity and passion. When it stays in the interspace between any two petals, then it gets the wrath arising from diseases generated through (the disturbance of the equilibrium of) vayu, bile and phlegm (in the body). When it stays in the middle, then it knows everything, sings, dances, speaks and is blissful. When the eye is pained (after a day's work), then in order to remove (its) pain, it makes first a circular line and sinks in the middle. The first line is of the colour of bandhuka flower (Bassia). Then is the state of sleep. In the middle of the state of sleep is the state of dream. In the middle of the state of dream, it experiences the ideas of perception, Vedas, inference, possibility, (sacred) words, etc. Then there arises much fatigue. In order to remove this fatigue, it circles the second line and sinks in the middle. The second is of the colour of (the insect) Indragopa (of red or white colour). Then comes the state of dreamless sleep.

During the dreamless sleep, it has only the thought connected with Parames'vara (the highest Lord) alone. This state is of the nature of eternal wisdom. Afterwards it attains the nature of the highest Lord (Parames'vara). Then it makes a round of the third circle and sinks in the middle. The third circle is of the colour of padmaraga (ruby). Then comes the state of turya (the fourth). In turya, there is only the connection of Paramatma. It attains the nature of eternal wisdom. Then one should gradually attain the quiescence of buddhi with

[p. 210]

self-control. Placing the manas in Atma, one should think of nothing else. Then causing the union of prana and apana, he concentrates his aim upon the whole universe being of the nature of Atma. Then comes the state of turyatita (viz., that state beyond the fourth). Then everything appears as bliss. He is beyond the pairs (of happiness and pains, etc.). He stays here as long as he should wear his body. Then he attains the nature of Paramatma and attains emancipation through this means. This alone is the means of knowing Atma.

When vayu (breath) which enters the great hole associated with a hall where four roads meet gets into the half of the well-placed triangle, [*1] then is Achyuta (the indestructible) seen. Above the aforesaid triangle, one should meditate on the five bija (seed) letters of (the elements) prthivi, etc., as also on the five pranas, the colour of the bijas and their position. The letter ###2351### [*2] is the bija of prana and resembles the blue cloud. The letter ###2352### is the bija of agni, is of apana and resembles the sun. The letter ###2354### is the bija of prthivi, is of vyana and resembles bandhuka flower. The letter ###2357### is the bija of jiva (or vayu), is of udana and is of the colour of the conch. The letter ###2361### is the bija of akas', is of samana, and is of the colour of crystal. Prana stays in the heart, navel, nose, ear, foot, finger, and other places, travels through the seventy-two thousand nadis, stays in the twenty-eight crores of hair-pores and is yet the same everywhere. It is that which is called jiva. One should perform the three, expiration, etc., with a firm will and great control: and drawing in everything (with the breath) in slow degrees, he should bind prana and apana in the cave of the lotus of the heart and utter pranava, having contracted his throat and the genital organ. From the Muladhara (to the head) is the Sushumna resembling the shining thread of the lotus. The nada is located in the Vinadanda, (spinal column); that sound from its middle resembles (that of) the conch, etc. When it goes to the hole of the akas', it resembles that of the peacock. In the middle of the cave of the

[p. 211]

skull between the four doors shines Atma, like the sun in the sky. Between the two bows in the Brahma-hole, one should see Purusha with s'akti as his own Atma. Then his manas is absorbed there. That man attains kaivalya who understands the gems, moonlight, nada, bindu, and the seat of Mahes'vara (the great Lord).

Thus is the Upanishad.

Footnotes

^202:1 The Upanishad of the seed of meditation.

^202:2 Of the heart.

^204:1 The black mark on the breast standing for mulaprakrti and the garland for the five elements.

^205:1 In other places, it is ten.

^210:1 Probably it refers to the triangle of the initiates.

^210:2 There seems to be some mistake in the original.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 212]

  

HAMSA [*1]-UPANISHAD

  

of

  

S'UKLA-YAJURVEDA

GAUtAMA addressed Sanatkumara thus: "O Lord, thou art the knower of all dharmas and art well versed in all S'astras, pray tell me the means by which I may obtain a knowledge of Brahmavidya. Sanatkumara replied thus:

"Hear, O Gautama, that Tattva as expounded by Parvati after inquiring into all dharmas and ascertaining S'iva's opinion. This treatise on the nature of Hamsa which gives the fruit of bliss and salvation and which is like a treasure to the yogin, is (a) very mystic (science) and should not be revealed (to the public).

"Now we shall explain the true nature of Hamsa and Paramahamsa for the benefit of a brahmacharin (a seeker after Brahman or celibate), who has his desires under control, is devoted to his guru and always contemplates (as) Hamsa, and realises thus: It (Hamsa) is permeating all bodies like fire (or heat) in all kinds of wood or oil in all kinds of gingelly seeds. Having known (It) thus, one does not meet with death.

"Having contracted the anus (with the heels pressed against it), having raised the vayu (breath) from (Mula) [*2] Adhara

[p. 213]

[paragraph continues] (chakra), having made circuit thrice round Svadhishthana, having gone to Manipuraka, having crossed Anahata, having controlled Prana in Vis'uddhi and then having reached Ajna, one contemplates in Brahmarandhra (in the head), and having meditated there always 'I am of three matras,' cognises (his Self) and becomes formless. The S'isna [*1] (penis) has two sides (left and right from head to foot). This is that Paramahamsa (Supreme Hamsa or Higher Self) having the resplendence of crores of suns and by whom all this world is pervaded.

"It (this Hamsa which has buddhi as vehicle) [*2] has eightfold vrtti. (When it is) in the eastern [*3] petal, there is the inclination (in a person) to virtuous actions; in the south-eastern petal, there arise sleep, laziness, etc.; in the southern, there is the inclination to cruelty; in the south-western, there is the inclination to sins; in the western, there is the inclination to sensual sport; in the north-western, there arise the desire of walking, and others; in the northern, there arises the desire of lust; in the north-eastern, there arises the desire of amassing money; in the middle (or the interspaces between the petals), there is the indifference to material pleasures. In the filament (of the lotus), there arises the waking state; in the pericarp, there arises the svapna (dreaming state); in the bija (seed of pericarp), there arises the sushupti (dreamless sleeping state); when leaving the lotus, there is the turya (fourth state). When Hamsa is absorbed in Nada (spiritual sound), the state beyond the fourth is reached. Nada (which is at the end of sound and beyond speech and mind) is like a pure crystal extending from (Mula) Adhara to Brahmarandhra. It is that which is spoken of as Brahma and Paramatma.

"(Here the performance of Ajapa Gayatri is given).

"Now Hamsa is the rshi; the metre is Avyakta Gayatri; Paramahamsa is the devata (or presiding deity) 'Ham' is the bija; 'Sa' is the s'akti; So'ham is the kilaka. [*4] Thus there are

[p. 214]

six. There are 21, 600 Hamsas (or breaths) [*1] in a day and night. (Salutation [*2] to) Surya, Soma, Niranjana (the stainless) and Nirabhasa (the universeless). Ajapa mantra. (May) the bodiless and subtle one guide [*3] (or illuminate my understanding). Vaushat to Agni-Soma. Then Anganyasas and Karanyasas occur (or should be performed after the mantras as they are performed before the mantras) in the heart and other (seats). Having done so, one should contemplate upon Hamsa as the Atma in his heart. Agni and Soma are its wings (right and left sides); Omkara is its head; Ukara and bindu are the three eyes [*4] and face respectively; Rudra and Rudrani (or Rudra's wife) are the feet kanthata (or the realisation of the oneness of jivatma or Hamsa, the lower self with Paramatma or Paramahamsa, the Higher Self) is done in two ways, (samprajnata [*5] and asamprajnata).

"After that, Unmani [*6] is the end of the Ajapa (mantra). Having thus reflected upon manas by means of this (Hamsa), one hears Nada after the uttering of this japa (mantra) a crore of times. It (Nada) is (begun to be heard as) of ten kinds. The first is chini (like the sound of that word); the second is chini-chini; the third is the sound of bell; the fourth is that of conch; the fifth is that of tantri (lute); the sixth is that sound of tala (cymbals); the seventh is that of flute; the eighth is that of bheri (drum); the ninth is that of mrdanga (double drum); and the tenth is that of clouds (viz., thunder). He may experience the tenth without the first nine sounds (through the initiation of

[p. 215]

a guru). In the first stage, his body becomes chini-chini; in the second, there is the (bhanjana) breaking (or affecting) in the body; in the third, there is the (bhedana) piercing; in the fourth, the head shakes; in the fifth, the palate produces saliva; in the sixth, nectar is attained; in the seventh, the knowledge of the hidden (things in the world) arises; in the eighth, Paravak is heard; in the ninth, the body becomes invisible and the pure divine eye is developed; in the tenth, he attains Parabrahman in the presence of (or with) Atma which is Brahman. After that, when manas is destroyed, when it which is the source of sankalpa and vikalpa disappears, owing to the destruction of these two, and when virtues and sins are burnt away, then he shines as Sadas'iva of the nature of S'akti pervading everywhere, being effulgence in its very essence, the immaculate, the eternal, the stainless and the most quiescent Om. Thus is the teaching of the Vedas; and thus is the Upanishad."

Footnotes

^212:1 This word "Hamsa" is very mysterious and has manifold meanings according to different standpoints. It is composed of Ham (or Aham) and Sa (ha), which mean "I" (am) "that". In its highest sense, it is Kalahamsa (or Parabrahman). It is also Brahma when he has Hamsa (or swan) as the vehicle or Hamsa-vahana. When Hamsa which is the manifestation of Prana is applied to the human breath, we are said to exhale with Ha and to inhale with Sa. It is also called Ajapa-Gayatri.

^212:2 The different chakras of those that are above the anus, in the genitals, navel, heart, and throat, between the eyebrows and in the head.

^213:1 This is omitted in the Calcutta edition and seemingly makes no sense here.

^213:2 This is how a commentator explains.

^213:3 This refers to the different petals in the heart. Vide the same in Narada-Parivrajaka and Dhyanabindu Upanishads.

^213:4 Kilaka means wedge. In the Ajapa mantra 'Hamsa-so'ham', So'ham is the wedge to which the whole mantra is fastened.

^214:1 One commentator gives the table for 21,600 thus: 60 breaths make one Prana; 6 Pranas, one nadi; and 60 nadis, one day and night.

^214:2 The words are: Suryaya, Somaya, Niranjanaya, Nirabhasaya. It is with the pronunciation of these words that the different places in the body are touched, viz., Anganyasas and Karanyasas are performed. The first word is pointed to the heart with the thumb; the second, to the head, and the third, to the hair of the head. With the last, a kavacha (armour) is made by circling the fingers round the head and then circling one hand over another. This process is carried on again after the pronunciation of Ajapa mantra which follows. Here Soma (moon) is that which is united with Thai or the emblem of the union of the lower and higher Selves. Surya or Sun is the causer of the state of one-ness.

^214:3 As it stands, it means "the bodiless, the subtle and the guide." The original is Atanu Sukshmam Prachodayat.

^214:4 The three eyes are the two eyes commonly now in use with the Divine eye.

^214:5 Contemplation with an object as seed and the seedless one.

^214:6 A state above manas or when manas is transcended.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 216]

  

AMRTANADA-UPANISHAD [*1]

  

OF

  

KRSHNA-YAJURVEDA

THE wise, having studied the S'astras and reflected on them again and again and having come to know Brahman, should abandon them all like a firebrand. Having ascended the car of Om with Vishnu (the Higher Self) as the charioteer, one wishing to go to the seat of Brahmaloka intent on the worship of Rudra, should go in the chariot so long as he can go. Then abandoning the car, he reaches the place of the Lord of the car. Having given up matra, linga, [*2] and pada, [*3] he attains the subtle pada (seat or word) without vowels or consonants by means of the letter M without the svara (accent). That is called pratyahara when one merely thinks of the five objects of sense, such as sound, etc., as also the very unsteady mind as the reins of Atma. Pratyahara (subjugation of the senses), dhyana (contemplation), pranayama (control of breath), dharana (concentration), tarka [*4] and samadhi are said to be the six parts of yoga. Just as the impurities of mountain-minerals are burnt by the blower, so the stains committed by the organs are burned by checking prana. Through pranayamas should be burnt the stains; through dharana, the sins; through pratyahara,

[p. 217]

the (bad) associations; and through dhyana, the godless qualities. Having destroyed the sins, one should think of Ruchira (the shining). Ruchira (cessation), expiration and inspiration--these three are pranayama of (rechaka, puraka and kumbhaka) expiration, inspiration and cessation of breath. That is called (one) pranayama when one repeats with a prolonged (or elongated) breath three times the Gayatri with its vyahrtis and Pranava (before it) along with the s'iras [*1] (the head) joining after it. Raising up the vayu from the akas' (region, viz., the heart) and making the body void (of vayu) and empty and uniting (the soul) to the state of void, is called rechaka (expiration). That is called puraka (inspiration) when one takes in vayu, as a man would take water into his mouth through the lotus-stalk. That is called kumbhaka (cessation of breath) when there is no expiration or inspiration and the body is motionless, remaining still in one state. Then he sees forms like the blind, hears sounds like the deaf and sees the body like wood. This is the characteristic of one that has attained much quiescence. That is called dharana when the wise man regards the mind as sankalpa and merging sankalpa into Atma, contemplates upon his Atma (alone). That is called tarka when one makes inference which does not conflict with the Vedas. That is called samadhi in which one, on attaining it, thinks (all) equal.

Seating himself on the ground on a seat of kus'a grass which is pleasant and devoid of all evils, having protected himself mentally (from all evil influences), uttering ratha-mandala, [*2] assuming either padma, svastika, or bhadra posture or any other which can be practised easily, facing the north and closing the nostril with the thumb, one should inspire through the other nostril and retain breath inside and preserve the Agni (fire). Then he should think of the sound (Om) alone. Om, the one letter is Brahman; Om should not be breathed out. Through this divine mantra (Om), it should be done many times to rid himself of

[p. 218]

impurity. Then as said before, the mantra-.knowing wise should regularly meditate, beginning with the navel upwards in the gross, the primary (or less) gross and subtle (states). The greatly wise should give up all (sight) seeing across, up or down, and should practise yoga always being motionless and without tremor. The union as stated (done) by remaining without tremor in the hollow stalk (viz., Sushumna) alone is dharana. The yoga with the ordained duration of twelve matras is called (dharana). That which never decays is Akshara (Om) which is without ghosha (third, fourth, and fifth letters from K), consonant, vowel, palatal, guttural, nasal, letter R and sibilants. Prana travels through (or goes by) that path through which this Akshara (Om) goes. Therefore it should be practised daily, in order to pass along that (course). It is through the opening (or hole) of the heart, through the opening of vayu (probably navel), through the opening of the head and through the opening of moksha. They call it bila (cave), sushira (hole), or mandala (wheel). [*1]

(Then about the obstacles of yogi). A yogin should always avoid fear, anger, laziness, too much sleep or waking and too much food or fasting. If the above rule be well and strictly practised each day, spiritual wisdom will arise of itself in three months without doubt. In four months, he sees the devas; in five months, he knows (or becomes) Brahmanishtha; and truly in six months he attains Kaivalya at will. There is no doubt.

That which is of the earth is of five matras (or it takes five matras to pronounce Parthiva-Pranava). That which is of water of four matras; of agni, three matras; of vayu, two; and of akas', one. But he should think of that which is with no matras. Having united Atma with manas, one should contemplate upon Atma by means of atma. Prana is thirty [*2] digits long. Such is the position (or range) of pranas. That is called Prana which is the seat of the external pranas. The breaths by

[p. 219]

day and night are numbered as 1,13,180. [*1] (Of the pranas) the first (viz.,) Prana is pervading the heart; Apana, the anus; Samana, the navel; Udana, the throat; and Vyana, all parts of the body. Then come the colours of the five pranas in order. Prana is said to be of the colour of a blood-red gem (or coral); Apana which is in the middle is of the colour of Indragopa (an insect of white or red colour); Samana is between the colour of pure milk and crystal (or oily and shining), between both (Prana and Apana): Udana is apandara (pale white); and Vyana resembles the colour of archis (or ray of light). That man is never reborn wherever he may die, whose breath goes out of the head after piercing through this mandala (of the pineal gland). That man is never reborn.

Footnotes

^216:1 The Upanishad treating of Nada (spiritual sound) which is Amrta (nectar). Here Pranas are spoken of, as they produce Nada within and without.

^216:2 It is said to be the subtle, gross and other microcosmic bodies. It also means sign.

^216:3 It is said to be the macrocosmic bodies of Virat, etc. It means a word or letter.

^216:4 In this classification, tarka is introduced newly. It means; the examination of the mind being attracted to objects and knowing that siddhis are impediments to progress.

^217:1 The vyahrtis are Bhuh, , etc., and the head is Om, Apo, etc.

^217:2 Lit., car-circle which is a mystical chakra or diagram for invoking the devata; but some commentators make ratha mean Om: and mandala, the circle of S'iva.

^218:1 There are four openings in the body; three from which the astral, the lower mental and the higher mental bodies escape: the last being of turya.

^218:2 As measured by the width of the middle finger: Yajnavalkya says, Prana is 12 digits beyond the body.

^219:1 One commentator makes it thus: Taking 21,600 for each of the five Pranas, we get 1,08,000: for the five sub-pranas, 5 * 1036 is 5,180. Hence the total is 1,13,180. Another commentator makes it 21,600 alone.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 220]

  

VARAHA [*1]-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

KRSHNA-YAJURVEDA

  

CHAPTER I

THE great sage Rbhu performed penance for twelve deva (divine) years. At the end of the time, the Lord appeared before him in the form of a boar. He said: "Rise, rise and choose your boon." The sage got up and having prostrated himself before him said: "O Lord, I will not, in my dream, wish of thee those things that are desired by the worldly. All the Vedas, S'astras, Itihasas [*2] and all the hosts of other sciences, as well as Brahma and all the other Devas, speak of emancipation as resulting from a knowledge of thy nature. So impart to me that science of Brahman which treats of thy nature."

Then the boar-shaped Bhagavan (Lord) said: "Some disputants hold that there are twenty-four tattvas (principles) and some thirty-six, whilst others maintain that there are ninety-six. I shall relate them in their order. Listen with an attentive mind. The organs of sense are five, viz.: ear, skin, eye and others. The organs of action are five, viz.: mouth, hand, leg and others. Pranas (vital airs) are five; [*3] sound and others (viz., rudimentary principles) are five. [*4] Manas, buddhi, chitta and ahankara are four; [*5] thus

[p. 221]

those that know Brahman know these to be the twenty-four tattvas. Besides these, the wise hold the quintuplicated elements to be five, viz.: earth, water, fire, vayu and akas'; the bodies to be three, viz.: the gross, the subtle and the karana or causal; the states of consciousness to be three, viz.: the waking, the dreaming and the dreamless sleeping. The munis know the total collection of tattvas to be thirty-six (coupled with jiva).

"With these tattvas, there are six changes, viz.: existence, birth, growth, transformation, decay and destruction. Hunger, thirst, grief, delusion, old age and death are said to be the six infirmities. Skin, blood, flesh, fat, marrow and bones are said to be the six sheaths. Passion, anger, avarice, delusion, pride and malice are the six kinds of foes. Vis'va, Taijasa and Prajna [*1] are the three aspects of the jiva. Sattva, rajas and tamas are the three gunas (qualities). Prarabdha, [*2] sanchita and agamin are the three karmas. Talking, lifting, walking, excreting and enjoying are the five actions (of the organs of action); and there are also thought, certainty, egoism, compassion, memory (functions of manas, etc.,), complacency, sympathy and indifference: dik (the quarters), Vayu, Sun, Varuna, [*3] As'vini devas, [*4] Agni, Indra, Upendra, [*5] and Mrtyu (death): and then the moon, the four-faced Brahma, Rudra, Kshetrajna, [*6] and Is'vara. Thus these are the ninety-six tattvas. Those that worship, with devotion, me of the form of boar, who am other than the aggregate of these tattvas and am without decay are released from ajnana and its effects and become jivanmuktas. Those that know these ninety-six tattvas will attain salvation in whatever order of life they may be, whether they have matted hair or are of shaven head or have (only) their tuft of hair on. [*7] There is no doubt of this. Thus ends the first chapter."

[p. 222]

  

CHAPTER II

The great Rbhu (again) addressed the Lord of Lakshmi of the form of boar thus: "O Lord, please initiate me into the supreme Brahmavidya (or science)." Then the Lord who removes the miseries of his devotees being thus questioned, answered thus: "Through (the right observance of) the duties of one's own caste and orders of life, through religious austerities and through the pleasing of the guru (by serving him rightly), arise to persons the four, vairagya, etc. They are the discrimination of the eternal from the non-eternal; indifference to the enjoyments of this and the other worlds; the acquisition of the six virtues, s'ama, [*1] etc., and the longing after liberation. These should be practised. Having subdued the sensual organs and having given up the conception of 'mine' in all objects, you should place your consciousness of 'I' in (or identify yourself with) me, who am the witness Chaitanya (consciousness). To be born as a human being is difficult--more difficult it is to be born as a male being--and more so is it to be born as a Brahman. Even then, if the fool does not cognise through the hearing, [*2] etc., of vedanta, the true nature of the Sachchidananda (of Brahman) that is all-pervading, and that is beyond all caste and orders of life, when will he obtain moksha? I alone am happiness. There is none other. If there is said to be another, then it is not happiness. There is no such thing as love, except on my account. The love that is on account of me is not natural to me. As I am the seat of supreme love, that 'I am not' is not. He who is sought after by all, saying "I should become such," is myself, the all-pervading. How can non-light affect Atma, the self-shining which is no other than the light whence originates the words 'I am not light'. My firm conviction is, whoever knows for certain that (Atma) which is self-shining and has itself no basis (to rest upon), is one of vijnana.

[p. 223]

"The universe, jiva, Is'vara, maya and others do not really exist, except my full Atma. I have not their characteristics. Karma which has dharana and other attributes and is of the form of darkness and ajnana is not fit to touch (or affect) me, who am Atma, the self-resplendent. That man who sees (his) Atma which is all-witness and is beyond all caste and orders of life as of the nature of Brahman, becomes himself Brahman. Whoever sees, through the evidence of vedanta, this visible universe as the Supreme Seat which is of the form of light, attains moksha at once. When that knowledge which dispels the idea that this body (alone) is Atma, arises firmly in one's mind as was before the knowledge that this body (alone) is Atma, then that person, even though he does not desire moksha, gets it. Therefore how will a person be bound by karma, who always enjoys the bliss of Brahman which has the characteristics of Sachchidananda, and which is other than ajnana? Persons with spiritual eyes see Brahman, that is the witness of the three states that has the characteristics of be-ness, wisdom and bliss, that is the underlying meaning of the words 'Thou' (Tvam) and 'I' (Aham), and that is untouched by all the stains. As a blind man does not see the sun that is shining, so an ignorant person does not see (Brahman). Prajnana alone is Brahman. It has truth and prajnana as its characteristics. By thus cognising Brahman well, a person becomes immortal. One who knows his own Atma as Brahman, that is bliss, and without duality and gunas (qualities), and that is truth and absolute consciousness is not afraid of anything. That which is consciousness alone which is all-pervading, which is eternal, which is all-full, which is of the form of bliss, and which is indestructible, is the only true Brahman. It is the settled determination of Brahmajnanis that there is naught else but that. As the world appears dark to the blind and bright to those having good eyes, so this world full of manifold miseries to the ignorant is full of happiness to the wise. In me, of the form of boar, who am infinite and the Bliss of absolute Consciousness, if there is the conception of non-dualism, where then is bondage? And who is the one to be emancipated? The real nature of all

[p. 224]

embodied objects is ever the absolute Consciousness. Like the pot seen by the eyes, the body and its aggregates are not (viz., do not really exist). Knowing, as Atma, all the locomotive and fixed worlds that appear as other than Atma, meditate upon them as 'It I am'. Such a person then enjoys his real nature. There is no other to be enjoyed than one-Self. If there is anything that is, then Brahman alone has that attribute. One who is perfect in Brahmajnana, though he always sees this established universe, does not see it other than his Atma. By cognising clearly my form, one is not trammelled by karma. He is an undaunted person who by his own experience cognises as his own real nature all (the universe and Brahman) that is without the body and the organs of sense--that is the all-witness--that is the one noumenal vijnana, that is the blissful Atma (as contrasted with jivatma or the lower self) and that is the self-resplendent. He is one that should be known as 'I' (myself). O Rbhu, may you become He. After this, there will be never any experience of the world. Thereafter there will always be the experience of the wisdom of one's own true nature. One who has thus known fully Atma has neither emancipation nor bondage. Whoever meditates, even for one muhurta (48 minutes) through the cognition of one's own real form, upon Him who is dancing as the all-witness, is released from all bondage. Prostrations--prostrations to me who am in all the elements, who am the Chidatma (viz., Atma of the nature of wisdom) that is eternal and free and who am the Pratyagatma. O Devata, you are I. I am you. Prostrations on account of myself and yourself who are infinite and who are Chidatma, myself being the supreme Is'a (Lord) and yourself being S'iva (of a beneficent nature). What should I do? Where should I go? What should I reject? (Nothing, because) the universe is filled by me as with the waters of the universal deluge. Whoever gives up (fond) love of the external, love of the internal and love of the body and thus gives up all associations, is merged in me. There is no doubt about it. That Paramahamsa (ascetic) who, though living in the world, keeps aloof from human congregation as from serpent, who regards a beautiful woman as a (living)

[p. 225]

corpse and the endless sensual objects as poison, and who has abandoned all passion and is indifferent towards all objects is no other than Vasudeva, [*1] (viz.,) myself. This is satya (truth). This is nothing but truth. It is truth alone that is now said. I am Brahman, the truth. There is naught else but I.

"(The word) 'upavasa' (lit., dwelling near) signifies the dwelling near (or union) of jivatma and Paramatma and not (the religious observance as accepted by the worldy of) emaciating the body through fasts. To the ignorant, what is the use of the mere drying up of the body? By beating about the hole of a snake, can we be said to have killed the big snake within, A man is said to attain paroksha (indirect) wisdom when he knows (theoretically) that there is Brahman; but he is said to attain sakshatkara (direct cognition) when he knows (or realises) that he is himself Brahman. When a yogin knows his Atma to be the Absolute, then he becomes a jivanmukta. To mahatmas, to be always in the state 'I am Brahman' conduces to their salvation. There are two words for bondage and moksha. They are 'mine' and 'not mine'. Man is bound by 'mine', but he is released by 'not mine'. He should abandon all the thoughts relating to externals and so also with reference to internals. O Rbhu having given up all thoughts, you should rest content (in your Atma) ever.

"The whole of the universe is caused through sankalpa alone. It is only through sankalpa that the universe manifests. Having abandoned the universe, which is of the form of sankalpa and having fixed your mind upon the nirvikalpa (one which is changeless), meditate upon my abode in your heart. O most intelligent being, pass your time in meditating upon me, glorifying me in songs, talking about me to one another and thus devoting yourself entirely to me as the Supreme. Whatever is chit (consciousness) in the universe is only Chinmatra. This universe is Chinmaya only. You are Chit. I am Chit: contemplate upon the worlds also as Chit. Make the desires nil. Always be without any stain. How then can the bright lamp of Atmic vijnana

[p. 226]

arising through the Vedas be affected by the karma arising from the ignorance of the actor and the agent? Having given up not-Atma and being in the world unaffected by it, delight only in the Chinmatra within, ever intent on the One. As the akas' of the pot and that of the house are both located in the all-pervading akas', so the jivas and Is'vara are only evolved out of me, the Chidakas' (the one akas' of universal consciousness). So that which did not exist before the evolution of Atmas (jivas and Is'vara) and that which is rejected at the end (viz., universal deluge) is called maya by Brahmajnanis through their discrimination. Should maya and its effects (the universe) be annihilated, there is no state of Is'vara, there is no state of jiva. Therefore like the akas' without its vehicle, I am the immaculate and Chit.

"The creation, sentient as well as non-sentient from ikshana (thinking) to praves'a (entry) (as stated in Chhandogya-Upanishad, Prapathaka VI, Khandas II and III) of those having the forms of jivas and Is'vara is due to the creation (or illusion) of Is'vara; while the samsara (worldly existence) from the waking state to salvation is due to the creation of jiva. So the karmas ordained in the sacrifice (called) Trinachaka (so called after Nachiketas of Katha-Upanishad) to yoga are dependent upon the illusion of Is'vara; while (the systems from) Lokayata (atheistical system) to sankhya rest on the illusion of jiva. Therefore aspirants after salvation should never make their heads enter into the field of controversy regarding jiva and Is'vara. But with an undisturbed mind, the tattvas of Brahman should be investigated. Those who do not cognise the tattva of the secondless Brahman are all deluded persons only. Whence (then) is salvation to them? Whence then is happiness (to them) in this universe? What if they have the thoughts of the superiority and inferiority (of Is'vara and jiva)? Will sovereignty and mendicancy (experienced by a person) in the dreaming state affect him in his waking state? When buddhi is absorbed in ajnana, then it is termed, by the wise, sleep. Whence then is sleep to me who have not ajnana and its effects? When buddhi is in full bloom, then it is said to be the jagrat (waking state).

[p. 227]

[paragraph continues] As I have no changes, etc., there is no waking state to me. The moving about of buddhi in the subtle nadis constitutes the dreaming state. In me without the act of moving about, there is no dreaming. Then at the time of sushupti when all things are absorbed, enveloped by tamas, he then enjoys the highest bliss of his own nature in an invisible state. If he sees everything as Chit without any difference, he alone is an actual vijnani. He alone is S'iva. He alone is Hari. He alone is Brahma. This mundane existence which is an ocean of sorrow, is nothing but a long-lived dream, or an illusion of the mind or a long-lived reign of the mind. From rising from sleep till going to bed, the one Brahman alone should be contemplated upon. By causing to be absorbed this universe which is but a superimposition, the chitta partakes of my nature. Having annihilated all the six powerful enemies, through their destruction become the non-dual One like the scent-elephant. Whether the body perishes now or lasts the age of moon and stars, what matters it to me having Chit alone as my body? What matters it to the akas' in the pot, whether it (the pot) is destroyed now or exists for a long time. While the slough of a serpent lies cast off lifeless in its hole, it (the serpent) does not evince any affection towards it. Likewise the wise do not identify themselves with their gross and subtle bodies. If the delusive knowledge (that the universe is real) with its cause should be destroyed by the fire of atmajnana, the wise man becomes bodiless, through the idea 'It (Brahman) is not this; It is not this.' Through the study of S'astras, the knowledge of reality (of the universe) perishes. Through direct perception of truth, one's fitness for action (in this universe) ceases. With the cessation of prarabdha (the portion of the past karma which is being enjoyed in this life), the destruction of the manifestation (of the universe) takes place. Maya is thus destroyed in a threefold manner. If within himself no identification (of jiva) with Brahman takes place, the state (of the separateness) of jiva does not perish. If the non-dual one is truly discerned, then all affinities (for objects) cease. With the cessation of prarabdha (arising from the cessation of

[p. 228]

affinities), there is that of the body. Therefore it is certain that maya perishes thus entirely.

"If it is said that all the universe is, that Brahman alone is that is of the nature of Sat. If it is said that the universe shines, thon it is Brahman alone that shines. (The mirage of) all the water in an oasis is really no other than the oasis itself. Through. inquiry of one's Self, the three worlds (above, below and middle) are only of the nature of Chit. In Brahman, which is one and alone, the essence of whose nature is absolute Consciousness and which is remote from the differences of jiva, Is'vara and guru, there is no ajnana. Such being the case, where then is the occasion for the universe there? I am that Brahman which is all full. While the full moon of wisdom is robbed of its lustre by the rahu (one of the two nodes of the moon) of delusion, all actions [*1] such as the rites of bathing, alms-giving and sacrifice performed during the time of eclipse are all fruitless. As salt dissolved in water becomes one, so if Atma and manas become identified, it is termed samadhi. Without the grace of a good (perfect) guru, the abandonment of sensual objects is very difficult of attainment; so also the perception of (divine) truth and the attainment of one's true state. Then the state of being in one's own self shines of its own accord in a yogin in whom jnana-s'akti [*2] has dawned and who has abandoned all karmas. The (property of) fluctuation is natural to mercury and mind. If either mercury is bound (or consolidated) or mind is bound (or controlled), what then on this earth cannot be accomplished? He who obtains murchchha [*3] cures all. diseases. The dead are brought to life again. He who has bound (his mind or mercury) is able to move in the air. Therefore mercury and mind confer upon one the state of Brahman. The master of indriyas (the organs) is manas (mind). The master of manas is prana. The master of prana is laya (absorption yoga). Therefore laya-yoga should be practised. To the yogins, laya (-yoga) is said to be

[p. 229]

without actions and changes. This laya (absorption) of mind which is above speech and in which one has to abandon all sankalpas and to give up completely all actions, should be known through one's own (experience). As an actress, though subject (or dancing in harmony) to music, cymbals and other musical instruments of time, has her mind intent upon the protection of the pot on her head, so the yogin, though intent for the time being upon the hosts of objects, never leaves off the mind contemplating on Brahman. The person who desires all the wealth of yoga should, after having given up all thoughts, practise with a subdued mind concentration on nada (spiritual sound) alone."

  

CHAPTER III

"The One Principle cannot at any time become of manifold forms. As I am the partless, there is none else but myself. Whatever is seen and whatever is heard is no other than Brahman. I am that Parabrahman, which is the eternal, the immaculate, the free, the one, the undivided bliss, the non-dual, the truth, the wisdom, and the endless. I am of the nature of bliss; I am of undivided wisdom; I am the supreme of the supreme; I am the resplendent absolute Consciousness. As the clouds do not touch the akas', so the miseries attendant on mundane existence do not affect me. Know all to be happiness through the annihilation of sorrow and all to be of the nature of sat (be-ness) through the annihilation of asat (not-be-ness). It is only the nature of Chit (Consciousness) that is associated with this visible universe. Therefore my form is partless. To an exalted yogin, there is neither birth nor death, nor going (to other spheres), nor returning (to earth); there is no stain or purity or knowledge but (the universe) shines to him as absolute Consciousness. Practise always silence 'I am (viz., that you yourself are) Parabrahman' which is truth and absolute Consciousness, which is undivided and non-dual, which is invisible, which is stainless, which is pure, which is second-less, and which is beneficent. It (Brahman) is not subject to

[p. 230]

birth and death, happiness and misery. It is not subject to caste, law, family and gotra (clan). Practise silence--I am Chit which is the vivarta-upadana [*1] (viz., the illusory cause) of the universe. Always practise silence--I am (viz., you are) the Brahman, that is the full, the secondless, the undivided consciousness which has neither the relationship nor the differences existing in the universe and which partakes of the essence of the non-dual and the supreme Sat and Chit.

"That which always is and that which preserves the same nature during the three periods of time, unaffected by anything, is my eternal form of Sat. Even the state of happiness which is eternal without upadhis (vehicles) and which is superior to all the happiness derivable from sushupti is of my bliss only. As by the rays of the sun, thick gloom is soon destroyed, so darkness, the cause of rebirth is destroyed by Hari (Vishnu) viz., the sun's lustre. Through the contemplation and worship of my (Hari's) feet, every person is delivered from his ignorance. The means of destroying deaths and births is only through the contemplation of my feet. As a lover of wealth praises a wealthy man, so if with earnestness a person praises the Cause of the universe, who will not be delivered from bondage?

"As in presence of the sun the world of its own accord begins to perform its actions, so in my presence all the worlds are animated to action. As to the mother-of-pearl, the illusory conception of silver is falsely attributed, so to me is falsely attributed through maya this universe which is composed of mahat, etc. I am not with those differences that are (observable) in the body of low caste men, the body of cow, etc., the fixed ones, the bodies of brahmanas and others. As to a person, even after being relieved from the misconception of the directions, the (same misconception of) direction continues (as before),

[p. 231]

just so is to me the universe though destroyed by vijnana. Therefore the universe is not. I am neither the body nor the organs of sense and action, nor pranas, nor manas, nor buddhi, nor ahankara, nor chitta, nor maya, nor the universe including akas' and others. Neither am I the actor, the enjoyer, nor he who causes the enjoyment. I am Brahman that is Chit, Sat and Ananda alone and that is Janardana (Vishnu).

"As, through the fluctuation of water, the sun (reflected therein) is moved, so Atma arises in this mundane existence through its mere connection with ahankara. This mundane existence has chitta as its root. This (chitta) should be cleansed by -repeated effort. How is it you have your confidence in the greatness of chitta? Alas, where is all the wealth of the kings! Where are the Brahmas? Where are all the worlds? All old ones are gone. Many fresh evolutions have occurred. Many crores of Brahmas have passed away. Many kings have flitted away like particles of dust. Even to a jnani, the love of the body may arise through the asura (demoniacal) nature. If the asura nature should arise in a wise man, his knowledge of truth becomes fruitless. Should rajas and others generated in us be burnt by the fire of discriminative (divine) wisdom, how can they germinate again? Just as a very intelligent person delights in the shortcomings of another, so if one finds out his own faults (and corrects them) who will not be relieved from bondage? O Lord of munis, only he who has not atmajnana and who is not an emancipated person, longs after siddhis. He attains such siddhis through medicine, [*1] (or wealth), mantras, religious works, time and skill. In the eyes of an atmajnani, these siddhis are of no importance. One who has become an atmajnani, one who has his sight solely on atma, and one who is content with Atma (the higher self) through (his) atma (or the lower self), never follows (the dictates of) avidya. Whatever exists in this world, he knows to be of the nature of avidya. How then will an atmajnani who has relinquished avidya be immersed in (or affected by) it. Though medicine, mantras, religious work, time and skill (or mystical

[p. 232]

expressions) lead to the development of siddhis, yet they cannot in any way help one to attain the seat of Paramatma. How then can one who is an atmajnani and who is without his mind be said to long after siddhis, while all the actions of his desires are controlled?"

  

CHAPTER IV

On another occasion Nidagha asked Lord Rbhu to enlighten him as to the characteristics of jivanmukti. [*1] To which Rbhu replied in the affirmative and said the following:

"In the seven bhumikas or (stages of development of wisdom) there are four kinds of jivanmuktas. [*1] Of these the first stage [*2] is s'ubhechchha (good desire); the second is vicharana (inquiry); the third is tanumanasi (or pertaining to the thinned mind); the fourth is sattvapatti (the attainment of sattva); the fifth is asamsakti (non-attachment); the sixth is the padarthabhavana (analysis of objects) and the seventh is the turya (fourth or final stage). The bhumika which is of the form of pranava (OM) is formed of (or is divided into) akara--A, ukara--U, makara--M, and ardhamatra. Akara and others are of four kinds on account of the difference of sthula (gross), sukshma (subtle), bija (seed or causal), and sakshi (witness). Their avasthas are four: waking, dreaming, dreamless sleeping and turya (fourth). He who is in (or the entity that identifies itself with) the waking state in the gross ams'a (essence or part) of akara is named Vis'va; in the subtle essence, he is termed Taijasa; in the bija essence, he is termed Prajna; and in the sakshi essence, he is termed Turya.

"He who is in the dreaming state (or the entity which identifies itself with the dreaming state) in the gross essence of ukara is Vis'va; in the subtle essence, he is termed Taijasa; in the bija essence, is termed Prajna; and in the sakshi essence, he is termed Turya.

"He who is in the sushupti state in the gross essence of makara is termed Vis'va; in the subtle essence, Taijasa; in the

[p. 233]

bija essence, he is termed Prajna; and in the sakshi essence, he is termed Turya.

"He who is in turya state in the gross essence of ardhamatra is termed Turya-vis'va. In the subtle, he is termed Taijasa; in the bija essence, he is termed Prajna; and in the sakshi essence, he is termed Turya-turya.

"The turya essence of akara is (or embraces) the first, second and third (bhumikas or stages of the seven). The turya essence of ukara embraces the fourth bhumika. The turya essence of makara embraces the fifth bhumika. The turya essence of ardhamatra is the sixth stage. Beyond this, is the seventh stage.

"One who functions in the (first) three bhumikas is called mumukshu; one who functions in the fourth bhumika is called a brahmavit; one who functions in the fifth bhumika is called a brahmavidvara; one who functions in the sixth bhumika is called a brahmavidvariya; and one in the seventh bhumika is called a brahmavidvarishtha. With reference to this, there are s'lokas. They are:

"'S'ubhechchha is said to be the first jnanabhumi (or stage of wisdom); vicharana, the second; tanumanasi, the third; sattvapatti, the fourth; then come asamsakti as the fifth, padarthabhavana as the sixth and turya as the seventh.'

"The desire that arises in one through sheer vairagya (after resolving) 'Shall I be ignorant? I will be seen by the S'astras and the wise (or I will study the books and be with the wise)' is termed by the wise as S'ubhechchha. The association with the wise and S'astras and the following of the right path preceding the practice of indifference is termed vicharana. That stage wherein the hankering after sensual objects is thinned through the first and second stages is said to be tanumanasi. That stage wherein having become indifferent to all sensual objects through the exercise in the (above) three stages, the purified chitta rests on Atma which is of the nature of sat is called sattvapatti. The light (or manifestation) of sattvaguna that is firmly rooted (in one) without any desire for the fruits of actions through the practice in the above four stages

[p. 234]

is termed asamsakti. That stage wherein through the practice in the (above) five stages one, having found delight in Atma, has no conception of the internals or externals (though before him) and engages in actions only when impelled to do so by others is termed padarthabhavana, the sixth stage. The stage wherein after exceedingly long practice in the (above) six stages one is (immovably) fixed in the contemplation of 'Atma alone without the difference (of the universe) is the seventh stage called turya. The three stages beginning with S'ubhechcha are said to be attained with (or amidst) differences and non-differences. (Because) the universe one sees in the waking state he thinks to be really existent. When the mind is firmly fixed on the non-dual One and the conception of duality is put down, then he sees this universe as a dream through his union with the fourth stage. As the autumnal cloud being dispersed vanishes, so this universe perishes. O Nidagha, be convinced that such a person has only sattva remaining. Then having ascended the fifth stage called sushuptipada (dreamless sleeping seat), he remains simply in the non-dual state, being freed from all the various differences. Having always introvision though ever participating in external actions, those that are engaged in the practice of this (sixth stage) are seen like one sleeping when fatigued (viz., being freed from all affinities). (Lastly) the seventh stage which is the ancient and which is called gudhasupti [*1] is generally attained. Then one remains in that secondless state without fear and with his consciousness almost annihilated where there is neither sat nor asat, neither self nor not-self. Like an empty pot in the akas', there is void both within and without; like a filled vessel in the midst of an ocean, he is full both within and without. Do not become either the knower or the known. May you become the Reality which remains after all thoughts are given up. Having discarded (all the distinctions of) the seer, the sight and the seen with their affinities, meditate solely upon Atma which shines as the supreme Light.

"He is said to be a jivanmukta (emancipated person) in whom, though participating in the material concerns of the

[p. 235]

world, the universe is not seen to exist like the invisible akas'. He is said to be a jivanmukta, the light of whose mind never sets or rises in misery or happiness, and who does not seek to change what happens to him (viz., either to diminish his misery or increase his happiness). He is said to be a jivanmukta who though in his sushupti is awake and to whom the waking state is unknown and whose wisdom is free from the affinities (of objects).

"He is said to be a jivanmukta whose heart is pure like akas', though acting (as if) in consonance to love, hatred, fear and others. He is said to be a jivanmukta who has not the conception of his being the actor and whose buddhi is not attached to material objects, whether he performs actions or not. He is said to be a jivanmukta, of whom people are not afraid, who is not afraid of people and who has given up joy, anger and fear. He is said to be a jivanmukta who, though participating in all the illusory objects, is cool amidst them and is a full Mind, (being) as if they belonged to others. O muni, he is called a jivanmukta who, having eradicated all the desires of his chitta, is (fully) content with me who am the Atma of all. He is said to be a jivanmukta who rests with an unshaken mind in that all pure abode which is Chinmatra and free from all the modifications of chitta. He is said to be a jivanmukta in whose chitta do not dawn (the distinctions of) the universe, I, he, thou and others that are visible and unreal. Through the path of the guru and S'astras, enter soon Sat--the Brahman that is immutable, great, full and without objects--and be firmly seated there. S'iva alone is Guru; S'iva alone is Vedas; S'iva alone is Lord; S'iva alone is I; S'iva, alone is all. There is none other than S'iva. The undaunted Brahmana having known Him (S'iva) should attain wisdom. One need not utter many words as they but injure the organ of speech.

"(The Rshi) S'uka [*1] is a mukta (emancipated person). (The Rshi) Vamadeva is a mukta. There are no others (who have attained emancipation) than through these (viz., the two

[p. 236]

paths of these two Rshis). 'Those brave men who follow the path of S'uka in this world become sadyomuktas (viz., emancipated) immediately after (the body  away); while those who always follow the path of vedanta in this world are subject again and again to rebirths and attain krama (gradual) emancipation, through yoga, sankhya and karmas associated with sattva (guna). Thus there are two paths laid down by the Lord of Devas (viz.,) the S'uka and Vamadeva paths. The S'uka path is called the bird's path: while the Vamadeva path is called the ant's path. [*1] Those persons that have cognised the true nature of their Atma through the mandatory and prohibitory injunctions (of the Vedas), the inquiry into (the true meaning of) mahavakyas (the sacred sentences of the Vedas), the samadhi of sankhya yoga or asamprajnata samadhi [*2] and that have thereby purified themselves, attain the supreme seat through the S'uka path. Having, through hathayoga [*3] practice with the pain caused by yama, postures, etc., become liable to the ever recurring obstacles caused by anima and other (siddhis) and having not obtained good results, one is born again in a great family and practises yoga through his previous (karmic) affinities. Then through the practice of yoga during many lives, he attains salvation (viz.,) the supreme seat of Vishnu through the Vamadeva path. Thus there are two paths that lead to the attainment of Brahman and that are beneficent. The one confers instantaneous salvation and the other confers gradual salvation.

"To one that sees (all) as the one (Brahman), where is delusion? Where is sorrow? Those that are under the eyes of those whose buddhi is solely occupied with the truth (of Brahman) that is the end of all experience are released from all heinous sins. All beings inhabiting heaven and earth that fall under the vision of Brahmavits are at once emancipated from the sins committed during many crores of births."

[p. 237]

  

CHAPTER V

Then Nidagha asked Lord Rbhu to enlighten him as to the rules (to be observed) in the practice of Yoga. Accordingly He (the Lord) said thus:

"The body is composed of the five elements. It is filled with five mandalas (spheres). [*1] That which is hard is Prthivi (earth), one of them; that which is liquid is Apas; that which is bright is Tejas (fire); motion is the property of Vayu; that which pervades everywhere is Akas'. All these should be known by an aspirant after Yoga. Through the blowing of Vayumandala in this body, (there are caused) 21,600 breaths every day and night. If there is a diminution in the Prthivimandala, there arise folds in the body; if there is diminution in the essence of Apas, there arises gradually greyness of hair; if there is diminution in the essence of Tejas, there is loss of hunger and lustre; if there is diminution in the essence of Vayu, there is incessant tremor; if there is diminution in the essence of Akas', one dies. The jivita (viz., Prana) which possesses these elements having no place to rest (in the body) owing to the diminution of the elements, rises up like birds flying up in the air. It is for this reason that it is called Udyana (lit., flying up). With reference to this, there is said to be a bandha (binding, also meaning a posture called Uddiyanabandha, by which this flight can be arrested). This Uddiyanabandha [*2] is to (or does away with) death, as a lion to an elephant. Its experience is in the body, as also the bandha. Its binding (in the body) is hurtful. If there is agitation of Agni (fire) within the belly, then there will be caused much of pain. Therefore this (Uddiyanabandha) should not be practised by one who is hungry or who has urgency to make water or void excrement. He should take

[p. 238]

many times in small quantities proper and moderate food. He should practise Mantrayoga, [*1] Layayoga and Hathayoga, through mild, middling and transcendental methods (or periods) respectively. Laya, Mantra, and Hathayogas have each (the same) eight subservients. They are yama, niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, (Parana, dhyana, and samadhi. [*2] (Of these), yama is of ten kinds. They are non-injury, truth, non-coveting, continence, compassion, straightforwardness, patience, courage, moderate eating, and purity (bodily and mental). Niyama is of ten kinds. They are tapas (religious austerities), contentment, belief in the existence of God or Vedas, charity, worship of Is'vara (or God), listening to the exposition of religious doctrines, modesty, a (good) intellect, japa (muttering of prayers), and vrata (religious observances). There are eleven postures beginning with chakra. Chakra, padma, karma, mayura, kukkuta, vira, svastika, bhadra, simha, mukta, and gomukha, are the postures enumerated by the knowers of yoga. Placing the left ankle on the right thigh and the right ankle on the left thigh, and keeping the body erect (while sitting) is the posture "Chakra". Pranayama should be practised again and again in the following order, viz., inspiration, restraint of breath and expiration. The pranayama is done through the nadis (nerves). Hence it is called the nadis themselves.

"The body of every sentient being is ninety-six digits long. In the middle of the body, two digits above the anus and two digits below the sexual organ, is the centre of the body (called Muladhara or sacral plexus). Nine digits above the genitals, there is kanda of nadis which revolves oval-shaped, four digits high and four digits broad. It is surrounded by fat, flesh, bone, and blood. In it, is situate a nadi-chakra (wheel of nerves) having twelve spokes. Kundali by which this body is supported is there. It is covering by its face the Brahmarandhra (viz., Brahma's hole) of Sushumna. (By the side) of Sushumna dwell the nadis

[p. 239]

[paragraph continues] Alambusa and Kuhuh. In the next two (spokes) are Varuna and Yas'asvini. On the spoke south of Sushumna is, in regular course, Pingala. On the next two spokes, are Pasha and Payasvini. On the spoke west of Sushumna is the nadi called Sarasvati. On the next two spokes are S'ankhini and Gandhari. To the north of Sushumna dwells Ida; in the next is Hastijihva; in the next is Vis'vodara. In these spokes of the wheel, the twelve nadis carry the twelve vayus from left to right (to the different parts of the body). The nadis are like (i.e., woven like the warp and woof of) cloth. They are said to have different colours. The central portion of the cloth (here the collection of the nadis) is called the Nabhichakra (navel plexus). Jvalanti, Nadarupini, Pararandhra, and Sushumna are called the (basic) supports of nada (spiritual sound). These four nadis are of ruby colour. The central portion of Brahmarandhra is again and again covered by Kundali. Thus ten vayus move in these nadis. A wise man who has understood the course of nadis and vayus should, after keeping his neck and body erect with his mouth closed, contemplate immovably upon Turyaka (Atma) at the tip of his nose, in the centre of his heart and in the middle of bindu, [*1] and should see, with a tranquil mind through the (mental) eyes, the nectar flowing from there. Having closed the anus and drawn up the vayu and caused it to rise through (the repetition of) pranava (Om), he should complete with S'ri bija. He should contemplate upon his Atma as S'ri (or Paras'akti) and as being bathed by nectar. This is kalavanchana (lit., time illusion). It is said to be the most important of all. Whatever is thought of by the mind is accomplished by the mind itself. (Then) agni (fire) will flame in jala (water) and in the flame (of agni) will arise the branches and blossoms. Then the words uttered and the actions done regarding the universe, are not in vain. By checking the bindu in the path, by making the fire flame up in the water and by causing the water to dry up, the body is made firm. Having contracted simultaneously the anus and yoni (the womb) united together, he should draw up Apana and unite with it Samana. He

[p. 240]

should contemplate upon his Atma as S'iva and then as being bathed by nectar. In the central part of each spoke, the yogin should commence to concentrate Bala (will or strength). He should try to go up by the union of Prana and Apana. This most important yoga brightens up in the body the path of siddhis. As a dam across the water serves as an obstacle to the floods, so it should ever be known by the yogins that the chhaya of the body is (to jiva). This bandha is said of all nadis. Through the grace of this bandha, the Devata (goddess) becomes visible. This bandha of four feet serves as a check to the three paths. This brightens up the path through which the siddhas obtained (their siddhis). If with Prana is made to rise up soon Udana, this bandha checking all nadis goes up. This is called Samputayoga or Mulabandha. Through the practising of this yoga, the three bandhas are mastered. By practising day and night intermittingly or at any convenient time, the vayu will come under his control. With the control of vayu, agni (the gastric fire) in the body will increase daily. With the increase of agni, food, etc., will be easily digested. Should food be properly digested, there is increase of rasa (essence of food). With the daily increase of rasa, there is the increase of dhatus (spiritual substances). With the increase of dhatus, there is the increase of wisdom in the body. Thus all the sins collected together during many crores of births are burnt up.

"In the centre of the anus and the genitals, there is the triangular Muladhara. It illumines the seat of S'iva of the form of bindu. There is located the Paras'akti named kundalini. From that seat, vayu arises. From that seat, agni becomes increased. From that seat, bindu originates and nada becomes increased. From that seat, Hamsa is born. From that seat, manas is born. The six chakras beginning with Muladhara are said to be the seat of S'akti (Goddess). From the neck to the top of the head is said to the seat of S'ambhu (S'iva). To the nadis, the body is the support (or vehicle); to Prana, the nadis are the support; to jiva, Prana is the dwelling place; to Hamsa, jiva is the support; to S'akti, Hamsa is the seat and the locomotive and fixed universe.

[p. 241]

"Being without distraction and of a calm mind, one should practise pranayama. Even a person who is well-skilled in the practice of the three bandhas should try always to cognise with a true heart that Principle which should be known and is the cause of all objects and their attributes. Both expiration and inspiration should (be stopped and made to) rest in restraint of breath (alone). He should depend solely on Brahman which is the highest aim of all visibles. (The giving out of) all external objects is said to be rechaka (expiration). The (taking in of the) spiritual knowledge of the S'astras is said to be puraka (inspiration) and (the keeping to oneself of) such knowledge is said to be kumbhaka (or restraint of breath). He is an emancipated person who practises thus such a chitta. There is no doubt about it. Through kumbhaka, it (the mind) should be always taken up, and through kumbhaka alone it should be filled up within. It is only through kumbhaka that kumbhaka should be firmly mastered. Within it is Paramas'iva. That (vayu) which is non-motionless should be shaken again through kantha-mudra (throat-posture). Having checked the course of vayu, having become perfect in the practice of expiration and restraint of breath and having planted evenly on the ground the two hands and the two feet, one should pierce the four seats through vayu through the three yogas. He should shake Mahameru with the (aid of) prakotis (forces) [*1] at the mouth of vayu. The two putas (cavities) being drawn, vayu throbs quickly. The union of moon, sun and agni should be known on account of nectar. Through the motion of Meru, the devatas who stay in the centre of Meru move. At first in his Brahma-granthi, there is produced soon a hole (or passage). Then having pierced Brahma-granthi, he pierces Vishnu-granthi then he pierces Rudra-granthi. Then to the yogin comes vedha [*2] (piercing) through his liberation from the impurities of delusion, through the religious ceremonies (performed) in various births, through the grace of gurus and devatas and through the practice of yoga.

[p. 242]

"In the mandala (sphere or region) of Sushumna (situated between Ida and Pingala, vayu should be made to rise up through the feature known as Mudra-bandha. The short pronunciation (of Pranava) frees (one) from sins: its long pronunciation confers (on one) moksha. So also its pronunciation in apyayana or pluta svara (tone). He is a knower of Veda, who through the above-mentioned three ways of pronunciation [*1] knows the end of Pranava which is beyond the power of speech, like the never-ceasing flow of oil or the long-drawn bell-sound. The short svara goes to bindu. The long svara goes to brahmarandhra: the pluta to dvadas'anta (twelfth centre). The mantras should be uttered on account of getting mantra siddhis. This Pranava (OM) will remove all obstacles. It will remove all sins. Of this, are four bhumikas (states) predicated, viz., arambha, ghata, parichaya, and nishpatti. Arambha is that state in which one having abandoned external karmas performed by the three organs (mind, speech and body), is always engaged in mental karma only. It is said by the wise that the ghata state is that in which vayu having forced an opening on the western side and being full, is firmly fixed there. Parichaya state is that in which vayu is firmly fixed to akas', neither associated with jiva nor not, while the body is immovable. It is said that nishpatti state is that in which there take place creation and dissolution through Atma or that state in which a yogin having become a jivanmukta performs yoga without effort.

"Whoever recites this Upanishad becomes immaculate like agni. Like vayu, he becomes pure. He becomes freed from the sin of drinking alcohol. He becomes freed from the sins of the theft of gold. He becomes a jivanmukta. This is what is said by the Rgveda. Like the eye pervading the akas' (seeing without effort everything above), a wise man sees (always) the supreme seat of Vishnu. The brahmanas who have always their spiritual eyes wide open praise and illuminate in diverse ways the spiritual seat of Vishnu.

"OM, thus is the Upanishad."

Footnotes

^220:1 This means boar and refers to the incarnation of Vishnu as a boar.

^220:2 Books such as Mahabharata and Ramayana.

^220:3 Prana, Apana, Udana, Vyana and Samana, having their respective places and functions in the body.

^220:4 Sound, touch, form, taste and odour.

^220:5 Producing respectively uncertainty, certain knowledge, fluctuation of thought, and egoism and having certain centres in the body.

^221:1 In the states of waking, dreaming and dreamless sleeping.

^221:2 Being past karmas now being enjoyed, past karmas being in store to be enjoyed hereafter and the karmas now produced to be enjoyed hereafter.

^221:3 Presiding over water or tongue.

^221:4 Presiding over odour or nose.

^221:5 Presiding over leg or nether world.

^221:6 Vide the translation of Sarvasara-Upanishad.

^221:7 This refers to the several class of persons in different modes of life who wear their hair in different ways as yogins, ascetics and so on.

^222:1 Meaning respectively mental restraint, bodily restraint, the renunciation or practising of works without reference to their fruits, endurance of heart and soul, etc., faith and settled peace of mind.

^222:2 Meaning meditation and reflection thereon.

^225:1 Viz., Vishnu, the Lord of all persons.

^228:1 During the solar and lunar eclipses, these rites are done by the Hindus.

^228:2 Of the six saktis, she is one that gives wisdom.

^228:3 Either controlling the breath through pranayama or the consolidation of mercury through some means, leading in both cases to siddhis, etc.

^230:1 Of the two causes of the universe, Spirit is the nimitta (instrumental) cause while matter is the upadana (material) cause. This material cause is again subdivided into three: viz., arambha (initial), parinama (changed) and vivarta (illusory). The first or material cause may be exemplified by the cotton or woollen thread being the initial material cause of cloth or dresses which are woven out of these threads without changing the threads; the second by milk being the changed cause of curd, since a change takes place in the milk which becomes curd; the third by a serpent being the illusory cause of a rope, for here through illusion we mistake the rope for the serpent.

^231:1 The mystic Hindu Tamil books teem with works on medicine through which the higher siddhis can be developed.

^232:1 Jivanmukti is emancipation. Jivanmuktas are those that have attained emancipation.

^232:2 This word and others are explained in full later on in the text.

^234:1 Lit., secret sleep.

^235:1 Suka is a Rshi, the son of the present Vyasa and the narrator of Bhagavata Purana. Vamadeva is also a Rshi.

^236:1 Bird's path, like birds which fly at once to the place they intend to go; Ant's path, like ants which move slowly.

^236:2 It is that of intense self-absorption when one loses his consciousness of individuality.

^236:3 Hathayoga, as stated in Patanjali's Yoga Philosophy.

^237:1 There are either the five elements or Muladhara (sacral plexus), Svadhishthana (epigastric or prostatic plexus), Manipuraka (solar plexus), Anahata (cardiac plexus) and Visuddhi (laryngeal or pharyngeal plexus). These are situated respectively in the anus, the genital organs, navel, heart and throat. The last or the sixth plexus is omitted here, as the five plexuses mentioned above correspond to the five elements. This chapter treating of yoga is very mystical.

^237:2 This is one of the postures treated of in Siva Samhita and other books.

^238:1 There are four kinds of yoga--the fourth being Rajayoga. Mantrayoga is that in which perfection is obtained through the pronunciation of mantras. Layayoga is that in which perfection is obtained through laya (absorption).

^238:2 They mean respectively forbearance, religious restraint, posture, restraint of breath, subjugation of the senses, contemplation, meditation, and intense self-absorption.

^239:1 Lit., germ.

^241:1 It is mystic here and later on.

^241:2 He has pierced all the granthis and hence becomes a master of vedha.

^242:1 There are the three kinds of pronunciation with 1 matra, 2 matras and 3 matras. They are respectively hrasva, dirgha and pluta which may be translated as short, long and very long.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 243]

  

MANDALABRAHMANA-UPANISHAD [*1]

  

OF

  

S'UKLA-YAJURVEDA

  

BRaHMAnA I

OM. The great muni Yajnavalkya went to Adityaloka (the sun's world) and saluting him (the Purusha of the sun) said: "O reverend sir, describe to me the Atma-tattva (the tattva or truth of Atma)."

(To which,) Narayana (viz., the Purusha of the sun) replied: "I shall describe the eightfold yoga together with Jnana. The conquering of cold and heat as well as hunger and sleep, the preserving of (sweet) patience and unruffledness ever and the restraining of the organs (from sensual objects)--all these come under (or are) yama. Devotion to one's guru, love of the true path, enjoyment of objects producing happiness, internal satisfaction, freedom from association, living in a retired place, the controlling of the manas and the not longing after the fruits of actions and a state of vairagya--all these  niyama. The sitting in any posture pleasant to one and clothed in tatters (or bark) is prescribed for asana (posture). Inspiration, restraint of breath and expiration, which have respectively 16, 64 and 32 (matras) constitute pranayama (restraint of breath). The restraining of the mind from the objects of

[p. 244]

senses is pratyahara (subjugation of the senses). The contemplation of the oneness of consciousness in all objects is dhyana. The mind having been drawn away from the objects of the senses, the fixing of the chaitanya (consciousness) (on one alone) is dharana. The forgetting of oneself in dhyana is samadhi. He who thus knows the eight subtle parts of yoga attains salvation.

"The body has five stains (viz.,) passion, anger, out-breathing, fear, and sleep. The removal of these can be effected respectively by absence of sankalpa, forgiveness, moderate food, carefulness, and a spiritual sight of tattvas. In order to cross the ocean of samsara where sleep and fear are the serpents, injury, etc., are the waves, trshna (thirst) is the whirlpool, and wife is the mire, one should adhere to the subtle path and overstepping tattva [*1] and other gunas should look out for Taraka. [*2] Taraka is Brahman which being in the middle of the two eyebrows, is of the nature of the spiritual  of Sachchidananda. The (spiritual) seeing through the three lakshyas (or the three kinds of introvision) is the means to It (Brahman). Sushumna which is from the muladhara to brahmarandhra has the radiance of the sun. In the centre of it, is kundalini shining like crores of lightning and subtle as the thread in the lotus-stalk. Tamas is destroyed there. Through seeing it, all sins are destroyed. When the two ears are closed by the tips of the forefingers, a phutkara (or booming) sound is heard. When the mind is fixed on it, it sees a blue light between the eyes as also in the heart. (This is antarlakshya or internal ). In the bahirlakshya (or external introvision) one sees in order before his nose at distance of 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 digits, the space of blue colour, then a colour resembling s'yama (indigo-black) and then shining as rakta (red) wave and then with the two pita (yellow and orange red) colours. Then he is a yogin. When one looks at the external space, moving

[p. 245]

the eyes and sees streaks of light at the corners of his eyes, then his vision can be made steady. When one sees jyotis (spiritual light) above his head 12 digits in length, then he attains the state of nectar. In the madhyalakshya (or the middle one), one sees the variegated colours of the morning as if the sun, the moon and the fire had joined together in the akas' that is without them. Then he comes to have their nature (of light). Through practice, he becomes one with akas', devoid of all gunas and peculiarities. At first akas' with its shining stars becomes to him Para-akas' as dark as tamas itself, and he becomes one with Para-akas' shining with stars and deep as tamas. (Then) he becomes one with Maha-akas' resplendent (as) with the fire of the deluge. Then he becomes one with Tattva-akas', lighted with the brightness which is the highest and the best of all. Then he becomes one with Surya-akas' (sun-akas') brightened by a crore of suns. By practising thus, he becomes one with them. He who knows them becomes thus.

"Know that yoga is twofold through its division into the purva (earlier) and the uttara (later). The earlier is taraka and the later is amanaska (the mindless). Taraka is divided into murti (with limitation) and amurti (without limitation). That is murti taraka which goes to the end of the senses (or exists till the senses are conquered). That is amurti taraka which goes beyond the two eyebrows (above the senses). Both these should be performed through manas. Antardrshti (internal vision) associated with manas comes to aid taraka. Tejas (spiritual light) appears in the hole between the two eyebrows. This taraka is the earlier one. The later is amanaska. The great jyotis (light) [*1] is above the root of the palate. By seeing it, one gets the siddhis anima, etc. S'ambhavimudra occurs when the lakshya (spiritual vision) is internal while the (physical) eyes are seeing externally without winking. This is the great science which is concealed in all the tantras. When this is known, one does not stay in samsara. Its worship (or practice) gives salvation. Antarlakshya is of

[p. 246]

the nature of Jalajyotis (or waterjyotis). It is known by the great Rshis and is invisible both to the internal and external senses.

"Sahasrara (viz., the thousand-petalled lotus of the pineal gland) Jalajyotis [*1] is the antarlakshya. Some say the form of Purusha in the cave of buddhi beautiful in all its parts is antarlakshya. Some again say that the all-quiescent Nilakantha accompanied by Uma (his wife) and having five mouths and latent in the midst of the sphere in the brain is antarlakshya. Whilst others say that the Purusha of the dimension of a thumb is antarlakshya. A few again say antarlakshya is the One Self made supreme through introvision in the state of a jivanmukta. All the different statements above made pertain to Atma alone. He alone is a Brahmanishtha who sees that the above lakshya is the pure Atma. The jiva which is the twenty-fifth tattva, having abandoned the twenty-four tattvas, becomes a jivanmukta through the conviction that the twenty-sixth tattva (viz.,) Paramatma is 'I' alone. Becoming one with antarlakshya (Brahman) in the emancipated state by means of antarlakshya (introvision), jiva becomes one with the partless sphere of Paramakas'.

"Thus ends the first Brahmana."

  

BRaHMAnA II

Then Yajnavalkya asked the Purusha in the sphere of the sun: "O Lord, antarlakshya has been described many times, but it has never been understood by me (clearly). Pray describe it to me." He replied: "It is the source of the five elements, has the lustre of many (streaks of) lightning, and has four seats having (or rising from) 'That' (Brahman). In its midst, there arises the manifestation of tattva. It is very hidden and unmanifested. It can be known (only) by one who has got into the boat of jnana. It is the object of both bahir and antar (external and internal) lakshyas. In its midst is absorbed

[p. 247]

the whole world. It is the vast partless universe beyond Nada, Bindu and Kara. Above it (viz., the sphere of agni) is the sphere of the sun; in its midst is the sphere of the nectary moon; in its midst is the sphere of the partless Brahma-tejas (or the spiritual effulgence of Brahman). It has the brightness of S'ukla (white light) [*1] like the ray of lightning. It alone has the characteristic of S'ambhavi. In seeing this, there are three kinds of drshti (sight), viz., ama (the new moon), pratipat (the first day of lunar fortnight), and purnima (the full moon). The sight of ama is the one (seen) with closed eyes. That with half opened eyes is pratipat; while that with fully opened eyes is purnima. Of these, the practice of purnima should be resorted to. Its lakshya (or aim) is the tip of the nose. Then is seen a deep darkness at the root of the palate. By practising thus, a jyotis (light) of the form of an endless sphere is seen. This alone is Brahman, the Sachchidananda. When the mind is absorbed in bliss thus naturally produced, then does S'ambhavi take place. She (S'ambhavi) alone is called Khechari. By practising it (viz., the mudra), a man obtains firmness of mind. Through it, he obtains firmness of vayu. The following are the signs: first it is seen like a star; then a reflecting (or dazzling) diamond; [*2] then the sphere of full moon; then the sphere of the brightness of nine gems; then the sphere of the midday sun; then the sphere of the flame of agni (fire); all these are seen in order.

"(Thus much for the light in purva or first stage.) Then there is the light in the western direction (in the uttara or second stage). Then the lustres of crystal, smoke, bindu, nada, kala, star, firefly, lamp, eye, gold, and nine gems, etc. are seen. This alone is the form of Pranava. Having united Prana and Apana and holding the breath in kumbhaka, one should fix his concentration at the tip of his nose and making shanmukhi [*3] with the fingers of both his hands, one hears

[p. 248]

the sound of Pranava (Om) in which manas becomes absorbed. Such a man has not even the touch of karma. The karma of (Sandhyavandana or the daily prayers) is verily performed at the rising or setting of the sun. As there is no rising or setting (but only the ever shining) of the sun of Chit (the higher consciousness) in the heart of a man who knows thus, he has no karma to perform. Rising above (the conception of) day and night through the annihilation of sound and time, he becomes one with Brahman through the all-full jnana and the attaining of the state of unmani (the state above manas). Through the state of unmani, he becomes amanaska (or without manas).

"Not being troubled by any thoughts (of the world) then constitutes the dhyana. [*1] The abandoning of all karmas constitutes avahana (invocation of god). Being firm in the unshaken (spiritual) wisdom constitutes asana (posture). Being in the state of unmani constitutes the padya (offering of water for washing the feet of god). Preserving the state of amanaska (when manas is offered as sacrifice) constitutes the arghya (offering of water as oblation generally). Being in state of eternal brightness and shoreless nectar constitutes snana (bathing). The contemplation of Atma as present in all constitutes (the application to the idol of) sandal. The remaining in the real state of the drk (spiritual eye) is (the worshipping with) akshata;(non-broken rice). The attaining of Chit (consciousness) is (the worshipping with) flower. The real state of agni (fire) of Chit is the dhupa (burning of incense). The state of the sun of Chit is the dipa (light waved before the image). The union of oneself with the nectar of full moon is the naivedya (offering of food, etc.). [*2] The immobility in that state (of the ego being one with all) is pradakshina (going round the image). The conception of 'I am He' is namaskara (prostration). The silence (then) is the stuti (praise). The all-contentment (or serenity then) is the visarjana (giving leave to god or finishing worship). (This is

[p. 249]

the worship of Atma by all Raja-yogins). He who knows this knows all.

"When the triputi [*1] are thus dispelled, he becomes the kaivalya jyotis without bhava (existence) or abhava (nonexistence), full and motionless, like the ocean without the tides or like the lamp without the wind. He becomes a brahmavit (knower of Brahman) by cognising the end of the sleeping state, even while in the waking state. Though the (same) mind is absorbed in sushupti as also in samadhi, there is much difference between them. (In the former case) as the mind is absorbed in tamas, it does not become the means of salvation, (but) in samadhi as the modifications of tamas in him are rooted away, the mind raises itself to the nature of the Partless. All that is no other than Sakshi-Chaitanya (witness-consciousness or the Higher Self) into which the absorption of the whole universe takes place, inasmuch as the universe is but a delusion (or creation) of the mind and is therefore not different from it. Though the universe appears perhaps as outside of the mind, still it is unreal. He who knows Brahman and who is the sole enjoyer of brahmic bliss which is eternal and has dawned once (for all in him)--that man becomes one with Brahman. He in whom sankalpa perishes has got mukti in his hand. Therefore one becomes an emancipated person through the contemplation of Paramatma. Having given up both bhava and abhava, one becomes a jivanmukta by leaving off again and again in all states jnana (wisdom) and jneya (object of wisdom), dhyana (meditation) and dhyeya (object of meditation), lakshya (the aim) and alakshya (non-aim), drs'ya (the visible) and adrs'ya (the non-visible and uha (reasoning) and apoha (negative reasoning). [*2] He who knows this knows all.

"There are five avasthas (states), viz.: jagrat (waking), svapna (dreaming), sushupti (dreamless sleeping), the turya (fourth) and turyatita (that beyond the fourth). The jiva (ego) that is engaged in the waking state becomes attached to the pravrtti (worldly) path and is the participator of naraka (hell) as the

[p. 250]

fruit of sins. He desires svarga (heaven) as the fruit of his virtuous actions. This very same person becomes (afterwards) indifferent to all these saying, "Enough of the births tending to actions, the fruits of which tend to bondage till the end of this mundane existence." Then he pursues the nivrtti (return) path with a view to attain emancipation. And this person then takes refuge in a spiritual instructor in order to cross this mundane existence. Giving up passion and others, he does only those he is asked to do. Then having acquired the four sadhanas (means to salvation), he attains, in the middle of the lotus of his heart, the Reality of antarlakshya that is but the Sat of Lord and begins to recognise (or recollect) the bliss of Brahman which he had left (or enjoyed) in his sushupti state. At last he attains this state of discrimination (thus): 'I think I am the non-dual One only. I was in ajnana for some time (in the waking state and called therefore Vis'va). I became somehow (or involuntarily) a Taijasa (in the dreaming state) through the reflection (in that state) of the affinities of the forgotten waking state; and now I am a Prajna through the disappearance of those two states. Therefore I am one only. I (appear) as more than one through the differences of state and place. And there is nothing of differentiation of class besides me.' Having expelled even the smack of the difference (of conception) between 'I' and 'That' through the thought 'I am the pure and the secondless Brahman', and having attained the path of salvation which is of the nature of Parabrahman, after having become one with It through the dhyana of the sun's sphere as shining with himself, he becomes fully ripened for getting salvation. Sankalpa and others are the causes of the bondage of the mind; and the mind devoid of these becomes fit for salvation. Possessing such a mind free from all (sankalpa, etc.,) and withdrawing himself from the outer world of sight and others and so keeping himself out of the odour of the universe, he looks upon all the world as Atma, abandons the conception of 'I', thinks I am Brahman' and considers all these as Atma. Through these, he becomes one who has done his duty.

[p. 251]

"The yogin is one that has realised Brahman that is all-full beyond turya. They (the people) extol him as Brahman; and becoming the object of the praise of the whole world, he wanders over different countries. Placing the bindu in the akas' of Paramatma and pursuing the path of the partless bliss produced by the pure, secondless, stainless, and innate yoga sleep of amanaska, he becomes an emancipated person. Then the yogin becomes immersed in the ocean of bliss. When compared to it, the bliss of Indra and others is very little. He who gets this bliss is the supreme yogin.

"Thus ends the second Brahmana."

  

BRaHMAnA III

The great sage Yajnavalkya then asked the Purusha in the sphere (of the sun): "O Lord, though the nature of amanaska has been defined (by you), yet I forget it (or do not understand it clearly). Therefore pray explain it again to me." Accordingly the Purusha said: "This amanaska is a great secret. By knowing this, one becomes a person who has done his duty. One should look upon it as Paramatma, associated with S'ambhavimudra and should know also all those that can be known through a (thorough) cognition of them. Then seeing Parabrahman in his own Atma as the Lord of all, the immeasurable, the birthless, the auspicious, the supreme akas', the supportless, the secondless the only goal of Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra and the cause of all and assuring himself that he who plays in the cave (of the heart) is such a one, he should raise himself above the dualities of existence and non-existence; and knowing the experience of the unmani of his manas, he then attains the state of Parabrahman which is motionless as a lamp in a windless place, having reached the ocean of brahmic bliss by means of the river of amanaska-yoga through the destruction of all his senses. Then he resembles a dry tree. Having lost all (idea of) the universe through the disappearance of growth, sleep, disease, expiration and inspiration, his body being always steady, he comes to have a supreme quiescence, being devoid of the movements of

[p. 252]

his manas and becomes absorbed in Paramatma. The destruction of manas takes place after the destruction of the collective senses, like the cow's udder (that shrivels up) after the milk has been drawn. It is this that is amanaska. By following this, one becomes always pure and becomes one that has done his duty, having been filled with the partless bliss by means of the path of taraka-yoga through the initiation into the sacred sentences 'I am Paramatma,' 'That art thou,' 'I am thou alone,' 'Thou art I alone,' etc.

"When his manas is immersed in the akas' and he becomes all-full, and when he attains the unmani state, having abandoned all his collective senses, he conquers all sorrows and impurities through the partless bliss, having attained the fruits of kaivalya, ripened through the collective merits gathered in all his previous lives and thinking always 'I am Brahman,' becomes one that has done his duty. 'I am thou alone. There is no difference between thee and me owing to the fullness of Paramatma.' Saying thus, he (the Purusha of the sun) embraced his pupil [*1] and made him understand it.

"Thus ends the third Brahmana."

  

BRaHMAnA IV

Then Yajnavalkya addressed the Purusha in the sphere (of the sun) thus: "Pray explain to me in detail the nature of the fivefold division of akas'." He replied: "There are five (viz.): akas', parakas', mahakas', suryakas', and paramakas'. That which is of the nature of darkness, both in and out is the first akas'. That which has the fire of the deluge, both in and out is truly mahakas'. That which has the brightness of the sun, both in and out is suryakas'. That brightness which is indescribable, all-pervading and of the nature of unrivalled bliss is paramakas'. By cognising these according to this description, one becomes of their nature. He is a yogin only in name, who does not cognise well the nine chakras, the six adharas, the three lakshyas and the five akas'. Thus ends the fourth Brahmana."

[p. 253]

  

BRaHMAnA V

"The manas influenced by worldly objects is liable to bondage; and that (manas) which is not so influenced by these is fit for salvation. Hence all the world becomes an object of chitta; whereas the same chitta when it is supportless and well-ripe in the state of unmani, becomes worthy of laya (absorption in Brahman). This absorption you should learn from me who am the all-full. I alone am the cause of the absorption of manas. The manas is within the jyotis (spiritual light) which again is latent in the spiritual sound which pertains to the anahata (heart) sound. That manas which is the agent of creation, preservation, and destruction of the three worlds--that same manas becomes absorbed in that which is the highest seat of Vishnu; through such an absorption, one gets the pure and secondless state, owing to the absence of difference then. This alone is the highest truth. He who knows this, will wander in the world like a lad or an idiot or a demon or a simpleton. By practising this amanaska, one is ever contented, his urine and faeces become diminished, his food becomes lessened: he becomes strong in body and his limbs are free from disease and sleep. Then his breath and eyes being motionless, he realises Brahman and attains the nature of bliss.

"That ascetic who is intent on drinking the nectar of Brahman produced by the long practice of this kind of samadhi, becomes a paramahamsa (ascetic) or an avadhuta (naked ascetic). By seeing him, all the world becomes pure, and even an illiterate person who serves him is freed from bondage. He (the ascetic) enables the members of his family for one hundred and one generations to cross the ocean of samsara; and his mother, father, wife, and children--all these are similarly freed. Thus is the Upanishad. Thus ends the fifth Brahmana."

Footnotes

^243:1 Mandala means sphere. As the Purusha in the mandala or sphere of the sun gives out this Upanishad to Yajnavalkya, hence it is called Mandala-Brahmana. It is very mystic. There is a book called Rajayoga Bhashya which is a commentary thereon; in the light of it which is by some attributed to S'ri Sankaracharya, notes are given herein.

^244:1 Comm.: Rising above the seven Pranas, one should with introvision cognise in the region of Akas, Tamas and should then make Tamas get into Rajas, Rajas into Sattva, Sattva into Narayana and Narayana, into the Supreme One.

^244:2 Taraka is from tr., to cross, as it enables one to cross samsara. The higher vision is here said to take place in a centre between the eyebrows--probably in the brain.

^245:1 The commentator puts it as 12 digits above the root of the palate--perhaps the Dvadasanta or twelfth centre corresponding to the pituitary body.

^246:1 The commentator to support the above that antarlakshya, viz., Brahman is jala- or water-jyotis quotes the Pranayama-Gayatri which says: "Om Apojyoti-raso'amrtam-Brahma, etc."--Apo-jyotis or water-jyotis is Brahman.

^247:1 Comm.: S'ukla is Brahman.

^247:2 The original is, 'Vajra-Darpanam.'

^247:3 Shanmukhi is said to be the process of hearing the internal sound by closing the two ears with the two thumbs, the two eyes with the two forefingers, the two nostrils with the two middle fingers, and the mouth with the remaining two fingers of both hands.

^248:1 In this paragraph, the higher or secret meaning is given of all actions done in the puja or worship of God in the Hindu houses as well as temples. Regarding the clothing of the idol which is left out here, the commentator explains it as avarana or screen.

^248:2 Here also the commentator brings in nirajana or the waving of the light before the image. That is according to him, the idea, "I am the self-shining."

^249:1 The Triputi are the three, the knower, the known and the knowledge. Comm.: Dhyana and others stated before wherein the three distinctions are made.

^249:2 Uha and apoha--the consideration of the pros and cons.

^252:1 This is a reference to the secret way of imparting higher truth.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 254]

  

NADABINDU [*1]-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

RGVEDA

THE syllable A is considered to be its (the bird Om's) right wing, U, its left: M [*2], its tail; and the ardhamatra (half-metre) is said to be its head.

The (rajasic and tamasic) qualities, its feet upwards (to the loins); sattva, its (main) body;  [*3] dharma is  to be its right eye, and adharma, its left.

The Bhurloka is situated in its feet; the Bhuvarloka, in its knees; the Suvarloka, in its loins; and the Maharloka, in its navel.

In its heart is situate the Janoloka; the tapoloka in its throat, and the Satyaloka in the centre of the forehead between the eyebrows.

Then the matra (or mantra) beyond the Sahasrara (thousand-rayed) is explained (viz.,) should be explained.

An adept in yoga who bestrides the Hamsa (bird) thus (viz., contemplates on Om) is not affected by karmic influences or by tens of crores of sins. [*4]

[p. 255]

The first matra has agni as its devata (presiding deity); the second, vayu as its devata; the next matra is resplendent like the sphere of the sun and the last, the Ardhamatra the wise know as belonging to Varuna (the presiding deity of water) .

Each of these matras has indeed three kalas (parts). This is called Omkara. Know it by means of the dharanas, viz., concentration on each of the twelve kalas, or the variations of the matras produced by the difference of svaras or intonation). The first matra is called ghoshini; the second, vidyunmali (or vidyunmatra); the third, patangini; the fourth, vayuvegini; the fifth, namadheya; the sixth, aindri; the seventh, vaishnavi; the eighth, s'ankari; the ninth, mahati; the tenth, dhrti (dhruva, Calcutta ed.); the eleventh, nari (mauni, Calcutta ed.); and the twelfth, brahmi. [*1]

If a person happens to die in the first matra (while contemplating on it), he is born again as. a great emperor in Bharatavarsha.

If in the second matra, he becomes an illustrious yaksha; if in the third matra, a vidyadhara; if in the fourth, a gandharva (these three being the celestial hosts).

If he happens to die in the fifth, viz., ardhamatra, he lives in the world of the moon, with the rank of a deva greatly glorified there.

If in the sixth, he merges into Indra; if in the seventh, he reaches the seat of Vishnu; if in the eighth, Rudra, the Lord of all creatures.

If in the ninth, in Maharloka; if in the tenth, in Janoloka (Dhruvaloka, Calcutta ed.); if in the eleventh, Tapoloka, and if in the twelfth, he attains the eternal [*2] state of Brahma.

[p. 256]

That which is beyond these, (viz.,) Parabrahman which is beyond (the above matras), the pure, the all-pervading, beyond kalas, the ever resplendent and the source of all jyotis (light) should be known.

 [*1] When the mind goes beyond the organs and the gunas and is absorbed, having no separate existence and no mental action, then (the guru) should instruct him (as to his further course of development).

That person always engaged in its contemplation and always absorbed in it should gradually leave off his body (or family) following the course of yoga and avoiding all intercourse with society.

Then he, being freed from the bonds of karma and the existence as a jiva and being pure, enjoys the supreme bliss by his attaining of the state of Brahma. [*2]

O intelligent man, spend your life always in the knowing of the supreme bliss, enjoying the whole of your prarabdha (that portion of past karma now being enjoyed) without making ally complaint (of it).

Even after atmajnana (knowledge of Mind or Self) has awakened (in one), prarabdha does not leave (him); but he does not feel prarabdha after the dawning of tattvajnana [*3] (knowledge of tattva or truth) because the body and other things are asat (unreal), like the things seen in a dream to one on awaking from it.

That (portion of the) karma which is done in former births, and called prarabdha does not at all affect the person (tattvajnani), as there is no rebirth 'to him.

As the body that exists in the dreaming state is untrue, so is this body. Where then is rebirth to a thing that is illusory? How can a thing have any existence, when there is no birth (to it)?

As the clay is the material cause of the pot, so one learns from Vedanta that ajnana is the material cause of the

[p. 257]

universe: and when ajnana ceases to exist, where then is the cosmos?

As a person through illusion mistakes a rope for a serpent, so the fool not knowing Satya (the eternal truth) sees the world (to be true.)

When he knows it to be a piece of rope, the illusory idea of a serpent vanishes.

So when he knows the eternal substratum of everything and all the universe becomes (therefore) void (to him), where then is prarabdha to him, the body being a part of the world? Therefore the word prarabdha is accepted to enlighten the ignorant (only).

Then as prarabdha has, in course of time, worn out, he who is the sound resulting from the union of Pranava with Brahman who is the absolute effulgence itself, and who is the bestower of all good, shines himself like the sun at the dispersion of the clouds.

The yogin being in the siddhasana (posture) and practising the vaishnavimudra, should always hear the internal sound through the right ear.

The sound which he thus practises makes him deaf to all external sounds. Having overcome all obstacles, he enters the turya state within fifteen days.

In the beginning of his practice, he hears many loud sounds. They gradually increase in pitch and are heard more and more subtly.

At first, the sounds are like those proceeding from- the ocean, clouds, kettle-drum, and cataracts: in the middle (stage) those proceeding from mardala (a musical instrument), bell, and horn.

At the last stage, those proceeding from tinkling bells, flute, vina (a musical instrument), and bees. Thus he hears many such sounds more and more subtle.

When he comes to that stage when the sound of the great kettle-drum is being heard, he should try to distinguish only sounds more and more subtle.

He may change his concentration from the gross sound to the subtle, or from the subtle to the gross, but he should not allow his mind to be diverted from them towards others.

[p. 258]

The mind having at first concentrated itself on any one sound fixes firmly to that and is absorbed in it.

It (the mind) becoming insensible to the external impressions, i becomes one with the sound as milk with water, and then becomes rapidly absorbed in chidakas' (the akas' where Chit prevails).

Being indifferent towards all objects, the yogin having controlled his passions, should by continual practice concentrate his attention upon the sound which destroys the mind.

Having abandoned all thoughts and being freed from all actions, he should always concentrate his attention on the sound, and (then) his chitta becomes absorbed in it.

Just as the bee drinking the honey (alone) does not care for the odour, so the chitta which is always absorbed in sound, does not long for sensual objects, as it is bound by the sweet smell of nada and has abandoned its flitting nature.

The serpent chitta through listening to the nada is entirely absorbed in it, and becoming unconscious of everything concentrates itself on the sound.

The sound serves the purpose of a sharp goad to control the maddened elephant--chitta which roves in the pleasure-garden of the sensual objects.

It serves the purpose of a snare for binding the deer--chitta. It also serves the purpose of a shore to the ocean waves of chitta.

The sound proceeding from Pranava which is Brahman is of the nature of effulgence; the mind becomes absorbed in it; that is the supreme seat of Vishnu.

The sound exists till there is the akas'ic conception (akas'asankalpa). Beyond this, is the (as'abda) soundless Parabrahman which is Paramatma.

The mind exists so long as there is sound, but with its (sound's) cessation, there is the state called unmani of manas (viz., the state of being above the mind).

This sound is absorbed in the Akshara (indestructible) and the soundless state is the supreme seat.

The mind which along with Prana (Vayu) has (its) karmic affinities destroyed by the constant concentration upon nada is absorbed in the unstained One. There is no doubt of it.

[p. 259]

Many myriads of nadas and many more of bindus--(all) become absorbed in the Brahma-Pranava sound.

Being freed from all states and all thoughts whatever, the yogin remains like one dead. He is a mukta. There is no doubt about this.

After that, he does not at any time hear the sounds of conch or dundubhi (large kettle-drum).

The body in the state of unmani is certainly like a log and does not feel heat or cold, joy or sorrow.

The yogin's chitta having given up fame or disgrace is in samadhi above the three states.

Being freed from the waking and the sleeping states, he attains to his true state.

When the (spiritual) sight becomes fixed without any object to be seen, when the vayu (prana) becomes still without any effort, and when the chitta becomes firm without any support, he becomes of the form of the internal sound of Brahma-Pranava.

Such is the Upanishad.

Footnotes

^254:1 Lit., Sound-seed.

^254:2 The commentator says that M is the last letter and hence tail and ardhamatra is the head, as it enables one to attain to higher worlds.

^254:3 Another reading is: The qualities are its feet, etc., and Tattva is its body.

^254:4 Comm.: Since this mantra has already occurred in the preceding khanda of the same sakha, it is simply referred in the text. The mantra is:

The meaning seems to be--the letters A and U are the two wings of the Hamm (Om) of the form of Vishnu which goes to svarga, the abode of Surya, the thousand-rayed God; that syllable, 'Om' bearing in its heart all the devas (of sattvaguna). He goes up to Sahasranha seeing the worlds personally: Sahasranha being the seat of the spiritual sun.

^255:1 Comm.: The four matras are subdivided into twelve by their having each three svaras, Udatta, Anudatta, and Svarita. Here the author goes on to give the names of the twelve kalas and shows the method of practising Dharana on each. Ghoshini is that which gives Prajna: Vidyunmali is that which secures entrance into the loka of Vidyunmali, the king of the yakshas: Patangini is that which confers the power of movement through air like the bird Patangini; Vayuvegini is that which gives the power of moving very rapidly: Namadheya means that which confers existence in Pitrloka: Aindri in Indraloka: Vaishnavi and Sankari in Vishnu and Siva-lokas respectively: Mauni to the loka of Munis or Janoloka and Brahmi to Brahmaloka.

^255:2 Eternal here means the lifetime of Brahma.

^256:1 Another edition says: he should enter through yoga the incomparable and quiescent S'iva.

^256:2 Here the Calcutta edition stops.

^256:3 Tattvajnana is the discrimination of the tattvas of this universe and man. Atmajnana--the discrimination of Atma or the Self in man.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 260]

  

YOGAKUNDALI [*1]-UPANISHAD

  

OF

  

KRSHNA-YAJURVEDA

  

CHAPTER I

CHIttA [*2] has two causes, vasanas and (prana) vayu. If-one of them is controlled, then both are controlled. Of these two, a person should control (prana) vayu always through moderate food, postures, and thirdly s'akti-chala. [*3] I shall explain the nature of these. Listen to it, O Gautama. One should take a sweet and nutritious food, [*4] leaving a fourth (of his stomach) unfilled) in order to please S'iva (the patron of yogins). This is called moderate food. Posture herein required is of two kinds, padma and vajra. Placing the two heels over the two opposite thighs (respectively) is the padma (posture) which is the destroyer of all sins. Placing one heel below the mulakanda [*5] and the other over it and sitting with the neck, body and head erect is the vajra posture. The s'akti (mentioned above) is only kundalini. A wise man should take it up from its place (viz., the navel, upwards) to the middle of the eyebrows. This is called s'akti-chala. In practising it, two things are necessary,

[p. 261]

[paragraph continues] Sarasvatichalana [*1] and the restraint of prana (breath). Then through practice, kundalini (which is spiral) becomes straightened. Of these two, I shall explain to you first Sarasvati-chalana. It is said by the wise of old that Sarasvati is no other than Arundhati. [*2] It is only by rousing her up that kundalini is roused. When prana (breath) is passing through (one's) Ida (left nostril), he should assume firmly padma-posture and should lengthen (inwards) 4 digits the akas' of 12 digits. [*3] Then the wise man should bind the (sarasvati) nadi by means of this lengthened (breath) and holding firmly together(both his ribs near the navel) by means of the forefingers and thumbs of both hands, (one hand on each side) should stir up kundalini with all his might from right to left often and often; for a period of two muhurtas (48 minutes), he should be stirring it up fearlessly. Then he should draw up a little when kundalini enters sushumna. By this means, kundalini enters the mouth of sushumna. Prana (also) having left (that place) enters of itself the sushumna (along with kundalini). By compressing the neck, one should also expand the navel. Then by shaking sarasvati, prana goes above (to) the chest. Through the contraction of the neck, prays, goes above from the chest. Sarasvati who has sound in her womb should be shaken (or thrown into vibration) each day. Therefore by merely shaking it, one is cured of diseases. Gulma (a splenetic disease), jalodara (dropsy), pliha (a splenetic disease) and all other diseases arising within the belly, are undoubtedly destroyed by shaking this S'akti.

I shall now briefly describe to you pranayama. Prana is the vayu that moves in the body and its restraint within is known as kumbhaka. It is of two kinds, sahita and kevala. [*4] One should practise sahita till he gets kevala. There are four bhedas (lit., piercings or divisions) viz., surya, ujjayi, s'itali, and bhastri.

[p. 262]

[paragraph continues] The kumbhaka associated with these four is called sahita kumbhaka.

Being seated in the padma posture upon a pure and pleasant seat which gives ease and is neither too high nor too low, and in a place which is pure, lovely and free from pebbles, etc., and which for the length of a bow is free from cold, fire, and water, one should shake (or throw into vibration) Sarasvati; slowly inhaling the breath from outside, as long as he desires, through the right nostril, he should exhale it through the left nostril. He should exhale it after purifying his skull (by forcing the breath up). This destroys the four kinds of evils caused by vayu as also by intestinal worms. This should be done often and it is this which is spoken of as suryabheda.

Closing the mouth and drawing up slowly the breath as before with the nose through both the nadis (or nostrils) and retaining it in the space between the heart and the neck, one should exhale it through the left nostril. This destroys the heat caused in the head as well as the phlegm in the throat. It removes all diseases, purifies his body and increases the (gastric) fire within. It removes also the evils arising in the nadis, jalodara (water-belly or dropsy) and dhatus. This kumbhaka is called ujjayi and may be practised (even) when walking or standing.

Drawing up the breath as before through the tongue with (the hissing sound of) ###2360### and retaining it as before, the wise man should slowly exhale it through (both) the nostrils. This is called s'itali kumbhaka and destroys diseases, such as gulma, pliha, consumption, bile, fever, thirst, and poison.

Seated in the padma posture with belly and neck erect, the wise man should close the mouth and exhale with care through the nostrils. Then he should inhale a little with speed up to the heart, so that the breath may fill the space with noise between the neck and skull. Then he should exhale in the same way and inhale often and often. Just as the bellows of a smith are moved (viz., stuffed with air within and then the air is let out), so he should move the air within his body. If the body gets tired, then he should inhale through the right nostril. If his belly is full of vayu, then he should press well his nostrils with

[p. 263]

all his fingers except his forefinger, and performing kumbhaka as before, should exhale through the left nostril. This frees one from diseases of fire in (or inflammation of) the throat, increases the gastric fire within, enables one to know the kundalini, produces purity removing sins, gives happiness and pleasure and destroys phlegm which is the bolt (or obstacle) to the door at the mouth of brahmanadi (viz., sushumna). It pierces also the three granthis [*1] (or knots) differentiated through the three gunas. This kumbhaka is known as bhastri and should especially be performed.

Through these four ways when kumbhaka is near (or is about to be performed.), the sinless yogin should practise the three bandhas. [*2] The first is called mulabandha. The second is called uddiyana, and the third is jalandhara. Their nature will be thus described. Apana (breath) which has a downward tendency is forced up by one bending down. This process is called mulabandha. When apana is raised up and reaches the sphere of agni (fire), then the flame of agni grows long, being blown about by vayu. Then agni and apana come to (or commingle with) prana in a heated state. Through this agni which is very fiery, there arises in the body the flaming (or the fire) which rouses the sleeping kundalini through its heat. Then this kundalini makes a hissing noise, becomes erect like a serpent beaten with stick and enters the hole of brahmanadi (sushumna). Therefore yogins should daily practise mulabandha often. Uddiyana should be performed at the end of kumbhaka and at the beginning of expiration. Because prana uddiyate (viz., goes up) the sushumna in this bandha, therefore it called uddiyana by the yogins. Being seated in the vajra posture, and holding firmly the two toes by the two hands, he should press at the kanda and at the place near the two ankles. Then he should gradually upbear the tana [*3] (thread or nadi) which is on the western side first to udara (the upper part of the abdomen above the navel), then to the heart and then to the neck. When prana reaches the sandhi (junction) of navel, slowly it removes

[p. 264]

the impurities (or diseases) in the navel. Therefore this should be frequently practised. The bandha called jalandhara should be practised at the end of kumbhaka. This jalandhara is of the form of the contraction of the neck and is an impediment to the passage of vayu (upwards). When the neck is contracted at once by bending downwards (so that the chin may touch the breast), prana goes through brahmanadi on the western tana in the middle. Assuming the seat as mentioned before, one should stir up sarasvati and control prana. On the first day kumbhaka should be done four times; on the second day it should be done ten times, and then five times separately; on the third day, twenty times will do, and afterwards kumbhaka should be performed with the three bandhas and with an increase of five times each day.

Diseases are generated in one's body through the following causes, viz., sleeping in daytime, late vigils over night, excess of sexual intercourse, moving in crowd, the checking of the discharge of urine and faeces, the evil of unwholesome food and laborious mental operation with prana. If a yogin is afraid of such diseases (when attacked by them), he says, "my diseases have arisen from my practice of yoga." Then he will discontinue this practice. This is said to be the first obstacle to yoga The second (obstacle) is doubt; the third is carelessness; the fourth, laziness; the fifth, sleep; the sixth, the not leaving of objects (of sense); the seventh, erroneous perception; the eighth, sensual objects; the ninth, want of faith; [*1] and the tenth, the failure to attain the truth of yoga. A wise man should abandon these ten obstacles after great deliberation. The practice of pranayama should be performed daily with the mind firmly fixed on Truth. Then chitta is absorbed in sushumna, and prana (therefore) never moves. When the impurities (of chitta) are thus removed and prana is absorbed in sushumna, he becomes a (true) yogin. Apana, which has a downward tendency should be raised up with effort by the contraction (of the anus), and this is spoken of as mulabandha. Apana thus raised up mixes with agni and

[p. 265]

then they go up quickly to the seat of prana. Then prana and apana uniting with one another go to kundalini, which is coiled up and asleep. Kundalini being heated by agni and stirred up by vayu, extends her body in the mouth of sushumna, pierces the brahmagranthi formed of rajas, and flashes at once like lightning at the mouth of sushumna. Then it goes up at once through vishnugranthi to the heart. Then it goes up through rudragranthi and above it to the middle of the eyebrows; having pierced this place, it goes up to the mandala (sphere) of the moon. It dries up the moisture produced by the moon in the anahatachakra having sixteen petals. [*1] When the blood is agitated through the speed of prana, it becomes bile from its contact with the sun, after which it goes to the sphere of the moon where it becomes of the nature of the flow of pure phlegm. How does it (blood) which is very cold become hot when it flows there? (Since) at the same time the intense white form of moon is speedily heated. [*2] Then being agitated, it goes up. Through taking in this, chitta which was moving amidst sensual objects externally, is restrained there. The novice enjoying this high state attains peace and becomes devoted to Atma. Kundalini assumes the eight [*3] forms of prakrti (matter) and attains S'iva by encircling him and dissolves itself in S'iva. Thus rajas-s'ukla [*4] (seminal fluid) which rises up goes to S'iva along with marut (vayu); prana and apana which are always produced become equal. Pranas flow in all things, great and small, describable or indescribable, as fire in gold. Then this body which is adhibhautika (composed of elements) becomes adhidaivata (relating to a tutelar deity) and is thus purified. Then it attains the stage of ativahika. [*5] Then the body being freed from the inert state

[p. 266]

becomes stainless and of the nature of Chit. In it, the ativahika becomes the chief of all, being of the nature of That. Like the conception of the snake in a rope, so the idea of the release from wife and samsara is the delusion of time. Whatever appears is unreal. Whatever is absorbed is unreal. Like the illusory conception of silver in the mother-of-pearl, so is the idea of man and woman. The microcosm and the macrocosm are one and the same; so also the linga and sutratma, svabhava (substance) and form and the self-resplendent light and Chidatma.

The S'akti named kundalini, which is like a thread in the lotus and is resplendent, is biting with the upper end of its hood (namely, mouth) at the root of the lotus the mulakanda. Taking hold of its tail with its mouth, it is in contact with the hole of brahmarandhra (of sushumna). If a person seated in the pad ma posture and having accustomed himself to the contraction of his anus makes his vayu go upward with the mind intent on kumbhaka, then agni comes to svadhishthana flaming, owing to the blowing of vayu. From the blowing of vayu and agni, the chief (kundalini) pierces open the brahmagranthi and then vishnugranthi. Then it pierces rudragranthi, after that, (all) the six lotuses (or plexuses). Then S'akti is happy with S'iva in sahasrara kamala (1,000 lotuses' seat or pineal gland). This should be known as the highest avastha (state) and it alone is the giver of final beatitude. Thus ends the first chapter.

  

CHAPTER II

I shall hereafter describe the science called khechari which is such that one who knows it is freed from old age and death in this world. One who is subject to the pains of death, disease and old age should, O sage, on knowing this science make his mind firm and practise khechari. One should regard that person as his guru on earth who knows khechari, the destroyer of old age and death, both from knowing the meaning of books and practice, and should perform it with all his heart. The science of khechari is not easily attainable, as also its practice.

[p. 267]

[paragraph continues] Its practice and melana [*1] are not accomplished simultaneously. Those that are bent upon practice alone do not get melana. Only some get the practice, O Brahman, after several births, but melana is not obtained even after a hundred births. Having undergone the practice after several births, some (solitary) yogin gets the melana in some future birth as the result of his practice. When a yogin gets this melana from the mouth of his guru, then he obtains the siddhis mentioned in the several books. When a man gets this melana through books and the significance, then he attains the state of S'iva freed from all rebirth. Even gurus may not be able to know this without books. Therefore this science is very difficult to master. An ascetic should wander over the earth so long as he fails to get this science, and when this science is obtained, then he has got the siddhi in his hand (viz., mastered the psychical powers). Therefore one should regard as Achyuta (Vishnu) the person who imparts the melana, as also him who gives out the science. He should regard as S'iva him who teaches the practice. Having got this science from me, you should not reveal it to others. Therefore one who knows this should protect it with all his efforts (viz., should never give it out except to persons who deserve it). O Brahman, one should go to the place where lives the guru, who is able to teach the divine yoga and there learn from him the science khechari, and being then taught well by him, should at first practise it carefully. By means of this science, a person will attain the siddhi of khechari. Joining with khechari s'akti (viz., kundalini s'akti) by means of the (science) of khechari which contains the bija (seed of letter) of khechari, one becomes the lord of khecharas (Devas) and lives always amongst them. Khechari bija (seed-letter) is spoken of as agni encircled with water and as the abode of khecharas (Devas). Through this yoga, siddhi is mastered. The ninth (bija) letter of somams'a (soma or moon part) should also be pronounced in the reverse order. Then a letter composed of three ams'as of the form of moon has been described; and after that, the eighth letter should be pronounced in

[p. 268]

the reverse order; then consider it as the supreme and its beginning as the fifth, and this is said to the kuta (horns) of the several bhinnas (or parts) of the moon. [*1] This which tends to the accomplishment of all yogas, should be learnt through the initiation of a guru. He who recites this twelve times every day, will not get even in sleep that maya (illusion) which is born in his body and which is the source of all vicious deeds. He who recites this five lakhs of times with very great care--to him the science of khechari will reveal itself. All obstacles vanish and the devas are pleased. The destruction of valipalita (viz., wrinkle and greyness of hair) will take place without doubt. Having acquired this great science, one should practise it afterwards. If not, O Brahman, he will suffer without getting any siddhi in the path of khechari. If one does not get this nectarlike science in this practice, he should get it in the beginning of melana and recite it always; (else) one who is without it never gets siddhi. As soon as he gets this science, he should practise it; and then the sage will soon get the siddhi. Having drawn out the tongue from the root of the palate, a knower of Atma should clear the impurity (of the tongue) for seven days according to the advice of his guru. He should take a sharp knife which is oiled and cleaned and which resembles the leaf of the plant snuhi ("Euphorbia antiquorum") and should cut for the space of a hair (the fraenum Lingui). Having powdered saindhava (rock-salt) and pathya (sea-salt), he should apply it to the place. On the seventh day, he should again cut for the space of a hair. Thus for the space of six months, he should continue it always gradually with great care. In six months, S'iro-bandha (bandha at the head), [*1] which is at the root of the tongue is destroyed. Then the yogin who knows timely action should encircle with S'iro-vastra (lit., the cloth of the head) the Vak-Is'vari (the deity presiding over speech) and should draw (it) up. Again by daily drawing it up for six months, it comes, O sage, as far as the middle of the eyebrows and obliquely up to the opening of the ears; having gradually practised, it goes to the root of the chin. Then in

[p. 269]

three years, it goes up easily to the end of the hair (of the head) It goes up obliquely to S'akha [*1] and downwards to the well of the throat. In another three years, it occupies brahmarandhra and stops there without doubt. Crosswise it goes up to the top of the head and downwards to the well of the throat. Gradually it opens the great adamantine door in the head. The rare science (of khechari) bija has been explained before. One should perform the six angas (parts) of this mantra by pronouncing it in six different intonations. One should do this in order to attain all the siddhis; and this karanyasam [*2] should be done gradually and not all at a time, since the body of one who does it all at once will soon decay. Therefore it should be practised, O best of sages, little by little. When the tongue goes to the brahmarandhra through the outer path, then one should place the tongue after moving the bolt of Brahma which cannot be mastered by the devas. On doing this for three years with the point of the finger, he should make the tongue enter within: then it enters brahmadvara (or hole). On entering the brahmadvara, one should practise mathana (churning) well. Some intelligent men attain siddhi even without mathana. One who is versed in khechari mantra accomplishes it without mathana. By doing the japa and mathana, one reaps the fruits soon. By connecting a wire made of gold, silver or iron with the nostrils by means of a thread soaked in milk, one should restrain his breath in his heart and seated in a convenient posture with his eyes concentrated between his eyebrows, he should perform mathana slowly. In six months, the state of mathana becomes natural like sleep in children. And it is not advisable to do mathana always. It should be done (once) only in every month. A yogin should not revolve his tongue in the path. After doing this for twelve years, siddhi is surely obtained. Then he sees the whole universe in his body as not being different from Atma. This path of the urdhvakundalini (higher kundalini), O chief of kings, conquers the macrocosm. Thus ends the second chapter.

[p. 270]

  

CHAPTER III

Melanamantra.--(Hrim), (bham), (sam), (sham), (pham), (sam), and (ksham).

The lotus-born (Brahma) said:

O S'ankara, (among) new moon (the first day of the lunar fortnight) and full moon, which is spoken of as its (mantra's) sign? In the first day of lunar fortnight and during new moon and full moon (days), it should be made firm and there is no other way (or time). A man longs for an object through passion and is infatuated with passion for objects. One should always leave these two and seek the Niranjana (stainless). He should abandon everything else which he thinks is favourable to himself. Keeping the manas in the midst of s'akti, and s'akti in the midst of manas, one should look into manas by means  manas. Then he leaves even the highest stage. Manas alone is the bindu, the cause of creation and preservation. It is only through manas that bindu is produced, like the curd from milk. The organs of manas is not that which is situated in the middle of bandhana. Bandhana is there where S'akti is between the sun and moon. Having known sushumna and its bheda (piercing) and making the vayu go in the middle, one should stand in the seat of bindu, and close the nostrils. Having known vayu, the above-mentioned bindu and the sattva-prakrti as well as the six chakras, one should enter the sukha-mandala (viz., the sahasrara or pineal gland, the sphere of happiness). There are six chakras. Muladhara is in the anus; svadhishthana is near the genital organ; manipuraka is in the navel; anahata is in the heart; vis'uddhi is at the root of the neck and ajna is in the head (between the two eyebrows). Having known these six mandalas (spheres), one should enter the sukhamandala (pineal gland), drawing up the vayu and should send it (vayu) upwards. He who practises thus (the control of) vayu becomes one with brahmanda (the macrocosm). He should practise (or master) vayu, bindu, chitta, and chakra.

Yogins attain the nectar of equality through samadhi alone. Just as the fire latent in (sacrificial) wood does not

[p. 271]

appear without churning, so the lamp of wisdom does not arise without the abhyasa yoga (or practice of yoga). The fire placed in a vessel does not give light outside. When the vessel is broken, its light appears without. One's body is spoken of as the vessel, and the seat of "That" is the fire (or light) within; and when it (the body) is broken through the words of a guru, the light of brahmajnana becomes resplendent. With the guru as the helmsman, one crosses the subtle body and the ocean of samsara through the affinities of practice. That vak [*1] (power of speech) which sprouts in para, gives forth two leaves in pas'yanti, buds forth in madhyama and blossoms in vaikhari--that vak which has before been described, reaches the stage of the absorption of sound, reversing the above order (viz., beginning with vaikhari, etc). Whoever thinks that He who is the great lord of that vak, who is the undifferentiated and who is the illuminator of that vak is Self; whoever thinks over thus, is never affected by words, high or low (or good or bad). The three (aspects [*2] of consciousness), vis'va, taijasa, and prajna (in man), the three Virat, Hiranyagarbha, and Is'vara in the universe, the egg of the universe, the egg of man [*3] and the seven worlds--all these in turn are absorbed in Pratyagatma through the absorption of their respective upadhis (vehicles). The egg being heated by the fire of jnana is absorbed with its karana (cause) into Paramatma (Universal Self). Then it becomes one with Parabrahman. It is then neither steadiness nor depth, neither light nor darkness, neither describable nor distinguishable. Sat (Be-ness) alone remains. One should think of Atma as being within the body like a light in a vessel. Atma is of the dimensions of a thumb, is a light without smoke and without form, is shining within (the body) and is undifferentiated and immutable.

[p. 272]

The Vijnana Atma that dwells in this body is deluded by maya during the states of waking, dreaming, and dreamless sleep; but after many births, owing to the effect of good karma, it wishes to attain its own state. Who am I? How has this stain of mundane existence accrued to me? What becomes in the dreamless sleep of me who am engaged in business in the waking and dreaming states? Just as a bale of cotton is burnt by fire, so the Chidabhasa [*1] which is the result of non-wisdom, is burnt by the (wise) thoughts like the above and by its own supreme illumination. The outer burning (of body as done in the world) is no burning at all. When the wordly wisdom is destroyed, Pratyagatma that is in the dahara (akas' or ether of the heart) obtains vijnana, diffusing itself everywhere and burns in an instant jnanamaya and manomaya (sheaths). After this, He himself shines always within, like a light within a vessel.

That muni who contemplates thus till sleep and till death is to be known as a jivanmukta. Having done what ought to be done, he is a fortunate person. And having given up (even) the state of a jivanmukta, he attains videhamu.kti (emancipation in a disembodied state), after his body wears off. He attains the state, as if of moving in the air. Then That alone remains which is soundless, touchless, formless, and deathless, which is the rasa (essence), eternal, and odourless, which has neither beginning nor end, which is greater than the great, and which is permanent, stainless, and decayless.

Thus ends the Upanishad.

Footnotes

^260:1 In this Upanishad are stated the ways by which the Kundalini power is roused from the navel upwards to the middle of the eyebrows and then up to sahasrara in the head: this being one of the important works of an adept to master the forces of nature.

^260:2 Chitta is the flitting aspect of Antahkarana.

^260:3 Lit., the moving of s'akti which is Kundalini.

^260:4 Regarding the quantity to be taken, one should take of solid food half of his stomach: of liquid food, one quarter, leaving the remaining quarter empty for the air to percolate.

^260:5 Mulakanda is the root of kanda, the genital organ.

^261:1 The moving of sarasvati nadi situated on the west of the navel among the 14 nadis (Vide Varaha and other Upanishads).

^261:2 Sarasvati is called also Arundhati who is literally one that helps good actions being done and the wife of Rshi Vasishtha--also the star that is shown to the bride on marriage occasions.

^261:3 In exhalation, prana goes out 16 digits and in inhalation, goes in only for 12, thus losing 4. But if inhaled for 16, then the power is aroused.

^261:4 Lit., associated with and alone. Vide S'andilya-Upanishad.

^263:1 They are Brahmagranthi, Vishnugranthi, and Rudragranthi.

^263:2 Bandhas are certain kinds of position of the body.

^263:3 This probably refers to Sarasvati Nadi.

^264:1 The text is Anakhiam which has no sense. It has been translated as Anastha.

^265:1 Twelve seems to be the right number of petals in the anahata-chakra of the heart; but the moon is probably meant having sixteen rays.

^265:2 The passages here are obscure.

^265:3 They are Mulaprakrti, Mahat, Ahankara and the five elements.

^265:4 Here it is the astral seminal fluid which, in the case of a neophyte, not having descended to a gross fluid through the absence of sexual desire, rises up being conserved as a spiritual energy.

^265:5 A stage of being able to convey to other bodies the deity appointed by God to help in the conveying of sukshma (subtle) body to other bodies at the expiry of good actions which contribute to the enjoyment of material pleasures (vide Apte's Dictionary).

^267:1 Melana is lit., joining. This is the key to this science which seems to be kept profoundly secret and revealed by adepts only at initiation, as will appear from the subsequent passages in this Upanishad.

^268:1 All these are very mystic.

^269:1 Probably it here means some part below the skull.

^269:2 Certain motions of the fingers and hands in the pronunciation of mantras.

^271:1 Vak is of four kinds (as said here) para, pasyanti, madhyama, and vaikhari. Vaikhari being the lowest and the grossest of sounds, and part being the highest. In evolution vak begins from the highest to the lowest and in involution it takes a reverse order, to merge into the highest subtle sound (Para).

^271:2 The first three aspects of consciousness refer to the gross, subtle, and karana bodies of men, while the second three aspects refer to the three bodies of the universe. This is from the standpoint of the three bodies.

^271:3 The egg of man--this shows that man in his formation is and appears as an egg, just as the universe is, and appears as an egg.

^272:1 It is the consciousness that becomes distorted and is unable to cognise itself through the bodies.

Thirty Minor Upanishads, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 273]

  

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES

A

ABHIMaNA <page 157>

Achyuta <page 37>

Adhibhautika <page 265>

Adhibhuta <page 64>

Adhidaivika <page 265>

Adhyatma <page 64>

Adhyatma-Upanishad <page 55>

Adityas <page 128>

Adityaloka <page 243>

Advaita <page 27>

Agneya-sacrifice <page 143>

Agni <page 46>, <page 61>, <page 62>, <page 75>, <page 113>, <page 116>, <page 121>, <page 187>, <page 197>, <page 237>

Agnihotra <page 138>

Agrahya <page 22>

Agamin <page 221>

Ahambrahmasmi <page 49>

Ahankara <page 27>, <page 44>, <page 55>, <page 116>

Ahavaniya <page 121>

Ahimsa <page 173>

Aindri <page 255>

Ajapa-Gayatri <page 213>

Ajnana <page 20>

Ajna <page 212>, <page 270>

Akara <page 232>, <page 254>

Akarma <page 201>

Akas' <page 46>, <page 61>, <page 62>, <page 75>, <page 113>, <page 116>, <page 197>, <page 237>

Akshata <page 248>

Alambusa <page 176>, <page 206>, <page 239>

Amanaska <page 245>, <page 251>

Amaroli <page 200>

Amrtanada-Upanishad <page 216>

Amrtabindu-Upanishad <page 34>

Amurti <page 245>

Ananda <page 17>

Anandamaya <page 14>, <page 47>

Anahata <page 212>, <page 253>

Ananta <page 16>

Anganyasas <page 214>

Anna <page 75>, <page 260>

Annamaya <page 14>

Antahkarana <page 44>, <page 46>, <page 113>

Antarlakshya <page 244>

Antarvedi <page 122>

Antaryamin <page 15>

Apana <page 177>, <page 206>, <page 219>

Apantaratama <page 60>, <page 69>

Apara <page 57>

Apas <page 46>, <page 61>, <page 62>, <page 75>, <page 113>, <page 116>, <page 197>, <page 236>

Apoha <page 249>

Apsaras <page 134>

Apyayana <page 242>

Arambha <page 193>, <page 242>

Arani <page 203>

Aranyakas <page i>

Ardhamatra <page 203>, <page 232>, <page 254>

Arghya <page 248>

Arjava <page 173>

Arundhati <page 261>

Aruni <page 132>

As'abdhabrahman <page 38>

Asamsakti <page 232>

Asana <page 238>, <page 243>, <page 248>

Asamprajnata-Samadhi <page 10>

Asat <page 17>, <page 61>

Asmat <page 58>

Ashtakshara <page 124>, <page 128>

Asipatravanas'reni <page 141>

Asuras <page 19>

Asteya <page 173>

Asura <page 22>

As'valayana <page 31>

As'vattha <page 177>

Atadvyavrtti-Samadhi <page 10>

Atala <page 187>

Atharvan <page 172>

Atharvanaveda <page 6>, <page 62>

[p. 274]

Ativahika <page 265>

Atma <page 208>

Atmabodha-Upanishad <page 37>

Atmanishtha-Vidya <page 4>

Atmajnana <page 256>

Atma-Tattva <page 243>

Atura-Sannyasa <page 137>

Avichchinna <page 47>

Avadhuta <page 153>

Avahana <page 248>

Avarana-S'akti <page 43>, <page 130>

Avasthas <page 47>, <page 232>, <page 249>

Avidya <page 13>

Avimukta <page 124>

Avyakta <page 43>, <page 47>, <page 115>

B

BAHIRLAKSHYA <page 244>

Bahudaka <page 132>, <page 153>

Bandha <page 13>,<page 21>

Bhadra <page 174>, <page 202>, <page 217>

Bharata <page 1>, <page 125>

Bharadvaja <page 124>, <page 132>

Bhastri <page 261>

Bhasvati <page 73>

Bhiksha <page 27>

Bhikshuka-Upanishad <page 132>

Bhinnas <page 268>

Bhuh <page 74>, <page 187>, <page 254>

Bhutas'raddha <page 149>

Bhutadi <page 61>

Bhumika <page 232>

Bhuvah <page 74>, <page 187>, <page 254>

Bija <page 232>

Bindu <page 200>, <page 202>, <page 208>

Bodha <page 57>

Boar-shaped <page 220>

Brahmi <page 255>

Brahmanda <page 44>, <page 270>

Brahma <page 19>, <page 60>, <page 62>, <page 69>

Brahmanya <page 129>

Brahmanas <page i>, <page 62>, <page 110>

Brahman <page 16>, <page 18>

Brahmacharya <page 135>, <page 175>

Brahmacharin <page 212>

Brahmajnana <page 106>

Brahma-nada <page 2>

Brahmarandhra <page 238>

Brahmavidya <page 31>, <page 212>, <page 222>

Brahmavit <page 51>, <page 233>

Brahmavidvara <page 233>

Brahmavidvariya <page 233>

Brahmavidvarishtha <page 233>

Brahmopanishad <page 106>

Brhadratha <page 24>

Brhaspati <page 124>, <page 125>

Buddhi <page 55>

C

CHAKRA <page 7>, <page 117>, <page 205>, <page 238>

Chandra <page 19>

Chandala <page 51>

Chandrayana <page 132>

Chhandas <page 62>, <page 128>

Chidabhasa <page 47>, <page 272>

Chidananda <page 10>

Chinmatra <page 10>, <page 82>

Chit <page 248>

Chitta <page 7>, <page 9>, <page 55>

Colours, Seven <page 117>

D

DAHARA <page 63>, <page 75>, <page 272>

Dakshinagni <page 121>

Danti <page 159>

Dars'anagni <page 121>

Dattatreya <page 132>, <page 145>, <page 190>

Daya <page 173>

Devas <page 19>

Devadatta <page 177>, <page 206>

Devarshi <page 148>

Devas'raddha <page 148>

Dhananjaya <page 177>, <page 206>

Dharana <page 173>, <page 188>, <page 216>, <page 238>, <page 243>

Dharma <page 110>

Dharma-megha <page 50>, <page 58>

Dharma-S'astras <page 62>

Dhatus <page 116>, <page 121>

Dhrti <page 173>, <page 255>

Dhruva <page 188>, <page 255>

Dhupa <page 248>

Dhyana <page 26>, <page 173>, <page 189>, <page 216>, <page 238>, <page 243>, <page 248>

Dhayanabindu-Upanishad <page 202>

Dik <page 46>, <page 221>

Diksha <page 121>

Dipa <page 248>

[p. 275]

Diseases <page 264>

Divyas'raddha <page 149>

Drk <page 248>

Duhkha <page 20>

Dundubhi <page 259>

Durvasas <page 145>

Dvadas'anta <page 184>

Dvaparayuga <page 130>

Dvaita <page 27>

E

EKAdAnDi <page 156>

Ekanta <page 27>

G

GaNdHaRi <page 174>, <page 206>

Gandharvas <page 62>, <page 64>

Ganes'a <page 179>

Garbha-Upanishad <page 116>

Garhapatya <page 121>

Gautama <page 132>, <page 212>

Gayatri <page 180>, <page 190>, <page 217>

Ghata <page 193>, <page 242>

Ghora-Angiras <page 60>, <page 69>

Ghoshini <page 255>

Gomukha <page 174>

Goraksha <page 135>

Gotra <page 12>

Grahya <page 22>

Granthi <page 56>, <page 241>, <page 266>

Grhastha <page 135>

Gudhasupti <page 234>

Gulma <page 182>, <page 261>

Guru <page 93>, <page 267>

H

HA <page 198>, <page 210>

Hamsa <page 132>, <page 147>, <page 153>, <page 161>, <page 206>, <page 213>, <page 254>

Hamsa-Upanishad <page 212>

Hanuman <page 1>, <page 125>

Haradhvaja <page 137>

Haritaka <page 132>

Hastjihva <page 176>, <page 206>, <page 239>

Hathayoga <page 196>, <page 238>

Havirats <page 62>

Hiranyagarbha <page 44>

Hita <page 64>

Hrdaya <page 117>, <page 160>, <page 201>, <page 204>, <page 208>

Hrim <page 204>

Hrshikes'a <page 192>

I

ICHCHHa <page 75>

Ida <page 122>, <page 176>, <page 206>, <page 239>

Ikshana <page 226>

Ikshvaku <page 24>

Indra <page 19>, <page 187>, <page 221>

Ishana <page 28>

Ishtadevata <page 179>

Is'vara <page 19>

Is'vara-chaitanya <page 43>

Itihasas <page 54>

J

JADABHARAtA <page 132>, <page 145>

Jagrata <page 13>, <page 47>, <page 113>, <page 232>, <page 234>

Jalajyotis <page 246>

Jalandhara <page 194>, <page 207>, <page 263>

Jalodara <page 261>

Jambavan <page 125>

Janoloka <page 187>, <page 254>

Jati <page 20>

Japa <page 53>

Jayanta <page 64>

Jiva <page 14>, <page 19>, <page 47>

Jivanmukta <page 6>, <page 88>, <page 232>, <page 234>

Jivita <page 122>, <page 237>

Jnana <page 16>, <page 20>, <page 184>, <page 193>

Jnanendriyas <page 45>, <page 113>

Jvalanti <page 239>

Jvalakila <page 75>

Jyotisha <page 62>

K

KAILaS <page 25>

Kaivalya-Upanishad <page 31>

Kaivalya <page 139>

Kala <page 125>

Kalatita <page 125>, <page 130>

Kalahamsa <page 202>

Kalavanchana <page 239>

Kalisantarana-Upanishad <page 130>

Kalasutra <page 141>

Kalpa <page 62>

[p. 276]

Kanda <page 238>

Kanthata <page 214>

Kanthamudra <page 241>

Karanyasa <page 213>

Karma <page 20>

Karmendriyas <page 44>, <page 213>

Karkata <page 107>

Karta <page 14>

Kas'i <page 42>

Kaustubha <page 204>

Kaya-rupa <page 188>

Kaya-vyuha <page 188>

Kevala <page 56>, <page 182>, <page 261>

Khaga <page 107>

Khanda-paras'u <page 61>

Khecharimudra <page 183>, <page 194>, <page 207>, <page 266>

Kilaka <page 213>

Kimpurusha <page 134>

Kinnaras <page 134>

Koka <page 75>

Kos'a <page 46>

Koshthagni <page 121>

Krama-mukta <page 236>

Kravyadi <page 75>

Krchchhra <page 148>

Krkara <page 177>, <page 206>

Krshna-Yajurveda <page 5>

Kshama <page 173>

Kshetrajna <page 15>, <page 221>

Kshatriya <page 62>, <page 110>

Kudupa <page 122>

Kuhuh <page 176>, <page 206>, <page 239>

Kumbhaka <page 10>, <page 182>, <page 241>

Kundalini vi, <page 174>, <page 185>, <page 238>

Karma <page 177>, <page 188>

Kurmira <page 72>

Kurukshetra <page 124>

Kus'a <page 217>

Kutastha <page 15>

Kuta <page 268>

Kutichaka <page 132>, <page 147>, <page 153>

L

LA <page 197>, <page 210>

Lakshmi <page 222>

Lakshmana <page 125>

Layayoga <page 193>, <page 228>, <page 238>

Linga <page 216>

Lingi <page 137>

Lokas <page 74>

Lokaloka <page 77>

M

MAdHUSudANA <page 37>

Madhyama <page 122>

Madhyamalakshya <page 245>

Mahabandha, <page 194>

Mahadeva <page 25>, <page 41>

Mahamudra <page 194>

Maharloka <page 254>

Maharaurava <page 156>

Mahat <page 44>

Mahatala <page 187>

Maha-samvartaka <page 75>

Mahavakyas <page 49>

Maha-vichi-vagura <page 141>

Maitrayani <page i>

Maitreya-Upanishad <page 24>

Maitri <page 10>

Makara <page 232>

Malas <page 116>

Manana <page 49>

Manas <page 34>, <page 54>

Mandalabrahmana-Upanishad <page 243>

Manipuraka <page 205>, <page 213>, <page 270>

Manomaya <page 14>, <page 47>

Mantrayoga <page 193>, <page 238>

Manushya-Rshi <page 148>

Manushyas'raddha <page 149>

Manushyas <page 19>

Mardala <page 257>

Matras <page 179>, <page 194>, <page 216>, <page 218>, <page 254>

Mathana <page 261>

Maya <page 17>

Mayura <page 174>

Melana <page 267>, <page 270>

Mimamsa <page 62>

Mitahara <page 173>

Mithya <page 17>

Moksha <page 13>, <page 21>

Mauna <page 8>, <page 79>

Mudha <page 27>

Muhurta <page 40>

Mukta <page 174>

Muktikopanishad <page 1>

Mukhya <page 71>

Mulakanda <page 260>

Muladhara <page 205>, <page 213>, <page 270>

[p. 277]

Mulabandha <page 79>, <page 194>, <page 263>

Murchchha <page 47>, <page 228>

Marti <page 245>

Mrtyu <page 221>

N

NadA <page 200>, <page 202>, <page 214>

Nadabindu-Upanishad <page 254>

Nadarupini <page 239>

Nadis <page 14>, <page 68>, <page 80>, <page 176>

Naga <page 177>, <page 206>

Naimis'a , <page 134>

Naivedya <page 248>

Namadheya <page 255>

Namaskara <page 248>

Narada <page 130>, <page 134>

Naradaparivrajaka-Upanishad <page 134>

Naraka <page 21>, <page 249>

Narasimha <page 42>

Narayana <page 37>, <page 67>, <page 127>

Narayana-Upanishad <page 127>

Nasinam <page 72>

Nidagha <page 93>, <page 145>, <page 232>

Nididhyasana <page 49>

Nilakantha <page 246>

Niralamba-Upanishad <page 18>

Nirukta <page 62>

Nirvikalpa Samadhi <page 56>

Nishadas <page 62>

Nishkala <page 190>

Nishpatti <page 193>, <page 242>

Nivrtti <page 57>

Niyama <page 79>, <page 174>, <page 243>

Nyaya <page 62>

O

OM <page 124>, <page 125>, <page 128>, <page 167>, <page 180>, <page 202>, <page 254>

Om-namo-Narayanaya <page 124>, <page 128>

P

PAdA <page 216>

Padarthabhavana <page 232>

Padma <page 174>, <page 205>, <page 217>, <page 260>

Palam <page 123>

Paingala-Upanishad <page 43>

Panchavarga <page 15>

Para <page 122>

Parakas' <page 252>

Paramapada <page 22>

Paramatma <page 16>

Paravak <page 215>

Paramjyotis <page 242>

Paramahamsa <page 132>, <page 147>, <page 153>, <page 212>

Parameshthi <page 31>

Parames'vara <page 31>

Pararandhra <page 239>

Parthiva-Pranava <page 218>

Parvati <page 212>

Parichaya <page 193>, <page 242>

Parivrat <page 172>

Parivrajaka <page 134>

Pas'yanti <page 122>

Patangini <page 255>

Patala <page 187>

Pathya <page 268>

Payasvini <page 176>, <page 239>

Phutkara <page 244>

Pindas <page 149>

Pindanda <page 271>

Pingala <page 122>, <page 176>, <page 206>, <page 239>

Pippalada <page 106>, <page 123>

Pis'achas <page 19>

Plutamatras <page 196>

Pitrs'raddha <page 149>

Pliha <page 182>, <page 261>

Pradakshina <page 248>

Pradhana <page 115>, <page 171>

Prajapatis <page 62>

Prajapatya <page 138>

Prakrti <page 19>

Prajna <page 37>, <page 168>

Prajna <page 47>, <page 169>, <page 232>

Prajnana <page 37>

Prana <page 10>, <page 177>, <page 206>, <page 218>, <page 219>

Pranamaya <page 14>, <page 47>, <page 86>, <page 173>, <page 216>, <page 238>, <page 243>

Prarabdha <page 2>, <page 4>, <page 51>, <page 221>

Prastha <page 123>

Pratibhasika <page 47>

Pratyahara <page 79>, <page 173>,<page 188>, <page 216>, <page 238>, <page 243>

Prthivi <page 45>, <page 61>, <page 62>, <page 75>, <page 113>, <page 116>, <page 197>, <page 237>

Praves'a <page 226>

Puja, <page 248>

[p. 278]

Punarbhava <page 75>

Pundarikaksha <page 37>

Puranas <page 54>

Puraka <page 217>

Puritati <page 122>

Purva <page 245>

Purushasukta <page 136>

Pasha <page 176>, <page 206>, <page 239>

Pushkara <page 107>

R

RA <page 198>, <page 210>

Raivataka <page 145>

Raikva <page 60>, <page 61>, <page 69>

Rajas <page 112>

Rajas-S'akti <page 265>

Rajarshi <page 148>

Rajayoga <page 193>

Rakshasas <page 62>, <page 64>

Rama <page 60>

Rama <page 75>

Rambha <page 64>

Rasatala <page 187>

Ratha-Mandala <page 217>

Rechaka  <page 217>

Retas <page 121>

Ruchira <page 217>

Rudra <page 62>, <page 124>, <page 127>

Rudra-Mantras <page 54>

Rbhu <page 93>, <page 145>, <page 220>

Rgveda <page 5>, <page 62>

Rshabha <page 145>

Rshis'raddha <page 148>

Rtu <page 117>

S

SA <page 198>

S'abdabrahman <page 35>

Sachchidananda <page 85>, <page 244>

Sadas'iva <page 42>

Sadhana-chatushtaya <page 135>, <page 235>

Sadyomuktas <page 236>

Sahasrara vi, <page 246>, <page 254>, <page 266>

Sahajoli <page 194>

Sahita <page 182>

Saindhava <page 268>

S'akayanya <page 24>

S'akha <page 134>, <page 269>

Sakala <page 190>

S'akti-chalana <page 260>

Sakshi <page 15>, <page 232>

Salokya <page 2>

Samadhi <page 10>,<page 173>,<page 189>, <page 216>, <page 238>, <page 246>

Samaveda <page 5>, <page 62>

Samana <page 177>, <page 206>, <page 219>

S'ambhavimudra <page 245>

Samipya <page 3>

Samhita <page i>

Samprajnata <page 10>

Samprasada <page 64>

Samputayoga <page 240>

Samrat <page 62>

Samsara <page 24>

Samskaras <page 135>

Samvartaka <page 132>, <page 148>

Sanaka <page 1>, <page 82>

Sanatkumara <page 212>

Sanatsujata <page 145>

Sanchita <page 221>

Sandhya <page 27>

Sandhyavandana <page 109>

S'andilya-Upanishad <page 173>

Sankalpa <page 225>

Sankalpa-Vikalpa <page 113>

S'ankhini <page 176>, <page 206>, <page 239>

S'ankari <page 255>

Sannyasa <page 13>, <page 151>, <page 152>

Sannyasin <page 22>, <page 151>

S'anti <page 159>

Santosha <page 138>

Sarasvati <page 176>, <page 180>

Sarasvati-chalana <page 261>

S'ariraka-Upanishad <page 113>

Sarupya <page 3>

Sat <page 17>, <page 61>

Sat-asat <page 61>

Sattra <page 134>

Satya <page 16>, <page 138>, <page 173>, <page 187>

Satyaloka <page 252>

Satyavasu <page 148>

Sattva <page 114>

Sattvapatti <page 232>

S'aucha <page 26>, <page 173>

Savitri <page 180>

Schopenhauer <page i>

S'esha <page 86>

Shanmukhi <page 246>

Siddhasana <page 174>, <page 205>, <page 257>

[p. 279]

S'ikha <page 108>, <page 132>, <page 144>

S'iksha <page 62>, <page 110>

Simha <page 174>, <page 205>

S'irobandha <page 268>

S'iro-vastra <page 268>

S'ishya <page 22>

S'isna <page 213>

Sita <page 1>, <page 125>

S'itali <page 261>

S'iva <page 187>

Skanda <page 64>

Skanda-Upanishad. <page 41>

Snana <page 26>, <page 248>

Snuhi <page 268>

So'ham <page 26>,<page 55>

Soma <page 187>

S'onita <page 117>

Soumitri <page 1>

Sounds, Seven <page 117>, <page 134>

S'ribija <page 239>

S'ri-Rama <page 1>

S'ri S'ankaracharya <page i>

S'raddha <page 52>, <page 148>

S'raddha <page 31>

S'ravana <page 49>

Sthandila <page 133>

Sthavara <page 19>

Sthita-Prajna <page 58>

Sthula <page 232>

Subala-Upanishad <page 61>

S'ubhechchha <page 232>

S'udras <page 62>, <page 110>

S'ukla-dhyana <page 133>

S'ukla <page 117>

S'ukla-Yajurveda <page 5>

S'uka <page 1>, <page 82>, <page 132>, <page 155>, <page 235>

Sukha <page 20>

Sukshma <page 232>

Surya <page 19>, <page 261>

Suryakas' <page 262>

Sushumna <page 122>, <page 176>, <page 206>, <page 239>

Sushupti <page 14>, <page 47>, <page 113>, <page 232>

Sutala <page 187>

Silva <page 108>

Suvar <page 187>, <page 254>

Svapna <page 13>, <page 47>, <page 113>

Svara <page 34>

S'veta <page 72>

S'vetaketu <page 132>, <page 145>

Svastika <page 174>, <page 217>

Svadhishthana <page 202>, <page 212>, <page 270>

Svarupa-dhyana <page 1>

S'yena <page 72>

T

TAIJASA <page 47>, <page 168>, <page 232>

Talatala <page 187>

Tamas <page 112>

Tana <page 263>

Tanumanasi <page 232>

Tanmatras <page 44>

Tapa <page 181>, <page 187>, <page 254>

Tapa s <page 22>

Taraka <page 2>, <page 124>, <page 244>, <page 245>

Tarka <page 216>

Tarasara-Upanishad <page 124>

Tat <page 49>

Tatastha <page 159>

Tattvas <page 27>, <page 220>

Tattvajnana <page 256>

Tattvamasi <page 49>

Tejobindu-Upanishad <page 78>

Triangle <page 78>, <page 210>

Trimurti <page 148>

Triputi <page 249>

Trshna <page 244>

Turya <page 14>, <page 70>

Turyaka <page 239>

Turiyatita <page 153>

Turiyatita-Avadhuta-Upanishad <page 55>

Tvam <page 49>

Tvambrahmasi <page 49>

Tvamtadasi <page 49>

Tyaga <page 97>

U

UdaNA <page 177>, <page 219>

Uddiyana <page 194>, <page 207>, <page 237>, <page 263>

Uddiyate <page 263>

Ujjayi <page 261>

Ukara <page 232>

Uma <page 31>

Unmani <page 214>

Upanayana <page 134>

Uparati <page 87>

Upasya <page 21>

Upavasa <page 142>, <page 225>

[p. 280]

Upendra <page 125>, <page 221>

Uragas <page 134>

Uttara <page 245>

V

VA <page 198>, <page 210>

Vaideha <page 145>

Vaikhanasa <page 137>

Vaikhari <page 122>

Vairagya <page 2>, <page 57>, <page 58>

Vaishnavi <page 255>, <page 257>

Vais'vanara <page 62>

Vais'yas <page 62>, <page 111>

Vajra <page 260>

Vajrasuchi-Upanishad <page 110>

Vajroli <page 200>

Vak <page 93>

Vamadeva <page 132>, <page 145>, <page 235>

Vanaprastha <page 135>

Varaha-Upanishad <page 220>

Varna-hatya-dosha <page iii>

Varuna <page 187>, <page 221>, <page 239>

Varuni <page 176>

Vasanas <page 7>, <page 260>

Vasishtha <page 1>, <page 132>

Vatasiddha <page 145>

Vaushat <page 213>

Vayu <page 46>, <page 61>, <page 62>, <page 75>, <page 113>, <page 116>, <page 187>, <page 221>

Vayuvegini <page 255>

Vedanta <page i>

Veda-Vyasa <page viii>

Vicharana <page 232>

Videhamukta <page 6>, <page 90>, <page 272>

Vidhimukha <page 10>

Vidvan <page 22>

Vidya <page 4>, <page 13>, <page 35>

Vidyunmali <page 255>

Vijnanamaya <page 14>

Vikshepa-S'akti <page 44>

Vina <page 257>

Vipra <page 108>

Vira <page 174>

Virat-chaitanya <page 45>

Viratpurusha <page 136>

Visarjana <page 248>

Vishnu <page 19>

Vishnu-Purana <page viii>

Vis'uddhi <page 213>

Vis'va <page 47>, <page 168>, <page 232>

Vis'vambhara <page 62>

Vis'vodhari <page 76>, <page 239>

Vitala <page 187>

Vivarta-Upadana <page 230>

Vrata <page 143>

Vyahrti <page 122>, <page 190>

Vyakarana <page 62>

Vyana <page 177>, <page 206>

Y

YA <page 198>, <page 210>

Yajnavalkya <page 43>, <page 124>, <page 125>, <page 132>, <page 243>

Yajnopavita <page 108>, <page 132>, <page 144>

Yajurveda <page 5>, <page 62>

Yakshas <page 62>, <page 64>

Yama <page 19>, <page 79>, <page 173>, <page 187>, <page 238>, <page 243>

Yas'asvini <page 176>, <page 206>, <page 239>

Yoga <page 183>, <page 193>

Yogakundali-Upanishad <page 260>

Yogatattva-Upanishad <page 192>

 

 

 

 

________________________________________
 PRINTED BY ANNIE BESANT AT THE VASANta PRESS, ADYAR, MADRAS.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: to.txt =====



Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

TERTIUM ORGANUM

  

THE THIRD CANON OF THOUGHT

  

A KEY TO THE ENIGMAS OF THE WORLD

  

P. D. OUSPENSKY

  

TRANSLATED FROM THE RUSSIAN BY NICHOLAS BESSARABOFF AND CLAUDE BRAGDON--WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY CLAUDE BRAGDON

  

SECOND AMERICAN EDITION, AUTHORIZED AND REVISED

  

THE MYSTERY OF SPACE AND TIME. SHADOWS AND REALITY, OCCULTISM AND LOVE. ANIMATED NATURE. VOICES OF THE STONES. MATHEMATICS OF THE INFINITE. THE LOGIC OF ECSTASY. MYSTICAL THEOSOPHY. COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS. THE NEW MORALITY. BIRTH OF THE SUPERMAN.

  

NEW YORK; ALFRED A KNOPF

  

[1922]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, May 2005 by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923

Click to enlarge
Front Cover

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Verso

[p. v]

 

          "And   swear . . . THAT THERE SHOULD BE TIME NO LONGER."
                                                           REVELATIONS,   X. 6

"That   ye, being rooted and grounded in love may be able to COMPREHEND with all saints what is the BREADTH AND LENGTH   AND DEPTH AND HEIGHT."
                                                           Paul   the Apostle
                                    THE   EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, III. 18

     
    

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

CONTENTS

        AUTHOR'S   PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

       <page xiii>

     
      INTRODUCTION   TO THE ENGLISH TRANSLATION

       <page 1>

     
      CHAPTER I

        

     
      What   do we know and what do we not know? Our data, and the things for which we   seek. The unknown mistaken for the known. Matter and motion. What does the   positive philosophy come to? Identity of the unknown: x=y, y=x. What we   really know. The existence of consciousness in us, and of the world outside   of us. Dualism or monism.? Subjective and objective knowledge. Where do the   causes of the sensations lie? Kant's system. Time and Space. Kant and the   "ether." Mach's observation. With what does the physicist really   deal?

       <page 11>

     
      CHAPTER II

        

     
      A   new view of the Kantian problem. The books of Hinton. The   "space-sense" and its evolution. A system for the development of a   sense of the fourth dimension by exercises with colored cubes. The geometrical   conception of space. Three perpendiculars--why three? Can everything   existing be measured by three perpendiculars? The indices of existence.   Reality of ideas. Insufficient evidence of the existence of matter and   motion. Matter and motion are only logical concepts, like "good"   and "evil."

       <page 23>

     
      CHAPTER III

        

     
      What   may we learn about the fourth dimension by a study of the geometrical   relations within our space? What should be the relation between a three-dimensional   body and one of four dimensions? The four-dimensional body as the tracing of   the movement of a three-dimensional body in the direction which is not   confined within it. A four-dimensional body as containing an infinite number   of three-dimensional bodies. A three dimensional body as a section of a   four-dimensional one. Parts of bodies and entire bodies in three and in four   dimensions. The incommensurability of a three-dimensional and a   four-dimensional body. A material atom as a section of a four-dimensional   line.

       <page 34>

     
      CHAPTER IV

        

     
      In   what direction may the fourth dimension lie? What is motion? Two kinds of   motion--motion in space and motion in time--which are contained in   every movement. What is time? Two ideas contained in the conception of time.   The new dimension of space, and motion upon that dimension. Time as the   fourth dimension of space. Impossibility of understanding the fourth   dimension without the idea of motion. The idea of motion and the   "time-sense." The time sense as a limit (surface) of the   "space-sense." Hinton on the law of surfaces. [p. viii] The   "ether" as a surface. Riemann's idea concerning the translation of   time into space in the fourth dimension. Present, past, and future. Why do we   not see the past and the future. Life   as a feeling of one's way. Wundt on the subject of our sensuous   knowledge.

       <page 33>

     
      CHAPTER V

        

     
      Four-dimensional   space. "Temporal body"--Linga   Sharira. The form of a human body from birth to death. Incommensurability   of three-dimensional and four-dimensional bodies. Newton's fluents. The   unreality of constant quantities in our world. The right and left hands in   three-dimensional and in four dimensional space. Difference between   three-dimensional and four-dimensional space. Not two different spaces but   different methods of receptivity of one and the same world

       <page 52>

     
      CHAPTER VI

        

     
      Methods   of investigation of the problem of higher dimensions. The analogy between imaginary   worlds of different dimensions. The one-dimensional world on a line.   "Space" and "time" of a one-dimensional being. The   two-dimensional world on a plane. "Space" and "time,"   "ether," "matter," and "motion" of a   two-dimensional being. Reality and illusion on a plane. The impossibility of   seeing an "angle." An angle as motion. The incomprehensibility to a   two-dimensional being of the functions of things in our world. Phenomena and   noumena of a two-dimensional being. How could a plane being comprehend the   third dimension?

       <page 59>

     
      CHAPTER VII

        

     
      The   impossibility of the mathematical definition of dimensions. Why does not   mathematics sense dimensions? The entire conditionality of the representation   of dimensions by powers. The possibility of representing all powers on a   line. Kant and Lobachevsky. The difference between non-Euclidian geometry and   metageometry. Where shall we find the explanation of the three-dimensionality   of the world, if Kant's ideas are true? Are not the conditions of the three-dimensionality   of the world confined to our receptive apparatus, to our psyche?

       <page 73>

     
      CHAPTER VIII

        

     
      Our   receptive apparatus. Sensation. Perception. Conception. Intuition. Art as the   language of the future. To what  does   the three-dimensionality of the world depend upon the properties of our   receptive apparatus? What might prove this interdependence? Where may we find   the real affirmation of this interdependence? The animal psyche. In what does   it differ from the human? Reflex action. The irritability of the cell.   Instinct. Pleasure-pain. Emotional thinking. The absence of concepts.   Language of animals. Logic of animals. Different degrees of psychic   development in animals. The goose, the cat, the dog and the monkey.

       <page 80>

     
      CHAPTER IX

        

     
      The   receptivity of the world by a man and by an animal. Illusions of the animal   and its lack of control of the receptive faculties. The world of moving   planes. Angles and curves considered as motion. The third dimension as motion.   The animal's two-dimensional view of our three-dimensional world. The animal   as a real two-dimensional being. Lower animals as one-dimensional beings. The   time and space of a snail. The time-sense as an imperfect space-sense. The   time and space of a dog. The change in the world coincident with a change in   the psychic apparatus. The proof of Kant's problem. The three-dimensional   world--an illusionary perception.

       <page 98>

     
      [p. ix]

        

     
      CHAPTER X

        

     
      The   spatial understanding of time. The angles and curves of the fourth dimension   in our life. Does motion exist in the world or not? Mechanical motion and   "life." Biological phenomena as the manifestation of motions going   on in the higher dimension. Evolution of the space-sense. The growth of the   space-sense and the diminution of the time-sense. The transformation of the   time-sense into the space-sense. The difficulties of our language and of our   concepts. The necessity for seeking a method of spatial expression for   temporal concepts. Science in relation to the fourth dimension. The solid of   four dimensions. The four-dimensional sphere.

       <page 112>

     
      CHAPTER XI

        

     
      Science   and the problem of the fourth dimension. The address of Prof. N. A. Oumoff before   the Mendeleevskian Convention in 1911--"The Characteristic Traits   and Problems of Contemporary Scientific Thought." The new physics. The   electromagnetic theory. The principle of relativity. The works of Einstein   and Minkowsky. Simultaneous existence of the past and the future. The Eternal   Now. Van Manen's book about occult experiences. The drawing of a   four-dimensional figure.

       <page 124>

     
      CHAPTER XII

        

     
      Analysis   of phenomena. What defines different orders of phenomena for us? Methods and forms   of the transition of one order of phenomena into another. Phenomena of   motion. Phenomena of life. Phenomena of consciousness. The central question   of our knowledge of the world: what mode of phenomena is generic and produces   the others? Can the origin of everything lie in motion? The laws of   transformation of energy. Simple transformation and liberation of latent   energy. Different liberating forces of different orders of phenomena. The   force of mechanical energy, the force of a living cell, the force of an idea.   Phenomena and noumena of our world

       <page 136>

     
      CHAPTER XIII

        

     
      The   apparent and hidden side of life. Positivism as the study of the phenomenal   side of life. Of what does the "two-dimensionality" of positive   philosophy consist? The regarding of everything upon a single plane, in one   physical sequence. The streams which flow underneath the earth. What can the   study of life, as a phenomenon, yield? The artificial world which science   erects for itself. The unreality of finished and isolated phenomena. The new   apprehension of the world

       <page 143>

     
      CHAPTER XIV

        

     
      The   voices of stones. The wall of a church and the wall of a prison. The mast of   a ship and a gallows. The shadow of a hangman and of an ascetic. The soul of a   hangman and of an ascetic. The different combinations of known phenomena in   higher space. The relationship of phenomena which appear unrelated, and the   difference between phenomena which appear similar. How shall we approach the   noumenal world? The understanding of things outside the categories of space   and time. The reality of many "figures of speech." The occult   understanding of energy. The letter of a Hindu occultist. Art as the   knowledge of the noumenal world. What we see and what we do not see. Plato's   dialogue about the cavern

       <page 156>

     
      [p. x]

        

     
      Occultism   and love. Love and death. Our different relations to the problems of death   and to the problems of love. What is lacking in our understanding of love? Love   as an every-day and merely psychological phenomena. The possibility of a   spiritual understanding of love. The creative force of love. The negation of   love. Love and mysticism. The "wondrous" in love. Nietzsche, Edward   Carpenter and Schopenhauer on love. "The Ocean of Sex."

       <page 166>

     
      CHAPTER XVI

        

     
      The   phenomenal and noumenal side of man. "Man-in-himself." How do we   know the inner side of man? Can we know of the existence of consciousness in   conditions of space not analogous to ours? Brain and consciousness. Unity of   the world. Logical impossibility of the simultaneous existence of spirit and   matter. Either all spirit or all matter. Rational and irrational actions in   nature and in the life of man. Can rational actions exist alongside irrational?   The world as an accidentally self-created mechanical toy. The impossibility   of reason in a mechanical universe. The irreconcilability of mechanicalness   with the existence of reason. Kant concerning "hosts." Spinoza on   the knowledge of the invisible world. Necessity for the intellectual   definition of that which can be, and that which cannot be, in the world of   hidden.

       <page 176>

     
      CHAPTER XVII

        

     
      A   living and rational universe. Different forms and lines of rationality. Animated   nature. The souls of stones and the souls of trees. The soul of a forest. The   human "I" as a collective rationality. Man as a complex being.   "Humanity" as a being. The world's soul. The face of Mahadeva. Prof. James on the consciousness   of the universe. Fechner's ideas. Zendavesta.   A living Earth.

       <page 198>

     
      CHAPTER XVIII

        

     
      Rationality   and life. Life as knowledge. Intellect and emotions. Emotion as an organ of knowledge.   The evolution of emotion from the standpoint of knowledge. Pure and impure   emotions. Personal and impersonal emotions. Personal and super-personal   emotions. The elimination of self-elements as a means of approach to true   knowledge. "Be as little children. . . " "Blessed are the pure   in heart. . . ." The value of morals from the standpoint of knowledge.   The defects of intellectualism. Dreadnaughts as the crown of intellectual   culture. The dangers of morality. Moral esthetics. Religion and art as organized   forms of emotional knowledge. The knowledge of God and the knowledge of   Beauty.

       <page 213>

     
      CHAPTER XIX

        

     
      The   intellectual method, objective knowledge. The limits of objective knowledge. The   possibility of the expansion of the application of the psychological method.   New forms of knowledge. The ideas of Plotinus. Different forms of   consciousness. Sleep (the potential state of consciousness). Dreams   (consciousness en-closed in itself, reflected from itself). Waking   consciousness (dualistic sensation of the world, the division of the I and   the Not-I). Ecstasy ( the liberation of the Self). Turiya (the absolute consciousness of all, as of the self).   "The dewdrop slips into the shining sea." Nirvana.

       <page 232>

     
      CHAPTER XX

        

     
      The   sense of infinity. The neophyte's first ordeal. An intolerable sadness. The   loss of everything real. What would an animal feel on becoming a man? The [p. xi] transition to the new logic. Our logic as founded on the observation of   the laws of the phenomenal world. Its invalidity for the study of the world   of noumena. The necessity for another logic. Analogy between the axioms of   logic and of mathematics. TWO MATHEMATICS. The mathematics of real magnitudes   (infinite and variable); and the mathematics of unreal, imaginary magnitudes   (finite and constant). Transfinite numbers--numbers lying beyond   INFINITY. The possibility of different infinities.

       <page 243>

     
      CHAPTER XXI

        

     
      Man's   transition to a higher logic. The necessity for rejecting everything   "real." "Poverty of the spirit." The recognition of the   infinite alone as real. Laws of the infinite. Logic of the finite--the Organon of Aristotle and the Novum Organum of Bacon. Logic of the   infinite--Tertium Organum. The higher logic as an instrument of thought,   as a key to the mysteries of nature, to the hidden side of life, to the world   of noumena. A definition of the world of noumena on the basis of all the   foregoing. The impression of the noumenal world on an unprepared   consciousness. "The thrice unknown darkness in the contemplation of   which all knowledge is resolved into ignorance."

       <page 254>

     
      CHAPTER XXII

        

     
      Theosophy   of Max Muller. Ancient India. Philosophy of the Vedanta. Tat twam asi. Knowledge by means of   the expansion of consciousness as a reality. Mysticism of different ages and   peoples. Unity of experiences. Tertium   Organum as a key to mysticism. Signs of the noumenal world. Treatise of   Plotinus On Intelligible Beauty as   a misunderstood system of higher logic Illumination in Jacob Boehme. "A   harp of many strings, of which each string is a separate instrument, while   the whole is only one harp." Mystics of The Love of the Good. St. Avva Dorotheus and others. Clement of   Alexandria. Lao-Tzu^ and Chuang-Tzu. Light   on the Path. The Voice of the   Silence. Mohammedan mystics. Poetry of the Sufis. Mystical states under   narcotics. The Anaestetic Revelation.   Experiments of Prof. James. Dostoyevsky on "time" (The Idiot). Influence of nature on the   soul of man.

       <page 270>

     
      CHAPTER XXIII

        

     
      Cosmic Consciousness of Dr. Bucke. The   three forms of consciousness according to Dr. Bucke. Simple consciousness, or   the consciousness of animals. Self-consciousness, or the consciousness of men.   Dr. Bucke's fundamental error. Cosmic consciousness. In what is it expressed?   Sensation, perception, concept, higher MORAL concept--creative   intuition. Men of cosmic consciousness. Adam's fall into sin. The knowledge   of good and evil. Christ and the salvation of man. Commentary on Dr. Bucke's   book. Birth of the new humanity. Two races. SUPERMAN. Table of the four forms   of the manifestation of consciousness

       <page 306>

     
      CONCLUSION

       <page 333>

     
      TABLE   OF THE FOUR FORMS OF CONSCIOUSNESS

       <page 337>

     
  

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiii]

  

AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

IN revising Tertium Organum for the second edition in English my chief concern has been to coordinate its terminology with the more developed terminology of those of my books written after the publication of the second Russian edition of Tertium Organum, from which the English translation was made.

Such a unity of terminology is the more necessary because I am obliged to lead the reader into regions of thought and knowledge where boundaries have not been clearly established, and where different authors--and often one and the same author, in different works and during different periods of his activity--have called the same thing by different names, or different things by the same name.

It must be admitted that language is a weak and inadequate vehicle even for the expression of our usual understanding of things, to say nothing of those moments when the understanding unexpectedly expands and becomes deeper, and we see revealed an entire series of facts and relations for the description of which we have neither words nor expressions. But quite aside from this, in ordinary conditions of thinking and feeling, we are frequently at a loss for words, and we use one word at different times to describe different things.

On the other hand, it is no merit in an author to invent new words, or to use old words in new meanings which have nothing in common with the accepted ones--to create, in other words, a special terminology. I have always considered that it is necessary to write in the language which men commonly speak, and I have endeavored to do this, although in some cases it has been necessary to make some additions to and corrections of that language for the sake of exactness and lucidity.

In due time I shall separately consider the subject of language and the methods of its adaptation for the transmission of exact thought. For the present I have reference only to the language of Tertium Organum.

[p. xiv]

The first word demanding a more careful use is "consciousness."

In conversational language and in every-day psychology, even in psychology purporting to be scientific, the word consciousness is often used as a term for the designation of a complex of all psychic functions in general, or for their separate manifestations. At present I have not access to the necessary books--I abandoned them all in Petrograd, four years ago--but to the best of my recollection Prof. William James defined thought as "a moment of consciousness."

From my standpoint, which I shall elucidate in works now being prepared for the press, it is necessary to regard consciousness as distinct from the commonly understood psychic functions: thought, feeling and sensation. Over and above all this, consciousness has several exactly definable forms or phases, in each one of which thoughts, feelings and sensations can function, giving in each different results. Thus consciousness (be it this or something other) is a background upon which thoughts, feelings and sensations reveal themselves. This background can be more or less bright. But as thoughts, feelings and sensations have their own separate life, and can be regarded independently of this background, so can it be regarded and studied independently of them. For the present I shall not insist too strongly upon the idea of this ground as something separate in its substance from psychic functions. The practical result is the same if we say that thoughts, feelings and sensations may have a different character, and that thoughts, feelings and sensations of this or that character create this or that state of consciousness. It is important only to establish the fact that thoughts, feelings and sensations, i.e., psychic functions, are not consciousness, and that this or that state of consciousness is something pertaining to them, but separate from them, and in some cases capable of being separately observed.

In the early editions of Tertium Organum I have used the word consciousness in its generally accepted meaning, i.e., as a complex of psychic functions, or in the sense of their indication and contents. But as in my future works it will be necessary for me to use the word consciousness in its real and true meaning, I have tried in this revised text of Tertium Organum to substitute for the word consciousness (wherever it is used in the sense of a complex of psychic functions)

[p. xv]

such other words as psyche, or psychic life, which perfectly express my meaning in such cases.

Furthermore, in my work of revision, I have found numerous instances of illustrations, examples, etc., having no direct connection with the main theme. I have found also that some of these introduced themes vitiate the correctness of the main line of thought, creating associations which lead too far away. Other themes also, accidentally touched upon, demand a considerably more extended treatment than can be given them within the limits of this book, but being inadequately developed they leave a wrong impression.

In such cases I consider it necessary to eliminate this extraneous matter in order to elucidate the principal thought more clearly and directly, particularly as some of the questions touched upon demanding more or different exposition are discussed at length in my forth-coming books.

In conclusion, let me express to Mr. Nicholas Bessaraboff and to Mr. Claude Bragdon my deep appreciation of their labors on the translation of my book into English. This translation, made without my knowledge and participation, at a time when I was cut off by war and revolution from the civilized world, transmits my thought so exactly that after a very attentive review of the book I could find only one word to correct. Such a result could be achieved only because Mr. Bessaraboff and Mr. Bragdon were not translating words merely, but were grasping directly the thoughts back of them. Also, it is especially pleasant for me to remember that a number of years ago Mr. Bragdon's Man the Square reached me in Petrograd, and that I, not knowing Mr. Bragdon's other works at all, selected this little book from a whole series received from abroad, as one which carried the message of a common thought, a common understanding.

P. OUSPENSKY

Constantinople,
   June 1921

 

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

INTRODUCTION TO THE ENGLISH TRANSLATION

IN naming his book Tertium Organum Ouspensky reveals at a stroke that astounding audacity which characterizes his thought throughout--an audacity which we are accustomed to associate with the Russian mind in all its phases. Such a title says, in effect: "Here is a book which will reorganize all knowledge. The Organon of Aristotle formulated the laws under which the subject thinks; the Novum Organum of Bacon, the laws under which the object may be known; but The Third Canon of Thought existed before these two, and ignorance of its laws does not justify their violation. Tertium Organum shall guide and govern human thought henceforth."

How passing strange, in this era of negative thinking, of timid philosophizing, does such a challenge sound! And yet it has the echo in it of something heard before--what but the title of another volume, Hinton's A New Era of Thought?

Ouspensky's Tertium Organum and Hinton's A New Era of Thought present substantially the same philosophy (though Hinton's book only sketchily), arrived at by the same route--mathematics.

Here is food for thought. In the words of Philip Henry Wynne, "Mathematics possesses the most potent and perfect symbolism the intellect knows; and this symbolism has offered for generations certain concepts (of which hyper-dimensionality is only one) whose naming and envisagement by the human intellect is perhaps its loftiest achievement. Mathematics presents the highest certitudes known to the intellect, and is becoming more and more the final arbiter and interpreter in physics, chemistry and astronomy. Like Aaron's rod it threatens to swallow all other knowledges as fast as they assume organized form. Mathematics has already taken possession of great provinces of logic and psychology--will it embrace ethics, religion and philosophy?"

In Tertium Organum mathematics enters and pervades the field of philosophy; but so adroitly, so silently as it were, that one hardly

[p. 2]

knows that it is there. It dwells more in Ouspensky's method than in his matter, because for the most part the mathematical ideas necessary for an understanding of his thesis are such as any intelligent high school student can comprehend. The author puts to himself and to the reader certain questions, propounds certain problems, which have baffled the human mind for thousands of years--the problems of space, time, motion, causality, of free will and determination--and he deals with them according to the mathematical method: that is all. He has sensed the truth that the problem of mathematics is the problem of the world order, and as such must deal with every aspect of human life.

Mathematics is a terrible word to those whose taste and training have led them into other fields, so lest the non-mathematical reader should be turned back at the very threshold, deciding too hastily that the book is not for him, let me dwell rather on its richly humanistic aspect.

To such as ask no "key to the enigmas of the world," but only some light to live by, some mitigation of the daily grind, some glimpse of some more enlightened polity than that which rules the world today, this book should have an appeal. The author has thrown overboard all the jargon of all the schools; he uses the language of common sense, and of every day; his illustrations and figures of speech are homely, taken from the life of every day. He simply says to the reader, "Come let us reason together," and leads him away from the haunted jungle of philosophical systems and metaphysical theories, out into the light of day, there to contemplate and to endeavor to understand those primal mysteries which puzzle the mind of a child or of a savage no less than that of the sophisticated and super-subtle ponderer on the enigmas of the world. Not that Ouspensky is a trafficker in the obvious--far from it: those who know most, think most, feel most, will get most out of his book--but a great sanity pervades his pages, and he never leads away into labyrinths where guide and follower alike lose their way and fail to come to any end.

______

Leaving the average reader out of account for the moment, there are certain others whom the book should particularly interest--if only in the way of repulsion.

[p. 3]

First of all come the mathematicians and the theoretical physicists, for they already, without knowing it, have invaded that "dark backward and abysm of time" which the Ouspenskian philosophy lights up--and are by way of losing themselves there.

That is to say, in certain of their calculations, they are employing four mutually interchangeable coordinates, three of space and one of time. In other words, they use time as though it were a dimension of space. Ouspensky tells them the reason they are able to do this. Time is the fourth dimension of space imperfectly sensed--apprehended by consciousness successively, and thereby creating the temporal illusion.

Moreover, mathematicians are perforce concerning themselves with magnitudes to which the ordinary logic no longer applies. Ouspensky presents a new logic, or rather, he presents anew an ancient logic--the logic of intuition--removing at a stroke all of the nightmare aspects, the preposterous paradoxes of the new mathematics, which by reason of its extraordinary development has shattered the old logic, as a growing oak shatters the containing jar.

It is from the philosophic camp, no doubt, that the book will receive its sharpest criticism, on  of the author's lese-majeste toward so many of the crowned kings of philosophic thought, and his devastating assault on positivism--that inevitable by-product of our materialistic way of looking at the world. His attempt to prove the Kantian problem--the subjectivity of space and time--doubtless will be acutely challenged, and with some chance of success, because the two chapters devoted to this are perhaps the least convincing of the book. But no one heretofore has even attempted to demonstrate absolutely or successfully to controvert the staggering proposition advanced by Kant regarding space and time as forms of consciousness.

Whatever the verdict of the philosophical pundits of the day and hour, whether favorable or otherwise, Ouspensky is sure of a place in the hierarchy of philosophers, for he has essayed to solve the most profound problems of human existence by the aid of the binocular vision of the mathematician and the mystic. Starting from the irreducible minimum of knowledge, he has carried philosophy into regions not hitherto explored.

[p. 4]

To persons of an artistic or devotional bent the book will be as water in the desert. These, always at a disadvantage among the purely practical-minded, by whom they are overwhelmingly out-numbered, will find in Ouspensky a champion whose weapon is mathematical certitude, the very thing by which the practical-minded swear. These he puts to rout, holds up to ridicule, and applauds every effort to escape into the "world of the wondrous."

But most of all Ouspensky will be loved by all true lovers, for his chapter on the subject of love. We have had Schopenhauer on love, and Freud on love, but what dusty answers do they give to the soul of a lover! Edward Carpenter comes much nearer the mark, but Ouspensky penetrates to its very center. It is because our loves are so dampened by our egotisms, our cynicisms and our cowardices that we rot and smoulder instead of bursting into purifying flame. Just as Goethe's Werther, with its sex-sentimentality, is said to have provoked an epidemic of suicides, so may Tertium Organum--which restores love to that high heaven from whence descend every beauty and benison--inaugurate a renascence of love and joy.

From one point of view this is a terrible book: there is a revolution in it--a revolution of the very poles of thought. Some it will rob of their dearest illusions, it will cut the very ground from beneath their feet, it will consign them to the Abyss. It is a great destroyer of complacency. Yes, this is a dangerous book--but then, life is like that.

_______

It is beyond the province of this Introduction either to outline the Ouspenskian philosophy at any length, or to discuss it critically; but some slight indication of its drift may be of assistance to the reader.

The book might have appropriately been called A Study of Consciousness, for Ouspensky comes early to the conclusion that all other methods of approach to an understanding of the "enigmas of the world" are vain. Chapters I to VII, inclusive, deal with the problem of the world-order by the objective method. The author erects an elaborate scaffolding for his future edifice, and after it has served its purpose, throws it down. Aware of the deficiencies

[p. 5]

of the objective method and having made the reader conscious of them too, he suddenly alters his system of attack. From chapter VIII onward, he undertakes the study of the world-order from the standpoint of subjectivity--of consciousness.

By a method both ingenious and new he correlates the different grades of consciousness observable in nature--those of vegetable-animal, animal and man--with the space sense, showing that as consciousness changes and develops, the sense of space changes and develops too. That is to say, the dimensionality of the world depends on the development of consciousness. Man, having reached the third stage in that development, has a sense of three-dimensional space--and for no other reason.

Ouspensky concludes that nothing except consciousness unfolds, develops, and as there appears to be no limit to this development, he conceives of space as the multi-dimensional mirror of consciousness and of time and motion as illusion--what appears to be time and motion being in reality only the movement of consciousness upon a higher space.

The problem of superior states of consciousness in which "there shall be time no longer" is thus directly opened up, and in discussing their nature and method of attainment, he quotes freely from the rich literature of mysticism. Instead of attempting to rationalize these higher states of consciousness, as some authors do, he applies to them the logic of intuition--"Tertium Organum"--paradoxical from the standpoint of ordinary reason, but true in relation to the noumenal world.

Joseph Conrad and Ford Madox Hueffer once wrote a novel called The Inheritors and by this they meant the people of the fourth dimension. Though there is small resemblance between Ouspensky's "superman" and theirs, it is his idea also that those of this world who succeed in developing higher-dimensional, or "cosmic" consciousness will indeed inherit--will control and regulate human affairs by reason of their superior wisdom and power. In this, and in this alone, dwells the "salvation" of the world. His superman is the "just man made perfect" of the Evangelist. The struggle for mastery between the blind and unconscious forces of materialism on the one hand, and the spiritually illumined on the other, is already upon us, and all conflicts between nations, peoples

[p. 6]

and classes must now be interpreted in terms of this greater warfare between "two races" of men, in which the superior minority will either conquer or disappear.

These people of the fourth dimension are in the world but not of it: their range is far wider than this slum of space. In them dormant faculties are alert. Like birds of the air, their fitting symbol, they are at home in realms which others cannot enter, even though already "there." Nor are these heavenly eagles confined to the narrow prison of the breast. Their bodies are as tools which they may take up or lay aside at will. This phenomenal world, which seems so real, is to them as insubstantial as the image of a landscape in a lake. Such is the Ouspenskian superman.

The entire book is founded upon a new generalization--new, that is, in philosophy, but already familiar to mathematicians and  physicists. This generalization involves startling and revolutionary ideas in regard to space, time and motion far removed from those of Euclidian geometry and classical physics.

Ouspensky handles these new ideas in an absolutely original way, making them the basis of an entire philosophy of life. To the timid and purblind this philosophy will be nothing short of terrifying, but to the clear-eyed and steadfast watcher, shipwrecked on this shoal of time, these vistas, overflowing with beauty, strangeness, doubt, terror and divinity, will be more welcome than anything in life.

Fear not the new generalization.

______

Ouspensky's clearness of thought is mirrored in a corresponding clarity of expression. He sometimes repeats the difficult and important passages in an altered form of words, he uses short sentences and short paragraphs, and italicizes significant phrases and significant words. He defines where definition is needed, and suggests collateral trains of thought with a skill which makes the reader who is intuitive a creator on his own account. Schopenhauer has said that it is always a sign of genius to treat difficult matters simply, as it is a sign of dullness to make simple matters appear recondite. Ouspensky exhibits this order of genius, and that other,

[p. 7]

mentioned by Schopenhauer, which consists in choosing always the apt illustration, the illuminating simile.

The translators have tried to be rigidly true to the Russian original, and they have been at great pains to verify every English quotation so far as has been possible. It is therefore a source of great gratification to them that their efforts should have received the unqualified endorsement of the author himself.

CLAUDE BRAGDON

Rochester, N. Y.
   January 31, 1922

 

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 8] [p. 9]

  

TERTIUM
 ORGANUM

[p. 10]

          "I   have called this system of higher logic Tertium   Organum because for us it is   the third canon--third   instrument--of thought after   those of Aristotle and Bacon. The first was Organon, the second, Novum   Organum. But the third existed earlier than the first."
                                                              TERTIUM   ORGANUM (page <page 262>)

     
    

[p. 11]

  

CHAPTER I

          What   do we know and what do we not know? Our data, and the things for which we   seek. The unknown mistaken for the known. Matter and motion. What does the   positive philosophy come to? Identity of the unknown: x=y, y=x. What we really   know. The existence of consciousness in us, and of the world outside us.   Dualism or monism? Subjective and objective knowledge. Where do the causes of   the sensations lie? Kant's system. Time and Space. Kant and the   "ether." Mach's observation. With what does the physicist really   deal?

"Learn to   discern the real from the false"
   THE VOICE OF THE SILENCE   
   H. P. B.     

 

     
    

THE most difficult thing is to know what we do know, and what we do not know.

Therefore, desiring to know anything, we shall before all else determine WHAT we accept as given, and WHAT as demanding definition and proof; that is, determine WHAT we know already, and WHAT we wish to know.

In relation to the knowledge of the world and of ourselves, the conditions would be ideal could we venture to accept nothing as given, and count all as demanding definition and proof. In other words, it would be best to assume that we know nothing, and make this our point of departure.

But unfortunately such conditions are impossible to create. Knowledge must start from some foundation, something must be recognized as known; otherwise we shall be obliged always to de-fine one unknown by means of another.

Looking at the matter from another point of view, we shall hesitate to accept as the known things--as the given ones--those in the main completely unknown, only presupposed, and therefore the things sought for. Should we do this, we are likely to fall into such a dilemma as that in which positive philosophy now finds itself--and by positive philosophy I mean a general trend of thought

[p. 12]

based on the data of those sciences which are now accepted as experimental and positive. This philosophy is founded on the existence of matter (materialism) or energy: that is, of a force, or motion, (energeticism); though in reality matter and motion were always the unknown x and y, and were defined by means of one another.

It must be perfectly clear to everyone that it is impossible to accept the thing sought as the given; and impossible to define one unknown by means of another. The result is nothing but the identity of the unknown: x=y, y=x.

This identity of the unknown is the ultimate conclusion to which positive philosophy comes.

Matter is that in which proceed the changes called motion: and motions are those changes which proceed in matter.

_______

But what do we know?

We know that with the very first awakening of knowledge, man is confronted with two obvious facts:

The existence of the world in which he lives; and the existence of psychic life in himself.

Neither of these can he prove or disprove, but they are facts: they constitute reality for him.

It is possible to meditate upon the mutual correlation of these two facts. It is possible to try to reduce them to one; that is, to regard the psychic or inner world as a part, reflection, or function of the world, or the world as a part, reflection, or function of that inner world. But such a procedure constitutes a departure from facts, and all such considerations of the world and of the self, to the ordinary non-philosophical mind, will not have the character of obviousness. On the contrary the sole obvious fact remains the antithesis of I and Not-I--our inner psychic life and the outer world.,

Further on we shall return to this fundamental thesis. But thus far we have no basis on which to found a contradiction of the obvious fact of the existence of ourselves--i.e., of our inner life--and of the world in which we live. This we shall therefore accept as the given.

This however is the only thing that we have the right to accept as

[p. 13]

given: all the rest demands proof and definition in terms of these two given data.

Space, with its extension; time, with the idea of before, now, after; quantity, mass, substantiality; number, equality and inequality; identity and difference; cause and effect; the ether, atoms, electrons, energy, life, death--all things that form the foundation of our so-called knowledge: these are the unknown things.

The existence in us of psychic life, i.e., of sensations, perceptions, conceptions, reasoning, feeling, desires etc., and the existence of the world outside of us--from these two fundamental data immediately proceed our common and clearly understood division of everything that we know into subjective and objective.

Everything that we accept as a property of the world, we call objective; and everything that we accept as a property of our psyche, we call subjective.

The subjective world we recognize directly: it is in ourselves--we are one with it.

The objective world we picture to ourselves as existing somewhere outside of us--we and it are different things.

It seems to us that if we should close our eyes, then the objective world would continue to exist, such as we just saw it; and if our inner life were to disappear, so would the subjective world disappear--yet the objective world would exist as before, as it existed at the time when we were not; when our subjective world was not.

Our relation to the objective world is most exactly defined by the fact that we perceive it as existing in time and space; otherwise, out of these conditions, we can neither conceive nor imagine it. In general, we say that the objective world consists of things and phenomena, i.e., things and changes in states of things. The PHENOMENA exist for us in time; the THINGS, in space.

But such a division of the subjective and the objective world does not satisfy us.

By means of reasoning we can establish the fact that in reality we know only our own sensations, perceptions and conceptions, and we cognize the objective world by projecting outside of ourselves the causes of our sensations, presupposing them to contain these causes.

Then we find that our knowledge of the subjective world, and of

[p. 14]

the objective world also, can be true and false, correct and incorrect.

The criterion for the definition of correctness or incorrectness of our knowledge of the subjective world is the form of the relations of one sensation to others, and the force and character of the sensation itself. In other words, the correctness of one sensation is verified by the comparison of it with another of which we are more sure, or by the intensity and "taste" of a given sensation.

The criterion for the definition of correctness or incorrectness of our knowledge of the objective world is the very same. It seems to us that we define the things and phenomena of the objective world by means of comparing them among themselves; and we think we find the laws of their existence outside of us, and independent of our perception of them. But it is an illusion. We know nothing about things separately from us; and we have no other means of verifying the correctness of our knowledge of the objective world than BY SENSATIONS.

______

Since the remotest antiquity the question of our relation to the true causes of our sensations has constituted the main subject of philosophical research. Men have always felt that they should have some solution for this question, some answer for it. And these answers have vacillated between two poles, from the full negation of the causes themselves, and the assertion that the causes of sensations are contained within ourselves and not in anything outside of us--up to the recognition that we know these causes, that they are embodied in the phenomena of the outer world, that these phenomena constitute the cause of sensations; and that the cause of all observed phenomena lies in the movement of "atoms," and the oscillations of the "ether." It is believed that if we cannot observe these motions and oscillations it is only because we have not sufficiently powerful instruments, and that when such instruments are at our disposal we shall be able to see the movements of atoms as well as we see, through powerful telescopes, stars the very existence of which were never guessed.

______

[p. 15]

In modern philosophy Kant's system occupies a middle position in relation to this problem of the causes of sensations, not sharing either of these extreme views. Kant proved that the causes of our sensations are in the outside world, but that we cannot know these causes through any sensuous approach--that is, by such means as we know phenomena--and that we cannot know these causes, and shall never know them.

Kant established the fact that everything that is known through the senses is known in terms of time and space, and that out of time and space we cannot know anything by way of the senses; that time and space are necessary conditions of sensuous receptivity (i.e., receptivity by means of the five organs of sense). Moreover, what is most important, he established the fact that extension in space and existence in time are not properties appertaining to things, but just  properties of our sensuous receptivity; that in reality, apart from our sensuous knowledge of them, things exist independently of time and space; but we can never perceive them out of time and space, and perceiving things and phenomena thus sensuously, by virtue of it we impose upon them the conditions of time and space, as belonging to our form of perception.

Thus space and time, defining everything that we cognize by sensuous means, are in themselves just forms of our receptivity, categories of our intellect, the prism through which we regard the world--or in other words, space and time do not represent properties of the world, but just properties of our knowledge of the world gained through our sensuous organism. From this it follows that the world, apart from our knowledge of it, has neither extension in space nor existence in time; these are properties which we add to it.

Cognitions of space and time arise in our intellect during its touch with the external world by means of the organs of sense, and do not exist in the external world apart from our contact with it.

Space and time are categories of intellect, i.e., properties which are ascribed by us to the external world. They are signal posts, signs put up by ourselves because we cannot picture the external world without their help. They are graphics by which we represent

[p. 16]

the world to ourselves. Projecting outside of ourselves the causes of our sensations, we are designing those causes in space, and we picture continuous reality to ourselves as a series of moments of time following one another. This is necessary for us because a thing having no definite extension in space, not occupying a certain part of space and not lasting a certain length of time, does not exist for us at all. That is, a thing not in space, divorced from the idea of space, and not included in the category of space, will not differ from some other thing in any particular; it will occupy the very same place, will coincide with it. Also, all phenomena not in time, divorced from the idea of time, not taken in this or that fashion from the standpoint of before, now, after, would co-exist for us simultaneously, and all mixed up with one another, and our weak mind would not be able to distinguish one moment in the infinite variety.

Therefore our consciousness segregates, out of a chaos of impressions, separate groups, and we construct in space and time the perceptions of things according to these groups of impressions.

It is necessary for us to divide things somehow, and we divide them into the categories of space and time.

But we should remember that these divisions exist only in us, in our knowledge of things and not in the things themselves; that we do not know the true relations of things among themselves, and the real things we do not know, but only phantoms, visions of things--we do not know the relation existing among the things in reality. At the same time we quite definitely know that our division of things into the categories of space and time does not at all correspond to the division of things in themselves, independently of our receptivity of them; and we quite definitely know that if there exist any division at all among things in themselves, it will in no case be a division in terms of space and time according to our usual understanding of these words, because such a division is not a property of things, but of our knowledge of things gained through the senses. Moreover, we do not know if it is even possible to distinguish those divisions which we see, i.e., in space and time, if things are looked at not through human eyes, not from the human . In point of fact we do not know but that

[p. 17]

our world would present an entirely different aspect for a differently built organism.

We cannot perceive things as images outside of the categories of space and time, but we constantly think of them outside of space and time.

When we say that table, we picture the table to ourselves in space and time; but when we say an object made of wood, not meaning any definite thing, but speaking generally, it will relate to all things made of wood throughout the world, and in all ages. An imaginative person could conceive that we are referring to some great thing made of wood, composed of all objects whenever and wherever wooden things existed, these forming its constituent atoms, as it were.

We do not comprehend all these matters quite clearly, but in general it is plain that we think in space and time by perceptions only; but by concepts we think independently of space and time.

______

Kant named his views critical idealism, in contradiction to dogmatic idealism, of  Berkeley was a representative.

According to dogmatic idealism, all the world, all things--i.e., the true causes of our sensations--do not exist except in our consciousness: they exist only so far as we know them. The entire world perceived by us is just a reflection of ourselves.

Kantian idealism recognizes a world of causes outside of us, but asserts that we cannot know the world by means of sensuous perception, and everything that we perceive, generally speaking, is of our own creation--the product of a cognizing being.

So, according to Kant, everything that we find in things is put in them by ourselves. Independently of ourselves we do not know what the world is like. And our cognition of things has nothing in common with the things as they are outside of us--that is, in themselves. Furthermore, and most important, our ignorance of things in themselves does not depend upon our insufficient knowledge, but is due to the fact that by means of sensuous perception we cannot know the world correctly at all. That is

[p. 18]

to say, we cannot truly declare that although now we perhaps know little, presently we shall know more, and at length shall come to a correct understanding of the world. It is not true because our experimental knowledge is not a confused perception of a real world. It is a very acute perception of an entirely unreal world appearing round about us at the moment of our contact with the world of true causes, to which we cannot find the way because we are lost in an unreal "material" world. For this reason the extension of the objective sciences does not bring us any nearer to the knowledge of things in themselves, or of true causes.

In A Critique of Pure Reason Kant affirms that:

Nothing which is intuited in space is a thing in itself, and space is not a form which belongs as a property to things; but objects are quite unknown to us in themselves, and what we call outward objects are nothing else but mere representations of our sensibility, whose form is space, but whose real correlated thing in itself is not known by means of these representations, nor ever can be, but respecting which, in experience, no inquiry is ever made.

The things which we intuit are not in themselves the same as our representation of them in intuition, nor are their relations in themselves so constituted as they appear to us; and if we take away the subject, or even only the subjective constitution of our senses in general, then not only the nature and relations of objects in space and time disappear, but even space and time themselves.

What may be the nature of objects considered as things in themselves and without reference to the receptivity of our sensibility is quite unknown to us. We know nothing more than our own mode of perceiving them, which is peculiar to us and which though not of necessity pertaining to every animated being, is so to the whole human race.

Supposing that we should carry our empirical intuition even to the very highest degree of clearness we should not thereby advance one step nearer to the constitution of objects as things in themselves.

To say then that our sensibility is nothing but the confused representation of things containing exclusively that which belongs to them as things in themselves, and this under an accumulation of characteristic marks and partial representations which we cannot distinguish in consciousness, is a falsification of the conception of sensibility and phenomenization, which renders our whole doctrine thereof empty and

[p. 19]

useless. The difference between a confused and a clear representation is merely logical, and has nothing to do with content.

_______

Up to the present time Kant's propositions have remained in the very form that he left them. Despite the multiplicity of new philosophical systems which appeared during the nineteenth century, and despite the number of philosophers who have particularly studied, commented upon, and interpreted Kant's writings, Kant's principal propositions have remained quite undeveloped, primarily because most people do not know how to read Kant at all, and they therefore dwell upon the unimportant and non-essential, ignoring the substance.

Yet really Kant simply put the question, threw to the world the problem, demanding the solution but not pointing the way toward it.

This fact is usually omitted when speaking of Kant. He propounded the riddle, but did not give the solution of it.

And to the present day we repeat Kant's propositions, we consider them incontrovertible, but in the main we represent them to our understanding very badly, and they are not correlated with other departments of our knowledge. All our positive science--physics (with chemistry) and biology--is built upon hypotheses CONTRADICTORY to Kant's propositions.

Moreover, we do not realize how we ourselves impose upon the world the properties of space, i.e., extension; nor do we realize how the world--earth, sea, trees, men--cannot possess such extension.

We do not understand how we can see and measure that extension if it does not exist--nor what the world represents in itself, if it does not possess extension.

But does the world really exist? Or, as a logical conclusion from Kant's ideas, shall we recognize the validity of Berkeley's idea, and deny the existence of the world itself except in imagination?

______

Positive philosophy stands in a very ambiguous relation to Kant's views. It accepts them and it does not accept them: it accepts,

[p. 20]

and considers them correct in their relation to the direct experience of the organs of sense--what we see, hear, touch. That is, positive philosophy recognizes the subjectivity of our receptivity, and recognizes everything that we perceive in objects as imposed upon them by ourselves--but this in relation to the direct experience of the senses only.

When it concerns itself with "scientific experience" however, in which precise instruments and calculations are used, positive philosophy evidently considers Kant's view in relation to that invalid, assuming that "scientific experience" makes known to us the very substance of things, the true causes of our sensations--or if it does not do so now, it brings us closer to the truth of things, and can inform us later.

Contrary to Kant, the positivists are sure that "more clear knowledge of phenomena makes them acquainted with things in themselves." They think that in looking upon physical phenomena as the motions of the ether, or as electrical or magnetic phenomena, and calculating their motions, they begin to know the very substance of things, i.e., the causes of phenomena; in other words, they believe exactly in the possibility of what Kant denied--the comprehension of the true substance of things by means of the investigation of phenomena. Moreover many physicists do not consider it necessary even to know Kant; and they could not themselves exactly define in what relation they stand toward him. Of course it is possible not to know Kant, but it is impossible to controvert him. Every description of physical phenomena, by its every word, is related to the problems set forth by Kant--remains in this or that relation to them.

In general, the position of "science" in regard to this question of "subjectively imposed" or "objectively cognized" is more than tottering, and in order to form its conclusions "science" is forced to accept many purely hypothetical suppositions as things known--as indubitable data, not demanding proof.

Moreover, physicists forget one very significant fact: in his book, Analysis of Sensations, Mach says:

In the investigation of purely physical processes we generally employ concepts of so abstract a character that as a rule we think only cursorily, or not at all, of the sensations (elements) that lie at their base. . .

[p. 21]

[paragraph continues] The foundation of all purely physical operations is based upon an almost unending series of sensations, particularly if we take into consideration the adjustment of the apparatus which must precede the actual experiment. Now it can easily happen to the physicist who does not study the psychology of his operations, that he does not (to reverse a well-known saying) see the trees for the wood, that he overlooks the sensory element at the foundation of his work. . . Psychological analysis has taught us that this is not surprising, since the physicist is always operating with sensations. [*1]

Mach here calls attention to a very important thing. Physicists de not consider it necessary to know psychology and to deal with it in their conclusions.

But when they are more or less acquainted with psychology, with that part of it which treats of the forms of receptivity, and take it into consideration, then they hold the most fantastic duality of opinion, as in the case of the man of orthodox belief who tries to reconcile the dogmas of faith with the arguments of reason, and who is obliged to believe simultaneously in the creation of the world in seven days, seven thousand years ago, and in geological periods hundreds of thousands of years long, and in the evolutionary theory. He is thus forced to resort to sophisms, and demonstrate that by seven days is meant seven periods. But why seven, exactly, he is unable to explain. For physicists the role of the "creation of the world" is played by the atomic theory and the ether, with its wave-like vibrations, and further by the electrons, and the energetic, or electromagnetic theory of the world.

Or sometimes it is even worse, for the physicist in the depth of his soul feels the falsity of all old and new scientific theories but fears to hang in the air, as it were; to take refuge in mere negation. He has no system in place of that whose falsity he already feels; he is afraid to make a plunge into mere emptiness. Lacking sufficient courage to declare that he believes in nothing at all, he accoutres himself in all contradictory theories, as in an official uniform, only because with this uniform are bound up certain rights and privileges, outer as well as inner, consisting of a certain confidence in himself and in his surroundings, to forego which he has no strength and determination. The unbelieving positivist--this is the tragic figure of our times, analogous to the atheist or unbelieving priest of the times of Voltaire.

[p. 22]

Out of this abhorrence of a vacuum come all dualistic theories which recognize "spirit" and "matter" existing simultaneously and independently of one another.

 

In general, to a disinterested observer, the state of our contemporary science should be of great psychological interest. In all branches of scientific knowledge we are absorbing an enormous number of facts destructive of the harmony of existing systems. And these systems can maintain themselves only by reason of the heroic attempts of scientific men who are trying to close their eyes to a long series of new facts which threatens to submerge everything in an irresistible stream. If in reality we were to collect these system-destroying facts they would be so numerous in every department of knowledge as to exceed those upon which existing systems are founded. The systematization of that which we do not know may yield us more for the true understanding of the world and the self than the systematization of that which in the opinion of "exact science" we do know.

Footnotes

^21:1 Open Court Publishing Co.'s edition of Mach's work. 1914, pages 41, 42, and 43.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 23]

  

CHAPTER II

          A   new view of the Kantian problem. The books of Hinton. The   "space-sense" and its evolution. A system for the development of a   sense of the fourth dimension by exercises with colored cubes. The   geometrical conception of space. Three perpendiculars--why three? Can   everything existing be measured by three perpendiculars? The indices of   existence. Reality of ideas. Insufficient evidence of the existence of matter   and motion. Matter and motion are only logical concepts, like   "good" and "evil."

     
    

AS already stated, Kant propounded the problem, but gave no solution of it, nor did he point the way to a solution. And not one of the known commentators, interpreters, followers or adversaries of Kant has found a solution, or the way to it.

I find the first flashes of a right understanding of the Kantian problem, and the first suggestions in regard to a possible way toward its solution, in the attempts at a new treatment of the problem of space and time, involving the concept of the "fourth dimension" and higher dimensions in general. An interesting synopsis of many things developed in this direction is that of C. H. Hinton, author of the books, A New Era of Thought, and The Fourth Dimension.

Hinton notes, among other things, that in commenting upon Kantian ideas, only their negative side is usually insisted upon, namely, the fact that we can cognize things in a sensuous way, in terms of space and time only, is regarded as an obstacle, hindering us from seeing what things in themselves really are, preventing the possibility of cognizing them as they are, imposing upon them that which is not inherent in them, shutting them off from us.

But [says Hinton] if we take Kant's statement simply as it is--not seeing in the spatial conception a hindrance to right receptivity--that we apprehend things by means of space--then it is equally allowable to consider our space sense not as a negative condition, hindering our perception of the world, but as a positive means by which the mind grasps its experiences, i.e., by which we cognize the world.

[p. 24]

There is, in so many books in which the subject is treated, a certain air of despondency--as if this space apprehension were a kind of veil which shut us off from nature. But there is no need to adopt this feeling. The first postulate of this book is a full recognition of the fact that it is by means of space that we apprehend what is.

Space is the instrument of the mind.

Very often a statement which seems to be most deep and abstruse and hard to grasp, is simply the form into which deep thinkers have thrown a very simple and practical observation. And for the present let us look on Kant's great doctrine of space from a practical point of view, and it comes to this--it is important to develop the space sense, for it is the means by which we think about real things.

Now according to Kant [Hinton goes on to say] the space sense, or the intuition of space, is the most fundamental power of the mind. But I do not find anywhere a systematic and thorough-going education of the space sense. It is left to be organized by accident. Yet the special development of the space sense makes us acquainted with a whole series of new conceptions.

Fichte, Schelling, Hegel, have developed certain tendencies and have written remarkable books, but the true successors of Kant are Gauss and Lobachevsky.

For if our intuition of space is the means whereby we apprehend, then it follows that there may be different kinds of intuitions of space. Who can tell what the absolute space intuition is? This intuition of space must be colored, so to speak, by the conditions (of psychical activity) of the being which uses it.

By a remarkable analysis the great geometers above mentioned have shown that space is not limited as ordinary experience would seem to inform us, but that we are quite capable of conceiving different kinds of space.

(A New Era of Thought.)           

Hinton invented a complicated system for the education and development of the space sense by means of exercises with groups the cubes of different colors. The books above mentioned are devoted to the exposition of this system. In my opinion Hinton's exercises are interesting from a theoretical standpoint, but they are practically valuable only for such as have the same turn of mind as Hinton's own.

Exercises of the mind according to his system must first of all lead to the development of the ability to imagine objects, not as the eye sees them, i.e., in perspective, but as they are geometrically--to learn to imagine the cube, for example, simultaneously from all sides. Moreover such a development of the imagination

[p. 25]

as overcomes the illusions of perspective results in the expansion of the limits of consciousness, thus creating new conceptions and augmenting the faculty for perceiving analogies.

______

Kant established the fact that the development of knowledge under the existing conditions of receptivity will not bring us any closer to things in themselves. But there are theories asserting that it is possible, if desired, to change the very conditions of receptivity, and thus to approach the true substance of things. In the books above referred to, Hinton tries to unite the scientific foundations of such theories.

Our space as we ordinarily think of it is conceived as limited--not in extent, but in a certain way which can only be realized when we think of our ways of measuring space objects. It is found that there are only three independent directions in which a body can be measured--it must have height, length and breadth, but it has no more than these dimensions, if any other measurement be taken in it, this new measurement will be found to be compounded of the old measurements.

It is impossible to find a point in the body which could not be arrived at by travelling in combinations of the three directions already taken.

But why should space be limited to three independent directions?

Geometers have found that there is no reason why bodies which we can measure should thus be limited. As a matter of fact all the bodies which we can measure are thus limited. So we come to this conclusion, that the space which we use for conceiving ordinary objects in the world is limited to three dimensions. But it might be possible for there to be beings living in a world such that they would conceive a space of four dimensions. [*1]

It is possible to say a great deal about space of higher dimensions than our own, and to work out analytically many problems which suggest themselves. But can we conceive four-dimensional space in the same way in which we can conceive our own space? Can we think of a body in four dimensions as a unit having properties in the same way as we think of a body having a definite shape in the space with which we are familiar?

There is really no more difficulty in conceiving four-dimensional shapes, when we go about it in the right way, than in conceiving the idea of solid shapes, nor is there any mystery at all about it.

When the faculty to apprehend in four dimensions is acquired--or rather when it is brought into consciousness--for it exists in every

[p. 26]

one in imperfect form--a new horizon opens. The mind acquires a development of power, and in this use of ampler space as a mode of thought, a path is opened by using that very truth which, when first stated by Kant, seemed to close the mind within such fast limits. Our perception is subject to the condition of being in space. But space is not limited as we at first think.

The next step after having formed this power of conception in ampler space, is to investigate nature and see what phenomena are to be explained by four-dimensional relations.

The thought of past ages has used the conception of a three-dimensional space, and by that means has classified many phenomena and has obtained rules for dealing with matters of great practical utility. The path which opens immediately before us in the future is that of applying the conception of four-dimensional space to the phenomena of nature, and of investigating what can be found out by this new means of apprehension. . . .

For development of knowledge it is necessary to separate the self-elements, i.e., the personal elements which we put in everything cognized by us, from that which is cognized, in order that our attention may not be distracted (upon ourselves) from the properties which we, in substance, .

Only by getting rid of the self-elements in our receptivity do we put ourselves in a position in which we can propound sensible questions. Only by getting rid of the notion of a circular motion of the sun around the earth (i.e., around us--self-element) do we prepare our way to study the sun as it really is.

But the worst about a self-element is that its presence is never dreamed of till it is got rid of.

In order to understand what the self-element in our receptivity means, imagine ourselves to be translated suddenly to another part of the universe, and to find there intelligent beings and to hold conversation with them. If we told them that we came from this world, and were to describe the sun to them, saying that it was a bright, hot body which moved around us, they would reply: "You have told us something about the sun, but you have also told us something about yourselves.". . .

Therefore, desiring to tell something about the sun, we shall first of all get rid of the self-element which is introduced into our knowledge of the sun by the movement of the earth, upon which we are, round it. . . .

One of our serious pieces of work will be to get rid of the self-elements in the knowledge of the arrangement of objects.

The relations of our universe or our space with regard to the wider universe of four-dimensional space are altogether undetermined. The real relationship will require a great deal of study to apprehend, and when apprehended will seem as natural to us as the position of the earth among the other planets seems to us now. . . .

I would divide studies of arrangement into two classes: those which

[p. 27]

create the faculty of arrangement, and those which use it and exercise it. Mathematics exercises it, but I do not think it creates it; and unfortunately, in mathematics as it is now often taught, the pupil is launched into a vast system of symbols: the whole use and meaning of symbols (namely, as means to acquire a clear grasp of facts) is lost to him. . . .

Of the possible units which will serve for the study of arrangement, I take the cube; and I have found that whenever I took any other unit I got wrong, puzzled, and lost my way. With the cube one does not get along very fast, but everything is perfectly obvious and simple, and builds up into a whole of which every part is evident. . . .

Our work then will be this: a study, by means of cubes, of the facts of arrangement; and the process of learning will be an active one of actually putting up the cubes. Thus we will bring our minds into contact with nature.

(A New Era of Thought.)

______

Taking all these things into consideration, we should try to define clearly our understanding of those sides of our receptivity dealt with by Kant.

What is space?

Taken as object, that is, perceived by our consciousness, space is for us the form of the universe or the form of the matter in the universe.

Space possesses an infinite extension in all directions. But it can be measured in only three directions independent of one another--in length, breadth, and height; these directions we call the dimensions of space, and we say that our space has three dimensions: it is three-dimensional.

By independent direction we mean in this case a line at right angles to another line.

Our geometry (or the science of measurement of the earth, or matter in space) knows only three such lines, which are mutually at right angles to one another and not parallel among themselves.

But why three only, and not ten or fifteen? 

This we do not know.

And here is another very significant fact: either because of some mysterious property of the universe, or because of some mental

[p. 28]

limitation, we cannot even imagine to ourselves more than three independent directions.

But we speak of the universe as infinite, and because the first condition of infinity is infinity in all directions and in all possible relations, so we must presuppose in space an infinite number of dimensions: that is, we must presuppose an infinite number of lines perpendicular and not parallel to each other; and yet out of these lines we know, for some reason, only three.

It is usually in some such guise that the question of higher dimensionality appears to normal human consciousness.

Since we cannot construct more than three mutually independent perpendiculars, and if the three-dimensionality of our space is conditional upon this, we are forced to admit the indubitable fact of the limitedness of our space in relation to geometrical possibilities: though of course if the properties of space are created by some limitation of consciousness, then the limitedness lies in ourselves.

No matter what this limitedness depends on, it is a fact that it exists.

A given point can be the vertex of only eight independent tetrahedrons. Through a given point it is possible to draw only three perpendicular and not parallel straight lines.

Upon this as a basis, we define the dimensionality of space by the number of lines it is possible to draw in it which are mutually at right angles one with another.

The line upon which there cannot be a perpendicular, that is, another line, constitutes linear, or one-dimensional space.

Upon the surface two perpendiculars are possible. This is superficial, or two-dimensional space.

In "space" three perpendiculars are possible. This is solid, or three-dimensional space.

The idea of the fourth dimension arose from the assumption that in addition to the three dimensions known to our geometry there exists still a fourth, for some reason unknown and inaccessible to us, i.e., that in addition to the three known to us, a mysterious fourth perpendicular is possible.

This assumption is practically founded on the consideration

[p. 29]

that there are things and phenomena in the world undoubtedly really existing, but quite incommensurable in terms of length, breadth and thickness, and lying as it were outside of three-dimensional space.

______

By really existing we understand that which produces definite action, which possesses certain functions, which appears to be the cause of something else.

That which does not exist cannot produce any action, has no function, cannot be a cause.

But there are different modes of existence. There is physical existence, recognized by certain sorts of actions and functions, and there is metaphysical existence, recognized by its actions and its functions.

A house exists, and the idea of good and evil exists. But they do not exist in like manner. One and the same method of proof of existence does not suffice for the proof of the existence of a house and for the proof of the existence of an idea. A house is a physical fact, an idea is a metaphysical fact. Physical and metaphysical facts exist, but they exist differently.

In order to prove the idea of a division into good and evil, i.e., a metaphysical fact, I have only to prove its possibility. This is already sufficiently established. But if I should prove that a house, i.e., a physical fact, may exist, it does not at all mean that it exists really. If I prove that a man may own the house it is no proof that he owns it.

Our relation to an idea and to a house are quite different, It is possible by a certain effort to destroy a house--to burn, to wreck it. The house will cease to exist. But suppose you attempt to destroy, by an effort, an idea. The more you try to contest, argue, refute, ridicule, the more the idea is likely to spread, grow, strengthen. And contrariwise, silence, oblivion, non-action, "non-resistance" will exterminate, or in any case will weaken the idea. Silence, oblivion, will not wreck a house, will not hurt a stone.

[p. 30]

[paragraph continues] It is clear that the existence of a house and that of an idea are quite different existences.

Of such different existences we know very many. A book exists, and also the contents of a book. Notes exist, and so does the music that the notes combine to make. A coin exists, and so does the purchasing value of a coin. A word exists, and the energy which it contains.

We discern on the one hand, a whole series of physical facts, and on the other hand, a series of metaphysical facts.

As facts of the first kind exist, so also do facts of the second kind exist, but differently.

From the usual positivist point of view it will seem naive in the highest degree to speak of the purchasing value of a coin separately from the coin; of the energy of a word separately from the word; of the contents of a book separately from the book, and so on. We all know that these are only "what people say," that in reality purchasing value, energy of a word, and contents of a book do not exist, that by these conceptions we only denote a series of phenomena in some way linked with coin, word, book, but in substance quite separate from them.

But is it so?

We decided to accept nothing as given, consequently we shall not negate anything as given.

We see in things, in addition to what is external, something internal. We know that this internal element in things constitutes a continuous part of things, usually their principal substance. And quite naturally we ask ourselves, where is this internal element, and what does it represent in and by itself. We see that it is not embraced within our space. We begin to conceive of the idea of a "higher space" possessing more dimensions than ours. Our space then appears to be somehow a part of higher space, i.e., we begin to believe that we know, feel, and measure only part of space, that part which is measurable in terms of length, width and height.

______

As was said before, we usually regard space as a form of the universe, or as a form of the matter of the universe. To make this

[p. 31]

clear it is possible to say that a "cube" is the form of the matter in a cube; a "sphere" is the form of the matter in a sphere; "space"--an infinite sphere--is the form of the entire matter of the universe.

H. P. Blavatsky, in The Secret Doctrine, has this to say about space:

The superficial absurdity of assuming that Space itself is measurable in any direction is of little consequence. The familiar phrase (the fourth dimension of space) can only be an abbreviation of the fuller form--the "Fourth dimension of Matter in Space.". . . The progress of evolution may be destined to introduce us to new characteristics of matter. . . ." [*1]

But the formula defining "space" as "the form of matter in the universe" suffers from this deficiency, that there is introduced in it the concept of "matter," i.e., the unknown.

I have already spoken of that "dead-end siding," x=y, y=x, to which all attempts at the physical definition of matter inevitably lead.

Psychological definitions lead to the same thing.

In a well-known book, The Psychology of the Soul, A. I. Herzen says:

We call matter everything which directly or indirectly offers resistance to motion, directly or indirectly produced by us, manifesting a remarkable analogy with our passive states.

And we call force (motion) that which directly or indirectly communicates movement to us or to other bodies, thus manifesting the greatest similitude to our active states.

Consequently, "matter" and "motion" are something like projections of our active and passive states. It is clear that it is possible to define the passive state only in terms of the active, and the active in terms of the passive--again two unknowns, defining one another.

E. Douglas Fawcett, in an article entitled Idealism and the Problem of Nature in The Quest (April, 1910), discusses matter from this point of view.

[p. 32]

Matter (like force) does not give us any trouble. We know all about it, for the very good reason that we invented it. By "matter" we think of sensuous objects. It is mental change of concrete but too complicated facts, which are difficult to deal with.

Strictly speaking, matter exists only as a concept. Truth to tell, the character of matter, even when treated only as a conception, is so unobvious that the majority of persons are unable to tell us exactly what they mean by it.

An important fact is here brought to light: matter and force are just logical concepts, i.e., only words accepted for the designation of a lengthy series of complicated facts. It is difficult for us, educated almost exclusively along physical lines, to understand this clearly, but in substance it may be stated as follows: Who has seen matter and force, and when? We see things, see phenomena. Matter, independently of the substance from which a given thing is made, or of which it consists, we have never seen and never shall see; but the given substance is not quite matter, this is wood, or iron or stone. Similarly, we shall never see force separately from motion. What does this mean? It means that "matter" and "force" are just such abstract conceptions as "value" or "labor," as "the purchasing value of a coin" or the "contents" of a book; it means that matter is "such stuff as dreams are made of." And because we can never touch this "stuff" and can see it only in dreams, so we can never touch physical matter, nor see, nor hear, nor photograph it, separately from the object. We cognize things and phenomena which are bad or good, but we never cognize "matter" and "force" separately from things and phenomena.

Matter is as much an abstract conception as are truth, good and evil.

It is as impossible to put matter or any part of matter into a chemical retort or crucible as it is impossible to sell "Egyptian darkness" in vials. However as it is said that "Egyptian darkness" is sold as a black powder in Athos, or elsewhere, therefore perhaps somewhere, by some one, even matter has been seen. [*1]

[p. 33]

In order to discuss questions of this order a certain preparation is necessary, or a high degree of intuition; but unfortunately it is customary to consider fundamental questions of cosmogony very lightly.

A man easily admits his incompetency in music, dancing, or higher mathematics, but he always maintains the privilege of having an opinion and being a judge of questions relating to "first principles."

It is difficult to discuss with such men.

For how will you answer a man who looks at you in perplexity, knocks on the table with his fingers and says, "This is matter. I know it; feel! How can it be an abstract conception?" To answer this is as difficult as to answer the man who says: "I see that the sun rises and sets!"

______

Returning to the consideration of space, we shall under no circumstances introduce unknown quantities in the definition of it. We shall define it only in terms of those two data which we decided to accept at the very beginning.

The world and consciousness are the facts which we decided to recognize as existing.

By the world we mean the combination of all the causes of our sensations in general.

By the material world we mean the combination of causes of a definite series of sensations: those of sight, hearing, touch, smell, taste, sensations of weight, and so on.

Space is either a property of the world or a property of our knowledge of the world.

Three-dimensional space is either a property of the material world or a property of our receptivity of the material world.

Our inquiry is confined to the problem: how shall we approach the study of space?

Footnotes

^25:1 Italics by P. D. Ouspensky. Transl.

^31:1 "The Secret Doctrine," The Theosophical Publishing Society. Third Edition, p. 271, vol. I.

^32:1 This is irony which the English speaking may easily fail to understand. Some unscrupulous monks of the monastery of Athos, famous throughout Greece and Russia, made a practice, it is said, of selling "Egyptian darkness" in little vials, thus making capital out of the credulity and piety of the illiterate Russian pilgrims who were wont to visit this  in great numbers. Transl.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

  

CHAPTER III

          What   may we learn about the fourth dimension by a study of the geometrical   relations within our space? What should be the relation between a three-dimensional   body and one of four dimensions? The four-dimensional body as the tracing of   the movement of a three-dimensional body in the direction which is not   confined within it. A four-dimensional body as containing an infinite number   of three-dimensional bodies. A three-dimensional body as a section of a   four-dimensional one. Parts of bodies and entire bodies in three and in four   dimensions. The incommensurability of a three-dimensional and a   four-dimensional body. A material atom as a section of a four-dimensional   line.

     
   IF we consider the very great difference between the point and the line, between the line and the surface--surface and solid, i.e., the difference between the laws to which line and plane, plane and surface, etc., are subjected, and the difference of phenomena possible in point, in line, in surface, we shall indeed come to understand how much of the new and inconceivable the fourth dimension holds for us.

As in the point it is impossible to imagine the line and the laws of the line; as in the line it is impossible to imagine the surface and the laws of the surface; as in the surface it is impossible to imagine the solid and the laws of the solid; so in our space it is impossible to imagine the body having more than three dimensions, and impossible to understand the laws of the existence of such a body.

But studying the mutual relations between the point, the line, the surface, the solid, we begin to learn something about the fourth dimension, i.e., of four-dimensional space. We begin to learn what it can be in comparison with our three-dimensional space, and what it cannot be.

This last we learn first of all. And it is especially important, because it saves us from many deeply inculcated illusions, which are very detrimental to right knowledge.

[p. 35]

We learn what cannot be in four-dimensional space, and this permits us to set forth what can be there.

In his book, The Fourth Dimension, Hinton makes an interesting statement concerning the method by which we may approach the problem of higher dimensions. He says:

Our space itself bears within it relations through which we can establish relations to other (higher) spaces.

For within space are given the conception of point and line, line and plane, which really involve the relation of space to a higher space.

Let us consider these relations within our space, and see what conclusions we can derive from their investigation.

We know that our geometry regards the line as a tracing of the movement of a point; the surface as a tracing of the movement of a line; and the solid as a tracing of the movement of a surface. On these premises we put to ourselves this question: Is it not possible to regard the "four-dimensional body" as a tracing of the movement of a three-dimensional body?

But what is this movement, and in what direction?

The point, moving in space, and leaving the tracing of its movement, a line, moves in a direction not contained in it, because in a point there is no direction whatsoever.

The line, moving in space, and leaving the tracing of its movement, the surface, moves in a direction not contained in it because, moving in a direction contained in it, a line will continue to be a line.

The surface, moving in space, and leaving a tracing of its movement, the solid, moves also in a direction not contained in it. If it should move otherwise, it would remain always the surface. In order to leave a tracing of itself as a "solid," or three-dimensional figure, it must set off from itself, move in a direction which in itself it has not.

In analogy with all this, the solid, in order to leave as the tracing of its movement, the four-dimensional figure (hypersolid) shall move in a direction not confined in it; or in other words it shall come out of itself, set off from itself, move in a direction which is not present in it. Later on it will be shown in what manner we shall understand this.

[p. 36]

But for the present we can say that the direction of the movement in the fourth dimension lies out of all those directions which are possible in a three-dimensional figure.

We consider the line as an infinite number of points; the surface as an infinite number of lines; the solid as an infinite number of surfaces.

In analogy with this it is possible to consider that it is necessary to regard a four-dimensional body as an infinite number of three-dimensional bodies, and four-dimensional space as an infinite number of three-dimensional spaces.

Moreover, we know that the line is limited by points, that the surface is limited by lines, that the solid is limited by surfaces.

It is possible that a four-dimensional body is limited by three-dimensional bodies.

Or it is possible to say that the line is the distance between two points; the surface the distance between two lines; the solid--between two surfaces.

Or again, that the line separates two points or several points from one another (for a straight line is the shortest distance between two points); that the surface separates two or several lines from each other; that the solid separates several surfaces one from another; as the cube separates six flat surfaces one from another--its faces.

The line binds several separate points into a certain whole (the straight,, the curved, the broken line); the surface binds several lines into a certain whole (the quadrilateral, the triangle); the solid binds several surfaces into a certain whole (the cube, the pyramid).

It is possible that four-dimensional space is the distance between a group of solids, separating these solids, yet at the same time binding them into some to us inconceivable whole, even though they seem to be separate from one another.

Moreover, we regard the point as a section of a line; the line as a section of a surface; the surface as a section of a solid.

By analogy, it is possible to regard the solid (the cube, sphere, pyramid) as a section of a four-dimensional body, and our entire three-dimensional space as a section of a four-dimensional space. If every three-dimensional body is the section of a four-dimensional one, then every point of a three-dimensional body is the

[p. 37]

section of a four-dimensional line. It is possible to regard an "atom" of a physical body, not as something material, but as an intersection of a four-dimensional line by the plane of our consciousness.

The view of a three-dimensional body as the section of a four-dimensional one leads to the thought that many (for us) separate bodies may be the sections of parts of one four-dimensional body.

A simple example will clarify this thought. If we imagine a horizontal plane, intersecting the top of a tree, and parallel to the surface of the earth, then upon this plane the sections of branches will seem separate, and not bound to one another. Yet in our space, from our standpoint, these are sections of branches of one tree, comprising together one top, nourished from one root, casting one shadow.

Or here is another interesting example expressing the same idea, given by Mr. Leadbeater, the theosophical writer, in one of his books. If we touch the surface of a table with our finger tips, then upon the surface will be just five circles, and from this plane presentment it is impossible to construe any idea of the hand, and of the man to whom this hand belongs. Upon the table's surface will be five separate circles. How from them is it possible to imagine a man, with all the richness of his physical and spiritual life? It is impossible. Our relation to the four-dimensional world will be analogous to the relation of that consciousness which sees five circles upon the table to a man. We see just "finger tips"--to us the fourth dimension is inconceivable.

We know that it is possible to represent a three-dimensional body upon a plane, that it is possible to draw a cube, a polyhedron or a sphere. This will not be a real cube or a real sphere, but the projection of a cube or of a sphere on a plane. We may conceive of the three-dimensional bodies of our space somewhat in the nature of images in our space of to us incomprehensible four-dimensional bodies.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38]

  

CHAPTER IV

          In   what direction may the fourth dimension lie? What is motion? Two kinds of   motion--motion in space and motion in time--which are contained in   every movement. What is time? Two ideas contained in the conception of time.   The new dimension of space, and motion upon that dimension. Time as the   fourth dimension of space. Impossibility of understanding the fourth   dimension without the idea of motion. The idea of motion and the   "time-sense." The time-sense as a limit (surface) of the   "space-sense." Hinton on the law of surfaces. The "ether"   as a surface. Riemann's idea concerning the translation of time into space in   the fourth dimension. Present, past, and future. Why we do not see the past   and the future. Life as a feeling of   one's way. Wundt on the subject of our sensuous knowledge.

     
   WE have established by a comparison of the relation of lower dimensional figures to higher dimensional ones that it is possible to regard a four-dimensional body as the tracing of the motion of a three-dimensional body upon the dimension not contained in it; i.e., that the direction of the motion upon the fourth dimension lies outside of all the directions which are possible in three-dimensional space.

But in what direction is it?

In order to answer this question it will be necessary to discover whether we do not know some motion not confined in three-dimensional space.

We know that every motion in space is accompanied by that which we call motion in time. , we know that everything existing, even if not moving in space, moves eternally in time.

And equally in all cases, whether speaking of motion or absence of motion, we have in mind an idea of what was before, what now becomes, and what will follow after. In other words, we have in mind the idea of time. The idea of motion of any kind, also the idea of absence of motion, is indissolubly bound up with the idea of time. Any motion or absence of motion proceeds in time and

[p. 39]

cannot proceed out of time. Consequently, before speaking of what motion is, we must answer the question, what is time?

Time is the most formidable and difficult problem which confronts humanity.

Kant regards time as he does space: as a subjective form of our receptivity; i.e., he says that we create time ourselves, as a function of our receptive apparatus, for convenience in perceiving the outside world. Reality is continuous and constant, but in order to make possible the perception of it, we must dissever it into separate moments; imagine it as an infinite series of separate moments out of which there exists for us only one. In other words, we perceive reality as if through a narrow slit, and what we are seeing through this slit we call the present; what we did see and now do not see--the past; and what we do not quite see but are expecting--the future.

Regarding each phenomenon as an effect of another, or others, and this in its turn as a cause of a third; that is, regarding all phenomena in functional interdependence one upon another, by this very act we are contemplating them in time, because we picture to ourselves quite clearly and precisely first a cause, then an effect; first an action, then its function; and cannot contemplate them otherwise. Thus we may say that the idea of time is bound up with the idea of causation and functional interdependence. Without time, causation cannot exist, just as without time, motion or the absence of motion cannot exist.

But our perception concerning our "being in time" is entangled and misty up to improbability.

First of all let us analyze our relation toward the past, present and future. Usually we think that the past already does not exist. It has passed, disappeared, altered, transformed itself into something else. The future also does not exist--it does not exist as yet. It has not arrived, has not formed. By the present we mean the moment of transition of the future into the past, i.e., the moment of transition of a phenomenon from one non-existence into another non-existence. For that moment only does the phenomenon exist for us in reality; before, it existed in potentiality, afterward it will exist in remembrance. But this short moment is after all only a fiction: it has no measurement. We have a full right to say that

[p. 40]

the present does not exist. We can never catch it. That which we did catch is always the past!

If we are to stop at that we must admit that the world does not exist, or exists only in some phantasmagoria of illusions, flashing and disappearing.

Usually we take no account of this, and do not reflect that our customary view of time leads to utter absurdity.

Let us imagine a stupid traveller going from one city to another and half way between these two cities. A stupid traveller thinks that the city from which he has departed last week does not exist now: only the memory of it is left; the walls are ruined, the towers fallen, the inhabitants have either died or gone away. Also, that city at which he is destined to arrive in several days does not exist now either, but is being hurriedly built for his arrival, and on the day of that arrival will be ready, populated, and set in order, and on the day after his departure will be destroyed just as was the first one.

We are thinking of things in time exactly in this way--everything passes away, nothing returns! The spring has passed, it does not exist still. The autumn has not come, it does not exist as yet.

But what does exist?

The present.

But the present is not a seizable moment, it is continuously transitory into the past.

So, strictly speaking, neither the past, nor the present, nor the future exists for us. Nothing exists! And yet we are living, feeling, thinking--and something surrounds us. Consequently, in our usual attitude toward time there exists some mistake. This error we shall endeavor to detect.

We accepted at the very beginning that something exists. We called that something the world. How then can the world exist if it is not existing in the past, in the present and in the future?

That conception of the world which we deduced from our usual view of time makes the world appear like a continuously gushing out igneous fountain of fireworks, each spark of which flashes for a moment and disappears, never to appear any more. Flashes are going on continuously, following one after another, there are an

[p. 41]

infinite number of sparks, and everything together produces the impression of a flame, though it does not exist in reality.

The autumn has not yet come. It will be, but it does not exist now. And we give no thought to how that can appear which is not.

We are moving upon a plane, and recognize as really existing only the small circle lighted by our consciousness. Everything out of this circle, which we do not see, we negate; we do not like to admit that it exists. We are moving upon the plane in one direction. This direction we consider as eternal and infinite. But the direction at right angles to it, those lines which we are intersecting, we do not like to recognize as eternal and infinite. We imagine them as going into non-existence at once, as soon as we, have passed them, and that the lines before us have not as yet risen out of non-existence. If, presupposing that we are moving upon a sphere, upon its equator or one of its parallels, then it will appear that we recognize as really existing only one meridian: those which are behind us have disappeared and those ahead of us have not appeared as yet. .

We are going forward like a blind man, who feels paving stones and lanterns and walls of houses with his stick and believes in the real existence of only that which he touches now, which he feels now. That which has passed has disappeared and will never return! That which has not as yet been does not exist. The blind man remembers the route which he has traversed; he expects that ahead the way will continue, but he sees neither forward nor backward because he does not see anything; because his instrument of knowledge--the stick--has a definite, and not very great length, and beyond the reach of his stick non-existence begins.

Wundt, in one of his books, called attention to the fact that our vaunted five organs of sense are in reality just feelers by which we feel the world around us. We live groping about. We never see anything. We are always just feeling everything. With the help of the microscope and the telescope, the telegraph and the telephone, we are extending our feelers a little, so to speak, but we are not beginning to see. To say that we are seeing would be possible only in case we could know the past and the future. But we do not see, and because of this we can never assure ourselves of that which we cannot feel.

[p. 42]

This is the reason why we count as really existing only that circle which our feelers grasp at a given moment. Beyond that--darkness and non-existence.

But have we any right to think in this way?

Let us imagine a consciousness that is not bound by the conditions of sensuous receptivity. Such a consciousness can rise above the plane upon which we are moving; it can see far beyond the limits of the circle enlightened by our usual consciousness; it can see that not only does the line upon which we are moving exist, but also all lines perpendicular to it which we are intersecting, which we have ever intersected, and which we shall intersect. After rising above the plane this consciousness can see the plane, can convince itself that it is really a plane, and not a single line. Then it can see the past and the future, lying together and existing simultaneously.

That consciousness which is not bound by the conditions of sensuous receptivity can outrun the stupid traveller, ascend the mountain to see in the distance the town to which he is going, and be convinced that this town is not being built anew for his arrival, but exists quite independently of the stupid traveller. And that consciousness can look off and see on the horizon the towers of that city where that traveller had been, and be convinced that those towers have not fallen, that the city continues to stay and live just as it stayed and lived before the traveller's advent.

It can rise above the plane of time and see the spring behind and the autumn ahead, see simultaneously the budding flowers and ripening fruits. It can make the blind man recover his sight and see the road along which he passed and that which still lies before him.

The past and the future cannot not exist, because if they do not exist then neither does the present exist. Unquestionably they exist somewhere together, but we do not see them.

The present, compared with the past and the future, is the most unreal of all unrealities.

We are forced to admit that the past, the present and the future do not differ in anything, one from another; there exists just one present--the Eternal Now of Hindu philosophy. But we do not perceive this, because in every given moment we experience just a

[p. 43]

little bit of that present, and this alone we count as existent, denying a real existence to everything else.

If we admit this, then our view of everything with which we are surrounded will change very considerably.

Usually we regard time as an abstraction, made by us during the observation of really existing motion. That is, we think that observing motion, or changes of relations between things and comparing the relations which existed before, which exist now, and which may exist in the future, that we are deducing the idea of time. We shall see later on how far this view is correct.

Thus the idea of time is composed of the conception of the past, of the present, and of the future.

Our conceptions of the past and present, though not very clear, are yet very much alike. As to the future there exists a great variety of views.

It is necessary for us to analyze the theories of the future as they exist in the mind of contemporary man.

There are in existence two theories--that of the foreordained future, and that of the free future.

Foreordination is established in this way: we say that every future event is the result of those which happened before, and is created such as it will be and not otherwise as a consequence of a definite direction of forces which are contained in preceding events. This means, in other words, that future events are 'wholly contained in preceding ones, and if we could know the force and direction of all events which have happened up to the present moment, i.e., if we knew all the past, by this we could know all the future. And sometimes, knowing the present moment thoroughly, in all its details, we may really foretell the future. If the prophecy is not fulfilled, we say that we did not know all that had been, and we discover in the past some cause which had escaped our observation.

The idea of the free future is founded upon the possibility of voluntary action and accidental new combinations of causes. The future is regarded as quite indefinite, or defined only in part, because in every given moment new forces, new events and new phenomena are born which lie in a potential state, not causeless, but so incommensurable with causes--as the firing of a city from one spark--that it is impossible to detect or measure them.

[p. 44]

This theory affirms that one and the same action can have different results; one and the same cause, different effects; and it introduces the hypothesis of quite arbitrary volitional actions on the part of a man, bringing about profound changes in the subsequent events of his own life and the lives of others.

Supporters of the foreordination theory contend on the contrary that volitional, involuntary actions depend also upon causes, making them necessary and unavoidable at a given moment; that there is nothing accidental, and that there cannot be; that we call accidental only those things the causes of which we do not see by reason of our limitations; and that different effects of causes seemingly the same occur because the causes are different in reality and only seem similar for the reason that we do not understand them well enough nor see them sufficiently clearly.

The dispute between the theory of the foreordained future and that of the free future is an infinite dispute. Neither of these theories can say anything decisive. This is so because both theories are too literal, too inflexible, too material, and one repudiates the other: both say, "either this or the other." In the one case there results a complete cold predestination: that which will be, will be, nothing can be changed--that which will befall tomorrow was predestined tens of thousands of years ago. There results in the other case a life upon some sort of needle-point called the present, which is surrounded on all sides by an abyss of non-existence, a journey in a country which does not as yet exist, a life in a world which is born and dies every moment, in which nothing ever returns. And both these opposite views are equally untrue, because the truth, in the given case, as in so many others, is contained in a union of two opposite understandings in one.

In every given moment all the future of the world is predestined and is existing, but is predestined conditionally, i.e., it will be such or another future according to the direction of events at a given moment, unless there enters a new fact, and a new fact can enter only from the side of consciousness and the will resulting from it. It is necessary to understand this, and to master it.

Besides this we are hindered from a right conception of the relation of the present toward the future by our misunderstanding of the relation of the present to the past. The difference of opinion

[p. 45]

exists only concerning the future; concerning the past all agree that it has passed, that it does not exist now!--and that it was such as it has been. In this last lies the key to the understanding of the incorrectness of our views of the future. As a matter of fact, in reality our relation both to the past and to the future is far more complicated than it seems to us. In the past, behind us, lies not only that which really happened, but that which could have been. In the same way, in the future lies not only that which will be, but everything that may be.

The past and the future are equally undetermined, equally exist in all their possibilities, and equally exist simultaneously with the present.

By time we mean the distance separating events in the order of their succession and binding them in different wholes. This distance lies in a direction not contained in three-dimensional space, therefore it will be the new dimension of space.

This new dimension satisfies all possible requirements of the fourth dimension on the ground of the preceding reasoning.

It is incommensurable with the dimensions of three-dimensional space, as a year is incommensurable with St. Petersburg. It is perpendicular to all directions of three-dimensional space and is not parallel to any of them.

As a deduction from all the preceding we may say that time (as it is usually understood) includes in itself two ideas: that of a certain to us unknown space (the fourth dimension), and that of a motion upon this space. Our constant mistake consists in the fact that in time we never see two ideas, but see always only one. Usually we see in time the idea of motion, but cannot say from whence, where, whither, nor upon what space. Attempts have been made heretofore to unite the idea of the fourth dimension with the idea of time. But in those theories which have attempted to combine the idea of time with the idea of the fourth dimension appeared always the idea of some spatial element as existing in time, and along with it was admitted motion upon that space. Those who were constructing these theories evidently did not understand that leaving out the possibility of motion they were advancing the demand for a new time, because motion cannot proceed out of time. And as a result time goes ahead of us, like our shadow, receding according

[p. 46]

as we approach it. All our perceptions of motion have become confused. If we imagine the new dimension of space and the possibility of motion upon this new dimension, time will still elude us, and declare that it is unexplained, exactly as it was unexplained before.

It is necessary to admit that by one term, time, we designate really two ideas--"a certain space" and "motion upon that space." This motion does not exist in reality, and it seems to us as existing only because we do not see the spatiality of time. That is, the sensation of motion in time (and motion out of time does not exist) arises in us because we are looking at the world as if through a narrow slit, and are seeing the lines of intersection of the time-plane with our three-dimensional space only.

Therefore it is necessary to declare how profoundly incorrect is our usual theory that the idea of time is deduced by us from the observation of motion, and is really nothing more than the idea of that succession which is observed by us in motion.

It is necessary to recognize quite the reverse: that the idea of motion is deduced by us out of an incomplete sensation of time, or of the time-sense, i.e., out of a sense or sensation of the fourth dimension, but out of an incomplete sensation. This incomplete sensation of time (of the fourth dimension)--the sensation through the slit--gives us the sensation of motion, that is, creates an illusion of motion which does not exist in reality, but instead of which there exists in reality only the extension upon a direction inconceivable to us.

______

One other aspect of the question has very great significance. The fourth dimension is bound up with the ideas of "time" and "motion." But up to this point we shall not be able to understand the fourth dimension unless we shall understand the fifth dimension.

Attempting to look at time as at an object, Kant says that it has one dimension: i.e., he imagines time as a line extending from the infinite future into the infinite past. Of one point of this line we are conscious--always only one point. And this point has no dimension because that which in the usual sense we call the present, is the recent past, and sometimes also the near future.

[p. 47]

This would be true in relation to our illusory perception of time. But in reality eternity is not the infinite dimension of time, but the one perpendicular to time; because, if eternity exists, then every moment is eternal. The line of time extends in that order of succession of phenomena which are in causal interdependence--first the cause, then the effect: before, now, after. The line of eternity extends perpendicularly to that line.

It is impossible to understand the idea of time without conceiving in imagination the idea of eternity; it is likewise impossible to understand space if we have no idea of time.

From the standpoint of eternity, time does not differ in anything from the other lines and dimensions of space--length, breadth, and height. This means that just as in space exist the things that we do not see, or speaking differently, not alone that which we see, so in time "events" exist before our consciousness has touched them, and they still exist after our consciousness has left them behind.

Consequently, extension in time is extension into unknown space, and therefore time is the fourth dimension of space.

______

It is necessary that we should regard time as a spatial conception considered with relation to our two data--the world and consciousness (psychic life).

The idea of time arises through the knowledge of the world by means of sensuous receptivity. It has been previously explained that because of the properties of our sensuous receptivity we see the world as through a narrow slit.

Out of this the following questions arise:

1. What accounts for the existence in the world of illusionary motion? That is, why do we not see, through this slit, the same thing? Why, behind the slit, do changes proceed creating the illusion of motion: that is, how and in what manner does the focus of our receptivity run over the world of phenomena? In addition to all this it is necessary to remember that through the same slit through which we see the world we observe ourselves and see in ourselves changes similar to the changes in the rest of things.

2. Why can we not extend that slit?

[p. 48]

It is necessary to answer these questions.

First of all it is important to note that within the limits of our usual observation our receptivity is always conditioned in the same way and cannot escape these conditions. In other words, it is chained, as it were, to some plane above which it cannot rise. These conditions, or that plane we call, in the inner world, consciousness or level of consciousness; in the outer world we call them matter or the density of matter. (The word density is used in this connection not in the sense of a solid, liquid or gaseous state, but in the sense of the physical, the astral and the mental plane--accepting temporarily the terminology employed in contemporary theosophical literature.) Our usual psychic life proceeds upon some definite plane (of consciousness or matter) and never rises above it. If our receptivity could rise above this plane it would undoubtedly perceive simultaneously, below itself, a far greater number of events than it usually sees while on a plane. Just as a man, ascending a mountain, or going up in a balloon, begins to see simultaneously and at once many things which it is impossible to see simultaneously and at once from below--the movement of two trains toward one another between which a collision will occur; the approach of an enemy detachment to a sleeping camp; two cities divided by a ridge, etc.--so consciousness rising above the plane in which it usually functions, must see simultaneously the events divided for ordinary consciousness by periods of time. These will be the events which ordinary consciousness never sees together, as: cause and effect; the work and the payment; the crime and the punishment; the movement of trains toward one another and their collision; the approach of the enemy and the battle; the sunrise and the sunset; the morning and the evening; the day and the night; spring, autumn, summer and winter; the birth and the death of a man.

The angle of vision will enlarge during such an ascent, the moment will expand.

If we imagine a receptivity which is on a level higher than our consciousness, possessing a broader angle of view, then this receptivity will be able to grasp, as something simultaneous, i.e., as a moment, all that is happening for us during a certain length of time--minutes, hours, a day, a month. Within the limits of its moment such a receptivity will not be in a position to discriminate

[p. 49]

between before, now, after; all this will be for it now. Now will expand.

But in order for this to happen it would be necessary for us to liberate ourselves from matter, because matter is nothing more than the conditions of space and time in which we dwell. Thence arises the question: can consciousness leave the conditions of a given material existence without itself undergoing fundamental changes, or without disappearing altogether, as men of positivistic views would affirm?

This is a debatable question, and later I shall give examples and proofs, speaking on behalf of the idea that our consciousness can leave the conditions of a given materiality. For the present I wish to establish what must proceed during this leaving.

There would ensue the expansion of the moment, i.e., all that we are apprehending in time would become something like a single moment, in which the past, the present, and the future would be seen at once. This shows the relativity of motion, as depending for us upon the limitation of the moment, which includes only a very small part of the moments of life perceived by us.

We have a perfect right to say, not that "time" is deduced from "motion," but that motion is sensed because of the time-sense. We have that sense, therefore we sense motion. The time-sense is the sensation of changing moments. If we did not have this time-sense we could not feel motion. The "time-sense" is itself, in substance, the limit or the surface of our "space-sense." Where the "space-sense" ends, there the "time-sense" begins. It has been made clear that "time" is identical in its properties with "space," i.e., it has all the signs of space extension. However, we do not feel it as spatial extension, but we feel it as time, that is, as something specific, inexpressible--in other words, uninterruptedly bound up with "motion." This inability to sense time spatially has its origin in the fact that the time-sense is a misty space-sense; by means of our time-sense we feel obscurely the new characteristics of space, which extend out from the sphere of three dimensions.

But what is the time-sense and why does there arise the illusion of motion?

[p. 50]

To answer this question at all satisfactorily is possible only by studying the forms and levels of psychic life.

"I" is a complicated quantity, and within it goes on a continuous motion. About the nature of this motion we shall speak later, but this very motion inside of us creates the illusion of motion around us, motion in the material world.

______

The noted mathematician Riemann understood that when higher dimensions of space are in question, time, by some means, translates itself into space, and he regarded the MATERIAL ATOM as the entrance of the fourth dimension into three-dimensional space.

In one of his books Hinton writes very interestingly about "surface tensions."

The relationship of a surface to a solid or of a solid to a higher solid is one which we often find in nature.

A surface is nothing more nor less than the relation between two things. Two bodies touch each other. The surface is the relationship of one to the other.

If our space is in the same co-relation with higher space as is the surface to our space, then it may be that our space is really the surface, that is, the place of contact, of two higher-dimensional spaces.

It is a fact worthy of notice that in the surface of a fluid different laws obtain from those which hold throughout the mass. There is a whole series of facts which are grouped together under the name of surface tensions, which are of great importance in physics, and by which the behavior of the surfaces of liquids is governed.

And it may well be that the laws of our universe are the surface tensions of a higher universe.

If the surface be regarded as a medium lying between bodies, then indeed it will have no weight, but be a powerful means of transmitting vibrations. Moreover, it would be unlike any other substance, and it would be impossible to get rid of it. However perfect a vacuum be made, there would be in this vacuum just as much of this unknown medium (i.e., of that surface) as there was before.

Matter would pass freely through this medium . . . vibrations of this medium would tear asunder portions of matter. And involuntarily the conclusion would be drawn that this medium was unlike any ordinary matter. . . . These would be very different properties to reconcile in one and the same substance.

[p. 51]

Now is there anything in our experience which corresponds to this medium? . . .

Do we suppose the existence of any medium through which matter freely moves, which yet by its vibrations destroys the combinations of matter--some medium which is present in every vacuum however perfect, which penetrates all bodies, is weightless, and yet can never be laid hold of.

The "substance" which possesses all these qualities is called the "ether."

The properties of the ether are a perpetual object of investigation in science. . . . But taking into consideration the ideas expressed before it would be interesting to look at the world supposing that we are not in it but on the ether; where the "ether" is the surface of contact of two bodies of higher dimensions. [*1]

Hinton here expresses an unusually interesting thought, and brings the idea of the "ether" nearer to the idea of time. The materialistic, or even the energetic understanding of contemporary physics of the ether is perfectly fruitless--a dead-end siding. For Hinton the ether is not a substance but only a "surface," the "boundary" of something. But of what? Again not that of a substance, but the boundary, the surface, the limit of one form of receptivity and the beginning of another. . . .

In one sentence the walls and fences of the materialistic dead-end siding are broken down and before our thought open wide horizons of regions unexplored.

Footnotes

^51:1 Hinton, "A New Era of Thought," pp. 52, 56, 57.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 52]

  

CHAPTER V

          Four-dimensional   space. "Temporal body"--Linga   Sharira. The form of a human body from birth to death.   Incommensurability of three-dimensional and four-dimensional bodies. Newton's   fluents. The unreality of constant quantities in our world. The right and the   left hands in three-dimensional and in four-dimensional space. Difference   between three-dimensional and four-dimensional space. Not two different   spaces but different methods of receptitivity of one and the same world.

     
   FOUR-DIMENSIONAL space, if we try to imagine it to ourselves, will be the infinite repetition of our space, of our infinite three-dimensional sphere, as a line is the infinite repetition of a point.

Many things that have been said before will become much clearer to us when we dwell on the fact that the fourth dimension must be sought for in time.

It will become clear what is meant by the fact that it is possible to regard a four-dimensional body as the tracing of the movement in space of a three-dimensional body in a direction not confined within that space. Now the direction not confined in three-dimensional space in which any three-dimensional body moves--this is the direction of time. Any three-dimensional body, existing, is at the same time moving in time and leaves as a tracing of its movement the temporal, or four-dimensional body. We never see or feel this body, because of the limitations of our receptive apparatus, but we see the section of it only, which section we call the three-dimensional body. Therefore we are in error in thinking that the three-dimensional body is in itself something real. It is the projection of the four-dimensional body--its picture--the image of it on our plane.

The four-dimensional body is the infinite number of three-dimensional bodies. That is, the four-dimensional body is the infinite number of moments of existence of the three-dimensional one--its states and positions. The three-dimensional body which we see

[p. 53]

appears as a single figure--one of a series of pictures on a cinematographic film as it were.

Four-dimensional space (time) is really the distance between the forms, states, and positions of one and the same body (and different bodies, i.e., those seeming different to us). It separates those states, forms, and positions each from the other, and it binds them also into some to us incomprehensible whole. This incomprehensible whole can be formed in time out of one physical body--and out of different bodies.

It is easier for us to imagine the temporal whole as related to one physical body.

If we consider the physical body of a man, we shall find in it besides its "matter" something, it is true, changing, but undoubtedly one and the same from birth until death.

This something is the Linga-Shariri of Hindu philosophy, i.e., the form on which our physical body is moulded. (H. P. Blavatsky: The Secret Doctrine.) Eastern philosophy regards the physical body as something impermanent which is in a condition of perpetual interchange with its surroundings. The particles come and go. After one second the body is already not absolutely the same as it was one second before. Today it is in a considerable degree not that which it was yesterday. After seven years it is a quite different body. But despite all this, something always persists from birth to death, changing its aspect a little, but remaining the same. This is the Linga-Sharira.

The Linga-Sharira is the form, the image: it changes, but remains the same. That image of a man which we are able to represent to ourselves is not the Linga-Sharira. But if we try to represent to ourselves mentally the image of a man from birth to death, with all the particularities and traits of childhood, manhood and senility, as if  in time, when it will be the Linga-Sharira.

Form pertains to all things. We say that everything consists of matter and form. Under the category of "matter," as already stated, the cause of a lengthy series of mixed sensations is predicated, but matter without form is not comprehensible to us; we cannot even think of matter without form. But we can think and imagine form without matter.

The thing, i.e., the union of form and matter, is never constant;

[p. 54]

it always changes in the course of time. This idea afforded Newton the possibility of building his theory of fluents and fluxions.

Newton came to the conclusion that constant quantities do not exist in nature. Variables do exist--flowing, fluents only. The velocities with which different fluents change were called by Newton fluxions.

From the standpoint of this theory all things known to us--men, plants, animals, planets--are fluents, and they differ by the magnitude of their fluxions. But the thing, changing continuously in time, sometimes very much, and quickly, as in the case of a living body for example, still remains one and the same. The body of a man in youth, and the body of a man in senility--these are one and the same, though we know that in the old body there is not one atom left that was in the young one. The matter changes, but something remains one under all changes, this something is the Linga-Sharira. Newton's theory is valid for the three-dimensional world existing in time. In this world there is nothing constant. All is variable because every consecutive moment the thing is already not that which it was before. We never see the Linga-Sharira, we see always its parts, and they appear to us variable. But if we observe more attentively we shall see that it is an illusion. Things of three dimensions are unreal and variable. They cannot be real because they do not exist in reality, just as the imaginary sections of a solid do not exist. Four-dimensional bodies alone are real.

In one of the lectures contained in the book, A Pluralistic Universe, Prof. James calls attention to Prof. Bergson's remark that science studies always only the t of the universe, i.e., not the universe in its entirety, but the moment, the "temporal section" of the universe.

______

The properties of four-dimensional space will become clearer to us if we compare in detail three-dimensional space with the surface, and discover the differences existing between them.

Hinton, in his book, A New Era of Thought, examines these differences very attentively. He represents to himself, on a plane, two equal rectangular triangles, cut out of paper, the right angles of which are placed in opposite directions. These triangles will be

[p. 55]

equal, but for some reason quite different. The right angle of one is directed to the right, that of the other to the left. If anyone wants to make them quite similar, it is possible to do so only with the help of three-dimensional space. That is, it is necessary to take one triangle, turn it over, and put it back on the plane. Then they will be two equal, and exactly similar triangles. But in order to effect this, it was necessary to take one triangle from the plane into three-dimensional space, and turn it over in that space. If the triangle is left on the plane, then it will never be possible to make it identical with the other, keeping the same relation of angles of the one to those of the other. If the triangle is merely rotated in the plane this similarity will never be established. In our world there are figures quite analogous to these two triangles.

We know certain shapes which are equal the one to the other, which are exactly similar, and yet which we cannot make fit into the same portion of space, either practically or by imagination.

If we look at our two hands we see this clearly, though the two hands represent a complex case of a symmetrical similarity. Now there is one way in which the right hand and the left hand may practically be brought into likeness. If we take the right hand glove and the left hand glove, they will not fit any more than the right hand will coincide with the left hand; but if we turn one glove inside out, then it will fit. Now suppose the same thing done with the solid hand as is done with the glove when it is turned inside out, we must suppose it, so to speak, pulled through itself. . . . If such an operation were possible, the right hand would be turned into an exact model of the left hand. [*1]

But such an operation would be possible in the higher dimensional space only, just as the overturning of the triangle is possible only in a space relatively higher than the plane. Even granting the existence of four-dimensional space, it is possible that the turning of the hand inside out and the pulling of it through itself is a practical impossibility on account of causes independent of geometrical conditions. But this does not diminish its value as an example. Things like the turning of the hand inside out are possible theoretically in four-dimensional space because in this space different, and even distant points of our space and time touch, or have the possibility of contact. All points of a sheet of paper lying on a table are separated

[p. 56]

one from another, but by taking the sheet from the table it is possible to fold it in such a way as to bring together any given points. If on one corner is written St. Petersburg, and on another Madras, nothing prevents the putting together of these corners. And if on the third corner is written the year 1812, and on the fourth 1912, these corners can touch each other too. If on one corner the year is written in red ink, and the ink has not yet dried, then the figures may imprint themselves on the other corner. And if afterwards the sheet is straightened out and laid on the table, it will be perfectly incomprehensible, to a man who has not followed the operation, how the figure from one corner could transfer itself to another corner. For such a man the. possibility of the contact of remote points of the sheet will be incomprehensible, and it will remain incomprehensible so long as he thinks of the sheet in two-dimensional space only. The moment he imagines the sheet in three-dimensional space this possibility will become real and obvious to him.

In considering the relation of the fourth dimension to the three known to us, we must conclude that our geometry is obviously insufficient for the investigation of higher space.

As before stated, a four-dimensional body is as incommensurable with a three-dimensional one as a year is incommensurable with St. Petersburg.

It is quite clear why this is so. The four-dimensional body consists of on infinitely great number of three-dimensional bodies; accordingly, there cannot be a common measure for them. The three-dimensional body, in comparison with the four-dimensional one is equivalent to the point in comparison with the line.

And just as the point is incommensurable with the line, so is the line incommensurable with the surface; as the surface is incommensurable with the solid body, so is the three-dimensional body incommensurable with the four-dimensional one.

It is clear also why the geometry of three dimensions is insufficient for the definition of the position of the region of the fourth dimension in relation to three-dimensional space.

Just as in the geometry of one dimension, that is, upon the line, it is impossible to define the position of the surface, the side of which constitutes the given line; just as in the geometry of two dimensions,

[p. 57]

i.e., upon the surface, it is impossible to define the position of the solid, the side of which constitutes the given surface, so in the geometry of three dimensions, in three-dimensional space, it is impossible to define a four-dimensional space. Briefly speaking, as planimetry is insufficient for the investigation of the problems of stereometry, so is stereometry insufficient for four-dimensional space.

As a conclusion from all of the above we may repeat that every point of our space is the section of a line in higher space, or as B. Riemann expressed it: the material atom is the entrance of the fourth dimension into three-dimensional space.

______

For a nearer approach to the problem of higher dimensions and of higher space it is necessary first of all to understand the constitution and properties of the higher dimensional region in comparison with the region of three dimensions. Then only will appear the possibility of a more exact investigation of this region, and a classification of the laws governing it.

What is it that it is necessary to understand?

It seems to me that first of all it is necessary to understand that we are considering not two regions spatially different, and not two regions of which one (again spatially, "geometrically") constitutes a part of the other, but two methods of receptivity of one and the same unique world of a space which is unique.

Furthermore it is necessary to understand that all objects known to us exist not only in those categories in which they are perceived by us, but in an infinite number of others in which we do not and cannot sense them. And we must learn first to think things in other categories, and then so far as we are able, to imagine them therein. Only after doing this can we possibly develop the faculty to apprehend them in higher space--and to sense "higher" space itself.

Or perhaps the first necessity is the direct perception of everything in the outside world which does not fit into the frame of three dimensions, which exists independently of the categories of time and space--everything that for this reason we are accustomed to consider as non-existent. If variability is an indication of the three-dimensional world, then let us search for the constant and

[p. 58]

thereby approach to an understanding of the four-dimensional world.

We have become accustomed to count as really existing only that which is measurable in terms of length, breadth and height; but as has been shown it is necessary to expand the limits of the really existing. Mensurability is too rough an indication of existence, because mensurability itself is too conditioned a conception. We may say that for any approach to the exact investigation of the higher dimensional region the certainty obtained by the immediate sensation is probably indispensable; that much that is immeasurable exists just as really as, and even more really than, much that is measurable.

Footnotes

^55:1 C. H. Hinton, "A New Era of Thought," p. 44.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 59]

  

CHAPTER VI

          Methods   of investigation of the problem of higher dimensions. The analogy between imaginary   worlds of different dimensions. The one-dimensional world on a line.   "Space" and "time" of a one-dimensional being. The   two-dimensional world on a plane. "Space" and "time,"   "ether," "matter" and "motion" of a   two-dimensional being. Reality and illusion on a plane. The impossibility of   seeing an "angle." An angle as motion. The incomprehensibility to a   two-dimensional being of the functions of things in our world. Phenomena and   noumena of a two-dimensional being. How could a plane being comprehend the   third dimension?

     
   A SERIES of analogies and comparisons are used for the definition of that which can be, and that which cannot be, in the region of the higher dimension.

We imagine "worlds" of one, and of two dimensions, and out of the relations of lower-dimensional worlds to higher ones we deduce possible relations of our world to one of four dimensions; just as out of the relations of points to lines, of lines to surfaces, and of surfaces to solids we deduce the relations of our solids to four-dimensional ones.

Let us try to investigate everything that this method of analogy can yield.

Let us imagine a world of one dimension.

It will be a line. Upon this line let us imagine living beings. Upon this line, which represents the universe for them, they will be able to move forward and backward only, and these beings will be as the points, or segments of a line. Nothing will exist for them outside their line--and they will not be aware of the line upon which they are living and moving. For there will exist only two points, ahead and behind, or may be just one point ahead. Noticing the change in states of these points, the one-dimensional being will call these changes phenomena. If we suppose the line upon which the one-dimensional being lives to be passing through the different objects of our world, then of all these objects the one-dimensional

[p. 60]

being will perceive one point only; if different bodies intersect his line, the one-dimensional being will sense them only as the appearance, the more or less prolonged existence, and the disappearance of a point. This appearance, existence, and disappearance of a point will constitute a phenomenon. Phenomena, according to the character and properties of passing objects and the velocity and properties of their motions, for the one-dimensional being will be constant or variable, long or short timed, periodical or unperiodical. But the one-dimensional being will be absolutely unable to understand or explain the constancy or variability, the duration or brevity, the periodicity or unperiodicity of the phenomena of his world, and will regard these simply as properties of such phenomena. The solids intersecting his line may be different, but for the one-dimensional being all phenomena will be absolutely identical--just the appearance or the disappearance of a point--and phenomena will differ only in duration and in greater or less periodicity.

Such strange monotony and similarity of the diverse and heterogeneous phenomena of our world will be the  peculiarity of the one-dimensional world.

Moreover, if we assume that the one-dimensional being possesses memory, it is clear that recalling all the points seen by him as phenomena, he will refer them to time. The point which was: this is the phenomenon already non-existent, and the point which may appear tomorrow: this is the phenomenon which does not exist as yet. All of our space except one line will be in the category of time, i.e., something wherefrom phenomena come and into which they disappear. And the one-dimensional being will declare that the idea of time arises for him out of the observation of motion, that is to say, out of the appearance and disappearance of points. These will be considered as temporal phenomena, beginning at that moment when they become visible, and ending--ceasing to exist--at that moment when they become invisible. The one-dimensional being will not be in a position to imagine that the phenomenon goes on existing somewhere, though invisibly to him; or he will imagine it as existing somewhere on his line, far ahead of him.

We can imagine this one-dimensional being more vividly. Let us take an atom hovering in space, or simply a particle of dust, carried along by the air, and let us imagine that this atom or particle

[p. 61]

of dust possesses a consciousness, i.e., separates himself from the outside world, and is conscious only of that which lies in the line of his motion, and with which he himself comes in contact. He will then be a one-dimensional being in the full sense of the word. He can fly and move in all directions, but it will always seem to him that he is moving upon a single line; outside of this line will be for him only a great Nothingness--the whole universe will appear to him as one line. He will feel none of the turns and angles of his line, for to feel an angle it is necessary to be conscious of that which lies to right or left, above or below. In all other respects such a being will be absolutely identical with the before-described imaginary being living upon the imaginary line. Everything that he comes in contact with, that is, everything that he is conscious of, will seem to him to be emerging from time, i.e., from nothing, vanishing into time, i.e., into nothing. This nothing will be all our world. All our world except one line will be called time and will be counted as actually non-existent.

______

Let us next consider the two-dimensional world, and the being living on a plane. The universe of this being will be one great plane. Let us imagine beings on this plane having the shape of points, lines, and flat geometrical figures. The objects and "solids" of that world will have the shape of flat geometrical figures too.

In what manner will a being living on such a plane universe cognize his world?

First of all we can affirm that he will not feel the plane upon which he lives. He will not do so because he will feel the objects, i.e., figures which are on this plane. He will feel the lines which limit them, and for this reason he will not feel his plane, for in that case he would not be in a position to discern the lines. The lines will differ from the plane in that they produce sensations; therefore they exist. The plane does not produce sensations; therefore it does not exist. Moving on the plane, the two-dimensional being, feeling no sensations, will declare that nothing now exists. After having encountered some figure, having sensed its lines, he will say that something appeared. But gradually, by a process of reasoning, the two-dimensional being will come to the conclusion that the figures

[p. 62]

he encounters exist on something, or in something. Thereupon he may name such a plane (he will not know, indeed, that it is a plane) the "ether." Accordingly he will declare that the "ether" fills all space, but differs in its qualities from "matter." By "matter" he will mean lines. Having come to this conclusion the two-dimensional being will regard all processes as happening in his "ether," i.e., in his space. He will not be in a position to imagine anything outside of this ether, that is, out of his plane. If anything, proceeding out of his plane, comes in contact with his consciousness, then he will either deny it, or regard it as something subjective, the creation of his own imagination; or else he will believe that it is proceeding right on the plane, in the ether, as are all other phenomena.

Sensing lines only, the plane being will not sense them as we do. First of all, he will see no angle. It is extremely easy for us to verify this by experiment. If we will hold before our eyes two matches, inclined one to the other in a horizontal plane, then we shall see one line. To see the angle we shall have to look from above. The two-dimensional being cannot look from above and therefore cannot see the angle. But measuring the distance between the lines of different "solids" of his world, the two-dimensional being will come continually in contact with the angle, and he will regard it as a strange property of the line, which is sometimes manifest and sometimes is not. That is, he will refer the angle to time; he will regard it as a temporary, evanescent phenomenon, a change in the state of a "solid," or as motion. It is difficult for us to understand this. It is difficult to imagine how the angle can be regarded as motion. But it must be absolutely so, and cannot be otherwise. If we try to represent to ourselves how the plane being studies the square, then certainly we shall find that for the plane being the square will be a moving body. Let us imagine that the plane being is opposite one of the angles of the square. He does not see the angle--before him is a line, but a line possessing very curious properties. Approaching this line, the two-dimensional being observes that a strange thing is happening to the line. One point remains in the same position, and other points are withdrawing back from both sides. We repeat, that the two-dimensional being has no idea of an angle. Apparently the line remains the same as it was, yet something is happening to it, without a doubt. The plane being will say

[p. 63]

that the line is moving, but so rapidly as to be imperceptible to sight. If the plane being goes away from the angle and follows along a side of the square, then the side will become immobile. When he comes to the angle, he will notice the motion again. After going around the square several times, he will establish the fact of regular, periodical motions of the line. Quite probably in the mind of the plane being the square will assume the form of a body possessing the property of periodical motions, invisible to the eye, but producing definite physical effects (molecular motion)--or it will remain there as a perception of periodical moments of rest and motion in one complex line, and still more probably it will seem to be a rotating body.

Quite possibly the plane being will regard the angle as his own subjective perception, and will doubt whether any objective reality corresponds to this subjective perception. Nevertheless he will reflect that if there is action, yielding to measurement, so must there be the cause of it, consisting in the change of the state of the line, i.e., in motion.

The lines visible to the plane being he may call matter, and the angles--motion. That is, he may call the broken line with an angle, moving matter. And truly to him such a line by reason of its properties will be quite analogous to matter in motion.

If a cube were to rest upon the plane upon which the plane being lives, then this cube will not exist for the two-dimensional being, but only the square face of the cube in contact with the plane will exist for him--as a line, with periodical motions. Correspondingly, all other solids lying outside of his plane., in contact with it, or passing through it, will not exist for the plane being. The planes of contact or cross-sections of these bodies will alone be sensed. But if these planes or sections move or change, then the two-dimensional being will think, indeed, that the cause of the change or motion is in the bodies themselves, i.e., right there on his plane.

As has been said, the two-dimensional being will regard the straight lines only as immobile matter; irregular lines and curves will seem to him as moving. So far as really moving lines are concerned, that is, lines limiting the cross-sections or planes of contact passing through or moving along the plane, these will be for

[p. 64]

the two-dimensional being something inconceivable and incommensurable. It will be as though there were in them the presence of something independent, depending upon  only, animated. This effect will proceed from two causes: He can measure the immobile angles and curves, the properties of which the two-dimensional being calls motion, for the reason that they are immobile; moving figures, on the contrary, he cannot measure, because the changes in them will be out of his control. These changes will depend upon the properties of the whole body and its motion, and of that whole body the two-dimensional being will know only one side or section. Not perceiving the existence of this body, and contemplating the motion pertaining to the sides and sections he probably will regard them as living beings. He will affirm that there is something in them which differentiates them from other bodies: vital energy, or even soul. That something will be regarded as inconceivable, and really will be inconceivable to the two-dimensional being, because to him it is the result of an incomprehensible motion of inconceivable solids.

If we imagine an immobile circle upon the plane, then for the two-dimensional being it will appear as a moving line with some very strange and to him inconceivable motions.

The two-dimensional being will never see that motion. Perhaps he will call such motion molecular motion, i.e., the movement of minutest invisible particles of "matter."

Moreover, a circle rotating around an axis passing through its center, for the two-dimensional being will differ in some inconceivable way from the immobile circle. Both will appear to be moving, but moving differently.

For the two-dimensional being a circle or a square, rotating around its centre, on, account of its double motion will be an inexplicable and incommensurable phenomenon, like a phenomenon of life for a modern physicist.

Therefore, for a two-dimensional being, a straight line will be immobile matter; a broken or a curved line--matter in motion; and a moving line--living matter.

The centre of a circle or a square will be inaccessible to the plane being, just as the centre of a sphere or of a cube made of solid matter is inaccessible to us--and for the two-dimensional being even

[p. 65]

the idea of a centre will be incomprehensible, since he possesses no idea of a centre.

Having no idea of phenomena proceeding outside of the plane--that is, out of his "space"--the plane being will think of all phenomena as proceeding on his plane as has been stated. And all phenomena which he regards as proceeding on his plane, he will consider as being in causal interdependence one with another: that is, he will think that one phenomenon is the effect of another which has happened right there, and the cause of a third which will happen right on the same plane.

If a multi-colored cube passes through the plane, the plane being will perceive the entire cube and its motion as a change in color of lines lying in the plane. Thus, if a blue line replaces a red one, then the plane being will regard the red line as a past event. He will not be in a position to realize the idea that the red line is still existing somewhere. He will say that the line is single, but that it becomes blue as a consequence of certain causes of a physical character. If the cube moves backward so that the red line appears again after the blue one, then for the two-dimensional being this will constitute a new phenomenon. He will say that the line became red again.

For the being living on a plane, everything above and below (if the plane be horizontal), and on the right or left (if the plane be vertical) will be existing in time, in the past and in the future: that which in reality is located outside of the plane will be regarded as non-existent, either as that which is already past, i.e., as something which has disappeared, ceased to be, will never return; or as in the future, i.e., as not existent, not manifested, as a thing in potentiality.

______

Let us imagine that a wheel with the spokes painted different colors is rotating through the plane upon which the plane being lives. To such a being all the motion of the wheel will appear as a variation of the color of the line of intersection of the wheel and the plane. The plane being will call this variation of the color of the line a phenomenon, and observing these phenomena he will notice in them a certain succession. He will know that the black line is followed by the white one, the white by the blue, the blue by the red, and so on. If simultaneously with the appearance of the white line some other phenomenon occurs--say the ringing of a

[p. 66]

bell--the two-dimensional being will say that the white line is the cause of that ringing. The change of the color of the lines, in the opinion of the two-dimensional being, will depend on causes lying right in his plane. Any pre-supposition of the possibility of the existence of causes lying outside of the plane he will characterize as fantastic and entirely unscientific. It will seem so to him because he will never be in a position to represent the wheel to himself, i.e., the parts of the wheel on both sides of the plane. After a rough study of the color of the lines, and knowing the order of their sequence, the plane being, perceiving one of them, say the blue one, will think that the black and the white ones have already passed, i.e., disappeared, ceased to exist, gone into the past; and that those lines which have not as yet appeared--the yellow, the green, and so on, and the new white and black ones still to come--do not yet exist, but lie in the future.

Therefore, though not conceiving the form of his universe, and regarding it as infinite in all directions, the plane being will nevertheless involuntarily think of the past as situated somewhere at one side of all, and of the future as somewhere at the other side of this totality. In such manner will the plane being conceive of the idea of time. We see that this idea arises because the two-dimensional being senses only two out of three dimensions of space; the third dimension he senses only after its effects become manifest upon the plane, and therefore he regards it as something different from the first two dimensions of space, calling it time.

______

Now let us imagine that through the plane upon which the two-dimensional being lives, two wheels with multi-colored spokes are rotating and are rotating in opposite directions. The spokes of one wheel come from above and go below; the spokes of the other come from below and go above.

The plane being will never notice it.

He will never notice that where for one line (which he sees) there lies the past, for another line there lies the future. This thought will never even come into his head, because he will conceive of the past and the future very confusedly, regarding them as concepts, not as actual facts. But at the same time he will be firmly convinced that the past goes in one direction, and the future in another. Therefore

[p. 67]

it will seem to him a wild absurdity that on one side something past and something future can lie together, and on another side--and also beside these two--something future and something past. To the plane being the idea that some phenomena come whence others go, and vice versa, will seem equally absurd. He will tenaciously think that the future is that wherefrom everything comes, and the past is that whereto everything goes and wherefrom nothing returns. He will be totally unable to understand that events may arise from the past just as they do from the future.

Thus we see that the plane being will regard the changes of color of the lines lying on the plane very naively. The appearance of different spokes he will regard as the change of color of one and the same line, and the repeated appearance of the same colored spoke he will regard every time as a new appearance of a given color.

But nevertheless, having noticed periodicity in the change of the color of the lines upon the surface, having remembered the order of their appearance, and having learned to define the "time" of the appearance of certain spokes in relation to some other more constant phenomenon, the plane being will be in a position to foretell the change of the line from one color to another. Thereupon he will say that he has studied this phenomenon, that he can apply to it "the mathematical method"--can "calculate" it.

_____

If we ourselves enter the world of plane beings, then its inhabit-ants will sense the lines limiting the sections of our bodies. These sections will be for them living beings; they will not know from whence they appear, why they alter, or whither they disappear in such a miraculous manner. So also, the sections of all our inanimate but moving objects will seem independent living beings.

If the consciousness of a plane being should suspect our existence, and should come into some sort of communion with our consciousness, then to him we would appear as higher, omniscient, possibly omnipotent, but above all incomprehensible beings of a quite inconceivable category.

We could see his world just as it is, and not as it seems to him. We could see the past and the future; could foretell, direct, and even create events.

[p. 68]

We could know the very substance of things--could know what "matter" (the straight line) is, what "motion" (the broken line, the curve, the angle) is. We could see an angle, and we could see a centre. All this would give us an enormous advantage over the two-dimensional being.

In all the phenomena of the world of the two-dimensional being we could see considerably more than he sees--or could see quite other things than he.

And we could tell him very much that was new, amazing, and unexpected about the phenomena of his world, provided indeed that be could hear us and understand us.

First of all we could tell him that what he regards as phenomena--angles and curves, for instance--are properties of higher figures; that other "phenomena" of his world are not phenomena, but only "parts" or "sections" of phenomena; that what he calls "solids" are only sections of solids--and many things besides.

We would be able to tell him that on both sides of his plane (i.e., of his space or ether) lies infinite space (which the plane being calls time); and that in this space lie the causes of all his phenomena, and the phenomena themselves, the past as well as the future ones; moreover, we might add that "phenomena" themselves are not something happening and then ceasing to be, but combinations of properties of higher solids.

But we should experience considerable difficulty in explaining anything to the plane being; and it would be very difficult for him to understand us. First of all it would be difficult because he would not have the concepts corresponding to our concepts. He would lack "necessary words."

For instance, "section"--this would be for him a quite new and inconceivable word; then "angle"--again an inconceivable word; "centre"--still more inconceivable; the third perpendicular--something incomprehensible, lying outside of his geometry.

The fallacy of his conception of time would be the most difficult thing for the plane being to understand. He could never understand that that which has passed and that which is to be are existing simultaneously on the lines perpendicular to his plane. And he could never conceive the idea that the past is identical with the future, because phenomena come from both sides and go in both directions.

[p. 69]

But the most difficult thing for the plane being would be to conceive the idea that "time" includes in itself two ideas: the idea of space, and the idea of motion upon this space.

We have shown that what the two-dimensional being living on the plane calls motion has for us a quite different aspect.

In his book The Fourth Dimension, under the heading "The First Chapter in the History of Four-space," Hinton writes:

Parmenides, and the Asiatic thinkers with whom he is in close affinity, propound a theory of existence which is in close accord with a conception of a possible relation between a higher and lower dimensional space. . . . It is one which in all ages has had a strong attraction for pure intellect, and is the natural mode of thought for those who refrain from projecting their own volition into nature under the guise of causality.

According to Parmenides of the school of Elea the all is one, unmoving and unchanging. The permanent amid the transient--that foothold for thought, that solid ground for feeling, on the discovery of which depends all our life--is no phantom; it is the image amidst deception of true being, the eternal, the unmoved, the one. Thus says Parmenides.

But how is it possible to explain the shifting scene, these mutations of things?

"Illusion," answers Parmenides. Distinguishing between truth and error, he tells of the true doctrine of the one--the false opinion of a changing world. He is no less memorable for the manner of his advocacy than for the cause he advocates.

Can the mind conceive a more delightful intellectual picture than that of Parmenides pointing to the one, the true, the unchanging, and yet on the other hand ready to discuss all manner of false opinion! . . .

In support of the true opinion he proceeded by the negative way of showing the self-contradictions in the ideas of change and motion. . . . To express his doctrine in the ponderous modern way we must make the statement that motion is phenomenal, not real.

Let us represent his doctrine.

Imagine a sheet of still water into which a slanting stick is being lowered with a motion vertically downward. Let 1, 2, 3 (Fig. 1) be three consecutive positions of the stick. A, B, C will be three connective positions of the meeting of the stick with the surface of the water. As the stick passes down, the meeting will move from A on to B and C.

Suppose now all the water to be removed except a film. At the meeting of the film and the stick there will be an interruption of the film. If we suppose the film to have a property, like that of a soap bubble, of closing up round any penetrating object, then as the stick goes vertically down-ward the interruption in the film will move on. If we pass a spiral through the film the intersection will give a point moving in a circle (shown by the dotted lines in Fig. 2).

[p. 70]

For the plane being such a point, moving in a circle in its plane, would probably constitute a cosmical phenomenon, something like the motion of a planet in its orbit.

Suppose now the spiral to be still and the film to move vertically upward, the whole spiral will be represented in the film in the consecutive positions of the point of intersection.

          
FIG I

       
FIG II

     
   If instead of one spiral we take a complicated construction consisting of spirals, inclined and straight lines, broken and curved lines, and if the film move vertically upward we shall have an entire universe of moving points the movements of which will appear to the plane being as original.

The plane being will explain these movements as depending one upon another, and indeed he will never happen to think that these movements are fictitious and are dependent upon the spirals and other lines lying outside his space. [*1]

Returning to the plane being and his perception of the world, and analyzing his relations to the three-dimensional world, we see that for the two-dimensional or plane being it will be very difficult to understand all the complexity of the phenomena of our world, as it appears to us. He (the plane being) is accustomed to perceive the world as being too simple.

Taking into consideration the sections of figures instead of the figures themselves, the plane being will compare them in relation to their length and their greater or lesser curvature, i.e., their for him more or less rapid motion.

The differences between the objects of our world, as they exist for us he would not understand. The functions of the objects of our world would be completely mysterious to his mind--incomprehensible, "supernatural."

[p. 71]

Let us imagine that a coin, and a candle the diameter of which is equal to that of the coin, are on the plane upon which the two-dimensional being lives. To the plane being they will seem two equal circles, i.e., two moving, and absolutely identical lines; he will never discover any difference between them. The functions of the coin and of the candle in our world--these are for him absolutely a terra incognita. If we try to imagine what an enormous evolution the plane being must pass through in order to understand the function of the coin and of the candle and the difference between these functions, we shall understand the nature of the division between the plane world and the world of three dimensions, and the complete impossibility of even imagining, on the plane, anything at all like the three-dimensional world, with its manifoldness of function.

The properties of the phenomena of the plane world will be extremely monotonous; they will differ by the order of their appearance, their duration, and their periodicity. Solids, and the things of this world will be flat and uniform, like shadows, i.e., like the shadows of quite different solids, which seem to us uniform. Even if the plane being could come in contact with our consciousness, he would never be in a position to understand all the manifoldness and richness the phenomena of our world and the variety of function of the things of that world.

Plane beings would not be in a position to master our most ordinary concepts.

It would be extremely difficult for them to understand that phenomena, identical for them, are in reality different; and on the other hand, that phenomena quite separate for them are in reality parts of one great phenomenon, and even of one object or one being.

This last will be one of the most difficult things for the plane being to understand. If we imagine our plane being to be inhabiting a horizontal plane, intersecting the top of a tree, and parallel to the surface of the earth, then for such a being each of the various sections of the branches will appear as a quite separate phenomenon or object. The idea of the tree and its branches will never occur to him.

Generally speaking, the understanding of the most fundamental and simple things of our world will be infinitely long and difficult

[p. 72]

to the plane being. He would have to entirely reconstruct his concepts of space and time. This would be the first step. Unless it is taken, nothing is accomplished. Until the plane being shall imagine all our universe as existing in time, i.e., until he refers to time everything lying on both sides of his plane, he will never understand anything. In order to begin to understand "the third dimension" the inhabitant of the plane must conceive of his time concepts spatially, that is, translate his time into space.

To achieve even the spark of a true understanding of our world he will have to reconstruct completely all his ideas--to revaluate all values, to revise all concepts, to dissever the uniting concepts, to unite those which are dissevered; and, what is most important, to create an infinite number of new ones.

If we put down the five fingers of one hand on the plane of the two-dimensional being they will be for him five separate phenomena.

Let us try to imagine what an enormous mental evolution he would have to undergo in order to understand that these five separate phenomena on his plane are the finger-tips of the hand of a large, active and intelligent being--man.

To make out, step by step, how the plane being would attain to an understanding of our world, lying in the region of the to him mysterious third dimension--i.e., partly in the past, partly in the future--would be interesting in the highest degree. First of all, in order to understand the world of three dimensions, he must cease to be two-dimensional--he must become three-dimensional himself, or in other words he must feel an interest in the life of three-dimensional space. After having felt the interest of this life, he will by so doing transcend his plane, and will never be in a position thereafter to return to it. Entering more and more within the circle of ideas and concepts which were entirely incomprehensible to him before, he will have already become, not two-dimensional, but three-dimensional. But all along the plane being will have been essentially three-dimensional, that is, he will have had the third dimension, without his being conscious of it himself. To become three-dimensional he must be three-dimensional. Then as the end of ends he can address himself to the self-liberation from the illusion of the two-dimensionality of himself and the world, and to the apprehension of the three-dimensional world.

Footnotes

^70:1 C. H. Hinton, "The Fourth Dimension," pp. 23, 24 and 25.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 73]

  

CHAPTER VII

          The   impossibility of the mathematical definition of dimensions. Why does not   mathematics sense dimensions? The entire conditionality of the representation   of dimensions by powers. The possibility of representing all powers on a   line. Kant and Lobachevsky. The difference between non-Euclidian geometry and   metageometry. Where shall we find the explanation of the three-dimensionality   of the world, if Kant's ideas are true? Are not the conditions of the   three-dimensionality of the world confined to our receptive apparatus, to our   psyche?

     
   NOW that we have studied those "relations which our space itself bears within it" we shall return to the questions: But what in reality do the dimensions of space represents--and why are there three of them?

The fact that it is impossible to define three-dimensionality mathematically must appear most strange.

We are little conscious of this, and it seems to us a paradox, because we speak of the dimensions of space, but it remains a fact that mathematics does not sense the dimensions of space.

The question arises, how can such a fine instrument of analysis as mathematics not feel dimensions, if they represent some real properties of space?

Speaking of mathematics, it is necessary to recognize first of all, as a fundamental premise, that correspondent to each mathematical expression is always the relation of some realities.

If there is no such a thing, if it be not true--then there is no mathematics. This is its principal substance, its principal contents. To express the correlations of magnitudes is the problem of mathematics. But these correlations must be between something. Instead of algebraical a, b and c it must be possible to substitute some reality. This is the ABC of all mathematics; a, b and c are credit bills; they can be good ones only if behind them there is a real something, and they can be counterfeited if behind them there is no reality whatever.

[p. 74]

"Dimensions" play here a very strange role. If we designate them by the algebraic symbols a, b and c, they have the character of counterfeit credit bills. For this a, b and c it is impossible to substitute any real magnitudes which are capable of expressing the correlations of dimensions.

Usually dimensions are represented by powers: the first, the second, the third; that is, if a line is called a, then a square, the sides of which are equal to this line, is called a2, and a cube, the face of which is equal to this square, is called a3.

This among other things gave Hinton the foundation on which he constructed his theory of tesseracts, four-dimensional solids--a4. But this is pure fantasy. First of all, because the representation of "dimensions" by powers is entirely conditional. It is possible to represent all powers on a line. For example, take the segment of a line equal to five millimetres; then a segment equal to twenty-five millimetres will be the square of it, i.e., a2 and a segment of one hundred and twenty-five millimetres will be the cube--a3.

How shall we understand that mathematics does not feel dimensions--that it is impossible to express mathematically the difference between dimensions?

It is possible to understand and explain it by one thing only--namely, that this difference does not exist.

We really know that all three dimensions are in substance identical, that it is possible to regard each of the three dimensions either as following the sequence, the first, the second, the third, or the other way about. This alone proves that dimensions are not mathematical magnitudes. All the real properties of a thing can be expressed mathematically as quantities, i.e., numbers, showing the relation of these properties to other properties.

But in the matter of dimensions it is as if mathematics sees more than we do, or farther than we do, through some boundaries which arrest us but not it--and sees that no realities whatever correspond to our concepts of dimensions.

If the three dimensions really corresponded to three powers, then we should have the right to say that only these three powers refer to geometry, and that all the other higher powers, beginning with the fourth, lie beyond geometry.

[p. 75]

But even this is denied us. The representation of dimensions by powers is perfectly arbitrary.

More accurately, geometry, from the standpoint of mathematics, is an artificial system for the solving of problems based on conditional data, deduced, probably, from the properties of our psyche.

The system of investigation of "higher space" Hinton calls metageometry, and with metageometry he connects the names of Lobachevsky, Gauss, and other investigators of non-Euclidian geometry.

We shall now consider in what relation the questions touched upon by us stand to the theories of these scientists. Hinton deduces his ideas from Kant and Lobachevsky.

Others, on the contrary, place Kant's ideas in opposition to those of Lobachevsky. Thus Roberto Bonola, in Non-Euclidian Geometry, declares that Lobachevsky's conception of space is contrary to that of Kant. He says:

The Kantian doctrine considered space as a subjective intuition, a necessary presupposition of every experience. Lobachevsky's doctrine was rather allied to sensualism and the current empiricism, and compelled geometry to take its place again among the experienced sciences. [*1]

Which of these views is true, and in what relation do Lobachevsky's ideas stand to our problem? The correct answer to this question is: in no relation. Non-Euclidian geometry is not metageometry, and non-Euclidian geometry stands in the same relation to metageometry as Euclidian geometry itself.

The results of non-Euclidian geometry, which have submitted the fundamental axioms of Euclid to a revaluation, and which have found the most complete expression in the works of Bolyai, Gauss, and Lobachevsky, are embraced in the formula:

The axioms of a given geometry express the properties of a given space.

Thus geometry on the plane accepts all three Euclidian axioms, i.e.:

1. A straight line is the shortest distance between two points.

[p. 76]

2. Any figure may be transferred into another position without changing its properties.

3. Parallel lines do not meet.

(This last axiom is formulated differently by Euclid.)

In geometry on a sphere, or on a concave surface the first two axioms alone are true, because the meridians which are separated at the equator meet at the poles.

In geometry on the surface of irregular curvatures only the first axiom is true--the second, regarding the transference of figures, is impossible because the figure taken in one part of an irregular surface can change when transferred into another place. Also, the sum of the angles of a triangle can be either more or less than two right angles.

Therefore, axioms express the difference of properties of various kinds of surfaces.

A geometrical axiom is a law of given surface.

But what is a surface?

Lobachevsky's merit consists in that he found it necessary to revise the fundamental concepts of geometry. But he never went so far as to revalue these concepts from Kant's standpoint. At the same time he is in no sense contradictory to Kant. A surface in the mind of Lobachevsky, as a , was only a means for the generalization of certain properties on which this or that geometrical system was constructed, or the generalization of the properties of certain given lines. About the reality or the unreality of a surface, he probably never thought.

Thus on the one hand, Bonola, who ascribed to Lobachevsky views opposite to Kant, and their nearness to "sensualism" and "current empiricism," is quite wrong, while on the other hand, it is not impossible to conceive that Hinton entirely subjectively ascribes to Gauss and Lobachevsky their inauguration of a new era in philosophy.

Non-Euclidian geometry, including that of Lobachevsky, has no relation to metageometry whatever.

Lobachevsky does not go outside of the three-dimensional sphere.

Metageometry regards the three-dimensional sphere as a section of higher space. Among mathematicians, Riemann, who understood the relation of time to space, was nearest of all to this idea.

[p. 77]

The point, of three-dimensional space, is a section of a meta-geometrical line. It is impossible to generalize on any surface whatever the lines considered in metageometry. Perhaps this last is the most important for the definition of the difference between geometries (Euclidian and non-Euclidian and metageometry). It is impossible to regard metageometrical lines as distances between points in our space, and it is impossible to represent them as forming any figures in our space.

The consideration of the possible properties of lines lying out of our space, the relation of these lines and their angles to the lines, angles, surfaces and solids of our geometry, forms the subject of metageometry.

The investigators of non-Euclidian geometry could not bring themselves to reject the consideration of surfaces. There is something almost tragic in this. See what surfaces Beltrami invented in his investigations of non-Euclidian geometry--one of his surfaces resembles the surface of a ventilator, another, the inner surface of a funnel. But he could not decide to reject the surface, to cast it aside once and for all, to imagine that the line can be independent of the surface, i.e., a series of lines which are parallel or nearly parallel cannot be generalized on any surface, or even in three-dimensional space.

And because of this, both he and many other geometers, developing non-Euclidian geometry, could not transcend the three-dimensional world.

Mechanics recognizes the line in time, i.e., such a line as it is impossible by any means to imagine upon the surface, or as the distance between two points of space. This line is taken into consideration in the calculations pertaining to machines. But geometry never touched this line, and dealt always with its sections only.

______

Now it is possible to return to the question: what is space? and to discover if the answer to this question has been found.

The answer would be the exact definition and explanation of the three-dimensionality of space as a property of the world.

[p. 78]

But this is not the answer. The three-dimensionality of space as an objective phenomenon remains just as enigmatical and inconceivable as before. In relation to three-dimensionality it is necessary:

Either to accept it as a thing given, and to add this to the two data which we established in the beginning.

Or to recognize the fallacy of all objective methods of reasoning, and return to another method, outlined in the beginning of the book.

Then, on the basis of the two fundamental data, the world and consciousness, it is necessary to establish whether three-dimensional space is a property of the world, or a property of our knowledge of the world.

Beginning with Kant, who affirms that space is a property of the receptivity of the world by our consciousness, I intentionally deviated far from this idea and regarded space as a property of the world.

Along with Hinton, I postulated that our space itself bears within it the relations which permit us to establish its relations to higher space, and on the foundation of this postulate I built a whole series of analogies which somewhat clarified for us the problems of space and time and their mutual co-relations, but which, as was said, did not explain anything concerning the principal question of the causes of the three-dimensionality of space.

The method of analogies is, generally speaking, a rather tormenting thing. With it, you walk in a vicious circle. It helps you to elucidate certain things, and the relations of certain things, but in substance it never gives a direct answer to anything. After many and long attempts to analyze complex problems by the aid of the method of analogies, you feel the uselessness of all your efforts; you feel that you are walking alongside of a wall. Thereupon you begin to experience simply a hatred and aversion for analogies, and you find it necessary to search in the direct way which leads where you need to go.

The problem of higher dimensions has usually been analyzed by the method of analogies, and only very lately has science begun to elaborate that direct method which will be shown later on.

If we desire to go straight, without deviating, we shall keep

[p. 79]

strictly up to the fundamental propositions of Kant. But if we formulate Hinton's above-mentioned thought from the point of view of these propositions, it will be as follows: We bear within ourselves the conditions of our space, and therefore within ourselves we shall find the conditions which will permit us to establish correlations between our space and higher space.

In other words, we shall find the conditions of the three-dimensionality of the world in our psyche, in our receptive apparatus--and shall find exactly there the conditions of the possibility of the higher dimensional world.

Propounding the problem in this way, we put ourselves upon the direct path, and we shall receive an answer to our question, what is space and its three-dimensionality?

How may we approach the solution of this problem?

Plainly, by studying our consciousness and its properties.

We shall free ourselves from all analogies, and shall enter upon the correct and direct path toward the solution of the fundamental question about the objectivity or subjectivity of space, if we shall decide to study the psychical forms by which we perceive the world, and to discover if there does not exist a correspondence between them and the three-dimensionality of the world--that is, if the three-dimensional extension of space, with its properties, does not result from properties of the psyche which are known to us.

Footnotes

^75:1 Roberto Bonola, "Non-Euclidian Geometry." The Open Court Publishing Co., Chicago, 1912, pp. 92, 93.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 80]

  

CHAPTER VIII

          Our   receptive apparatus. Sensation. Perception. Conception. Intuition. Art as the   language of the future. To what extent does the three-dimensionality of the   world depend upon the properties of our receptive apparatus? What might prove   this interdependence? Where may we find the real affirmation of this   interdependence? The animal psyche. In what does it differ from the human?   Reflex action. The irritability of the cell. Instinct. Pleasure-pain.   Emotional thinking. The absence of concepts. Language of animals. Logic of   animals. Different degrees of psychic development in animals. The goose, the   cat, the dog and the monkey.

     
   IN order exactly to define the relation of our psyche to the external world, and to determine what, in our receptivity of the world, belongs to it, and what belongs to ourselves, let us turn to elementary psychology and examine the mechanism of our receptive apparatus.

The fundamental unit of our receptivity is a sensation. This sensation is an elementary change in the state of our psyche, produced, as it seems to us, either by some change in the state of the external world in relation to our consciousness, or by a change in the state of our psyche in relation to the external world. Such is the teaching of physics and psycho-physics. Into the consideration of the correctness or incorrectness of the construction of these sciences I shall not enter. Suffice it to define a sensation as an elementary change in the state of the psyche--as the element, that is, as the fundamental unit of this change. Feeling the sensation we assume that it appears, so to speak, as the reflection of some change in the external world.

The sensations felt by us leave a certain trace in our memory. The accumulating memories of sensations begin to blend in consciousness into groups, and according to their similitude tend to associate, to sum up, to be opposed; the sensations which are usually felt in close connection with one another will arise in memory in the

same connection. Gradually, out of the memories of sensations,

[p. 81]

perceptions are compounded. Perceptions--these are so to speak the group memories of sensations. During the compounding of perceptions, sensations are polarizing in two clearly defined directions. The first direction of this grouping will be according to the character of sensations. (The sensations of a yellow color will combine with the sensations of a yellow color; sensations of a sour taste with those of a sour taste.) The second direction will be according to the time of the reception of sensations. When various sensations, constituting a single group, and compounding one perception, enter simultaneously, then the memory of this definite group of sensations is ascribed to a common cause. This "common cause" is projected into the outside world as the object, and it is assumed that the given perception itself reflects the real properties of this object. Such group remembrance constitutes perception, the perception, for example, of a tree--that tree. Into this group enter the green color of the leaves, their smell, their shadows, their rustle in the wind, etc. All these things taken together form as it were a focus of rays coming out of the psyche, gradually concentrated upon the outside object and coinciding with it either well or ill.

In the further complication of the psychic life, the memories of perception proceed as with the memories of sensations. Mingling together, the memories of perceptions, or the "images of perceptions," combine in various ways: they sum up, they stand opposed, they form groups, and in the end give rise to concepts.

Thus out of various sensations, experienced (in groups) at different times, a child gets the perception of a tree (that tree), and afterwards, out of the images of perceptions of different trees there emerges the concept of a tree, i.e., not "that tree," but trees in general.

______

The formation of perceptions leads to the formation of words, and the appearance of speech.

The beginning of speech may appear on the lowest level of psychic life, during the period of living by sensations, and it will become more complex during the period of living by perceptions;

[p. 82]

but unless there be concepts it will not be speech in the true meaning of the word.

On the lower levels of psychic life certain sensations can be expressed by certain sounds. Therefore it is possible to express common impressions of horror, anger, pleasure. These sounds may serve as signals of danger, as commands, demands, threats, etc., but it is impossible to say much by means of them.

In the further development of speech, if words or sounds express perceptions, as in the case of children, this means that the given sound or the given word designates only that object to which it refers. For each new similar object must exist another new sound, or a new word. If the speaker designates different objects by one and the same sound or word, it means that in his opinion the objects are the same, or that knowingly he is calling different objects by the same name. In either case it will be difficult to understand him, and such speech cannot serve as an example of clear speech. For instance, if a child call a tree by a certain sound or word, having in view that tree only, and not knowing other trees at all, then any new tree which he may see he will call by a new word, or else he will take it for the same tree. The speech in which "words" correspond to perceptions is as it were made up of proper nouns. There are no appellative nouns; and not only substantives, but verbs, adjectives and adverbs have the character of "proper nouns"--that is, they apply to a given action, to a given quality, or to a given property.

The appearance of words of a common meaning in human speech signifies the appearance of concepts in consciousness.

Speech consists of words, each word expressing a concept. Concept and word are in substance one and the same thing; only the first (the concept) represents, so to speak, the inner side, and the second (the word) the outer side. Or, as says Dr. R. M. Bucke (the author of the book Cosmic Consciousness, about which I shall have much to say later on), "A word (i.e., concept) is the algebraical sign of a thing."

It has been noticed thousands of times that the brain of a thinking man does not exceed in size the brain of a non-thinking wild man in anything like the proportion in which the mind of the thinker exceeds the mind of the savage. The reason is that the brain of a Herbert Spencer has very little more work to do than has the brain of a native Australian, for

[p. 83]

this reason, that Spencer does all his characteristic mental work by signs or counters which stand for concepts, while the savage does all or nearly all his by means of cumbersome recepts. The savage is in a position comparable to that of the astronomer who makes his calculations by arithmetic, while Spencer is in the position of one who makes them by algebra. The first will fill many great sheets of paper with figures and go through immense labor; the other will make the same calculations on an envelope and with comparatively little mental work. [*1]

In our speech words express concepts or ideas. By ideas are meant broader concepts, not representing the group sign of similar perceptions, but embracing various groups of perceptions, or even groups of concepts. Therefore an idea is a complex or an abstract concept.

In addition to the simple sensations of these sense organs (color, sound, touch, smell and taste), in addition to the simple emotions of pleasure, pain, joy, anger, surprise, wonder, curiosity and many others, there is passing through our consciousness a series of complex sensations and higher (complex) emotions (moral, esthetic, religious). The content of emotional feelings, even the simplest--to say nothing of the complex--can never be wholly confined to concepts or ideas, and therefore can never be correctly or exactly expressed in words. Words can only allude to it, point to it. The interpretation of emotional feelings and emotional understanding is the problem of art. In combinations of words, in their meaning, their rhythm, their music--the combination of meaning, rhythm and music; in sounds, colors, lines, forms--men are creating a new world, and are attempting therein to express and transmit that which they feel, but which they are unable to express and transmit simply in words, i.e., in concepts. The emotional tones of life, i.e., of "feelings," are best transmitted by music, but it cannot express concepts, i.e., thought. Poetry endeavors to express both music and thought together. The combination of feeling and thought of high tension leads to a higher form of psychic life. Thus in art we have already the first experiments in a language of the future. Art anticipates a psychic evolution and divines its future forms.

At the present time an average man, taken as a norm, has attained to three units of psychic life: sensation, perception, and conception. Furthermore, observation reveals the fact that some people at certain

[p. 84]

times acquire a new, fourth unit of psychic life, which different authors and different schools name differently, but in which an element of knowledge or ideas is always united with an emotional element.

If Kant's ideas are correct, if space with its characteristics is a property of our consciousness, and not of the external world, then the three-dimensionality of the world must in this or some other manner depend upon the constitution of our psychic apparatus.

It is possible to put the question concretely in the following manner: What bearing upon the three-dimensional extension of the world has the fact that in our psychical apparatus we discover the categories above described--sensations, perceptions and concepts?

We possess such a psychical apparatus and the world is three-dimensional. How is it possible to establish the fact that the three-dimensionality of the world depends upon such a constitution of our psychical apparatus?

This could be proven or disproven undeniably only with the aid of experiments.

If we could change our psychic apparatus and should then discover that the world around us was changing, this would constitute for us the proof of the dependence of the properties of space upon the properties of our consciousness.

For example if we could make the above-mentioned higher form of psychic life (which appears now accidentally as it were and depends upon insufficiently studied conditions) just as definite, exact, and subject to our will as is the concept; and if the number of characteristics of space increased, i.e., if space became four-dimensional instead of being three-dimensional, this would affirm our presupposition, and would prove Kant's contention that space with its properties is a form of our sensuous receptivity.

Or if we could diminish the number of units of our psychic life, and deprive ourselves or someone else of conceptions, leaving the psyche to act by perceptions and sensations only; and if by so doing the number of characteristics of the space surrounding us diminished; i.e., if for the person subjected to the test the world became two-dimensional instead of three-dimensional, and indeed

[p. 85]

one-dimensional as a result of a still greater limitation of the psychic apparatus, by depriving the person of perceptions--this would affirm our presupposition, and Kant's idea could be considered proven.

That is to say, Kant's idea would be proven experimentally if we could be convinced that for the being possessing sensations only, the world is one-dimensional; for the being possessing sensations and perceptions the world is two-dimensional; and for the being possessing, in addition to concepts and ideas, the higher forms of knowledge the world is four-dimensional.

Or, more exactly, Kant's thesis in regard to the subjectivity of space-perception could be regarded as proven (a) if for the being possessing sensations only, our entire world with all its variety of forms should seem a single line; if the universe of this being should possess but one dimension, i.e., should this being be one-dimensional in the properties of its receptivity; and (b) if for the being possessing, in addition to the  of feeling sensations, the faculty of forming perceptions, the world should have a two-dimensional extension; if all our world with its blue sky, clouds, green trees, mountains and precipices, should seem to him one plane; if the universe of this being should have only two dimensions, i.e., if this being were two-dimensional in the properties of its receptivity.

More briefly, Kant's thesis would be proven could we be made to see that for the conscious being the number of characteristics of the world changes in accordance with the changes of its psychic apparatus.

To perform such an experiment, effecting the diminution of psychic characteristics is not possible under ordinary conditions--we cannot arbitrarily limit our own, or anyone else's psychic apparatus.

Experiments with the augmentation of psychic characteristics have been made and are recorded, but in consequence of many diverse causes they are insufficiently convincing. The chief reason for this is that the augmentation of psychic faculties yields, first of all, so much of newness in the psychic realm that this newness obscures the changes proceeding simultaneously in the

[p. 86]

previous perception of the world; one feels the new, but is not capable of defining the difference exactly.

The entire body of teachings of religio-philosophic movements have as their avowed or hidden purpose, the expansion of consciousness. This also is the aim of mysticism of every age and of every faith, the aim of occultism, and of the Oriental yoga. But the question of the expansion of consciousness demands special study; the final chapters of this book will be dedicated to it.

For the present, in proof of the above stated propositions with regard to the change of the world in relation to psychic changes, it is sufficient to consider the assumption concerning the possibility of a smaller number of psychic characteristics.

If experiments in this direction are impossible, perhaps observation may furnish what we seek.

Let us put the question: Are there not beings in the world standing toward us in the necessary relation, whose psyche is of a lower grade than ours?

Such psychically inferior beings undoubtedly exist. These are animals.

Of the difference between the psychical nature of an animal and of a man we know very little: the usual "conversational" psychology deals with it not at all. Usually we deny altogether that animals have minds, or else we ascribe to them our own psychology, but "limited"--though how and in what we do not know. Again, we say that animals do not possess reason, but are governed by instinct. As to what exactly we mean by instinct we do not ourselves know. I am speaking not alone of popular, but so-called "scientific" psychology.

Let us try to discover what instinct is, and learn something about animal psychology. First of all let us analyze the actions of animals, and see wherein they differ from ours. If these actions are instinctive, what inference is to be drawn from the fact?

What are those actions in general, and how do they differ?

In the actions of living beings within the limits of our usual observation we discriminate between those which are reflex, instinctive, rational and automatic.

Reflex actions are simply responses by motion, reactions upon external irritations, taking place always in the same way, regardless

[p. 87]

of their utility or futility, expediency or inexpediency in any given case. Their origin and laws are due to the simple irritability of a cell.

What is the irritability of a cell, and what are these laws?

The irritability of a cell is defined as its faculty to respond to external irritation by a motion. Experiments with the simplest mono-cellular organisms, have shown that this irritability acts according to definite laws. The cell responds by a motion to outside irritation. The force of the responsive motion increases as the force of the irritation is intensified, but in no definite proportionality. In order to provoke the responsive movement the irritation must be of a sufficient intensity. Each experienced irritation leaves a certain trace in the cell, making it more receptive to the new irritations. In this we see that the cell responds to the repetitive irritation of an equal force by a more forceful motion than the first one. And if the irritations be repeated further the cell will respond to them by more and more forceful motions, up to a certain limit. Having reached this limit the cell experiences fatigue, and responds to the same irritation by more and more feeble reactions. It is as if the cell becomes accustomed to the irritation. It becomes for the cell part of a constant environment, and it ceases to react, because it is reacting generally only to changes in conditions which are constant. If from the very beginning the irritation is so weak that it fails to provoke the responsive motion, it nevertheless leaves in the cell a certain invisible trace. This can be inferred from the fact that by repeating these weak irritations, the cell finally begins to react to them.

Thus in the laws of irritability we observe, as it were, the beginnings of memory, fatigue, and habit. The cell produces the illusion, if not of a conscious and reasoning being, at any rate of a remembering being, habit-forming, and susceptible to fatigue. If we can be thus deceived by a cell, how much more liable are we to be deceived by the greater complexity of animal life.

But let us return to the analysis of actions. By the reflex actions of an organism are meant actions in which either an entire organism or its separate parts acts as a cell, i.e., within the limits of the law of variability. We observe such actions both in men and in animals. A man shudders all over from unexpected cold, or

[p. 88]

from a touch. His eyelids wink at the swift approach or touch of some object. The freely-hanging foot of a person in a sitting position moves forward if the leg be struck on the tendon below the knee. These movements proceed independently of consciousness, they may even proceed counter to consciousness. Usually consciousness registers them as accomplished facts. Moreover these movements are not at all governed by expediency. The foot moves forward in answer to the blow on the tendon even though a knife or a fire be in front of it.

By instinctive actions are meant actions governed by expediency, but made without conscious selection or without conscious aim.

They appear with the appearance of a sensuous tincture to sensations, i.e., from that moment when the sensation begins to be associated with a sense of pleasure or pain.

As a matter of fact, before the dawn of human intellect, throughout the entire animal kingdom "actions" were governed by the tendency to receive or to retain pleasure, or to escape pain.

We may declare with entire assurance that instinct is a pleasure-pain which, like the positive and negative poles of an electro-magnet, repels and attracts the animal in this or that direction, compelling it to perform whole series of complex actions, sometimes expedient to such a degree that they appear to be sensible, and not only sensible, but founded upon foresight of the future, almost upon some clairvoyance, like the migration of birds, the building of nests for the young which have not as yet appeared, the finding of the way south in the autumn, and north in the spring, etc.

But all these actions are explained in reality by a single instinct, i.e., by the subservience to pleasure-pain.

During periods in which  may be regarded as days, by selection among all animals the types have been perfected, living along the lines of this subservience. This subservience is expedient, that is, the results of it lead to the desired goal. Why this is so is clear. Had the sense of pleasure arisen from that which is detrimental, the given species could not live, and would quickly die out. Instinct is the guide of its life, but only as long as instinct is expedient solely; just as soon as it ceases to be expedient it becomes the guide of death, and the species soon dies out. Normally "pleasure-pain" is pleasant or unpleasant not for the usefulness

[p. 89]

or the harm which may result, but because of it. Those influences which proved to be beneficial for a given species during the vegetative life, with the transition to the more active and complex animal life begin to be sensed as pleasant, the detrimental influences as unpleasant. As regards two different species, one and the same influence--say a certain temperature--may be useful and pleasant for one, and for another detrimental and unpleasant. It is clear, therefore, that the subservience to "pleasure-pain" must be governed by expediency. The pleasant is pleasant because it is beneficial, the unpleasant is unpleasant because it is harmful.

Next after instinctive actions follow those actions which are rational and automatic.

By rational action is meant such an action as is known to the acting subject before its execution; such an action as the acting subject can name, define, explain, can show its cause and purpose before its execution.

Automatic actions are actions which have been rational for a given subject, but because of frequent repetitions they have become habitual and are performed unconsciously. The acquired automatic actions of trained animals were previously rational not in the animal, but in the trainer. Such actions often appear as rational but this is a complete illusion. The animal remembers the sequence of actions, and therefore its actions appear to be considered and expedient. They really were considered, but not by it. Automatic actions are often confounded with instinctive ones--in reality they resemble instinctive ones, but there is an enormous difference between them. Automatic actions are developed by the subject during its own life, and for a long time before they become automatic it must be conscious of them. Instinctive actions, on the other hand, are developed during the life-periods of the species, and the aptitude for them is transmitted in a definite manner by heredity. It is possible to call automatic actions instinctive actions worked out for itself by a given subject. It is impossible, however, to call instinctive actions automatic actions worked out by a given species, because they never were rational in different individuals of a given species, but were compounded out of a series of complex reflexes.

REFLEXES, INSTINCTIVE AND "RATIONAL" ACTIONS, ALL MAY BE REGARDED AS REFLECTED, i.e., AS NOT SELF-ORIGINATED. BOTH THESE AND OTHERS, AND STILL A THIRD CLASS, COME NOT FROM MAN

[p. 90]

[paragraph continues] HIMSELF, BUT FROM THE OUTSIDE WORLD. MAN IS THE TRANSMITTING OR TRANSFORMING STATION FOR CERTAIN FORCES: ALL OF HIS ACTIONS IN THESE THREE CATEGORIES ARE CREATED AND DETERMINED BY HIS IMPRESSIONS OF THE OUTSIDE WORLD. MAN IN THESE THREE SPECIES OF ACTIONS IS, IN SUBSTANCE, AN AUTOMATON, UNCONSCIOUS OR CONSCIOUS OF HIS ACTIONS. NOTHING COMES FROM HIM HIMSELF.

With the exception of sensations of the outer world, only the higher category of actions, i.e., conscious actions [*1] appears to depend on something else. But the aptitude for such actions is seldom met with--only in some few persons whom it is possible to describe as MEN OF A HIGHER TYPE.

Having established the differences between various kinds of actions, let us return to the question propounded before: In what manner does the psyche of an animal differ from that of a human being? Out of the four categories of actions the two lower ones are accessible to animals. The category of "conscious" actions is inaccessible to animals. This is proven first of all by the fact that animals have not the power of speech as we have it.

As has been shown before, the possession of speech is indissolubly bound up with the possession of concepts. Therefore we may say that animals do not possess concepts.

Is this true, and is it possible to possess the instinctive mind without possessing concepts?

All that we know about the instinctive mind teaches us that it acts possessing sensations and perceptions only, and that in the lower grades it possesses sensation only. The being which does its thinking by means of perceptions possesses the instinctive mind which gives it the possibility of exercising that choice between the perceptions presented to it which produces the impression of judging and reasoning. In reality the animal does not reason its actions, but lives by its emotions, subject to that emotion which happens to be strongest. Although indeed, in the life of the animal, acute moments sometimes occur when it is confronted with the necessity of choosing among a certain series of perceptions. At such moments its actions may seem to be quite reasoned out. For example, the animal, being put in a situation of danger acts often very cautiously and wisely,

[p. 91]

but in reality its actions are directed not by thoughts but principally by emotional memory and motor perceptions. It has been previously shown that emotions are expedient, and that the subjection to them in a normal being must be expedient. Any perception of an animal, any recollected image, is bound up with some emotional sensation or emotional remembrance--there are no non-emotional, cold thoughts in the animal soul, or even if there are, these are in-active, and incapable of becoming the springs of action.

Thus all actions of animals, sometimes highly complex, expedient, and apparently reasoned, we can explain without attributing to them concepts, judgments, and the power of reasoning. Indeed, we must recognize that animals have no concepts, and the proof of this is that they have no speech.

If we take two men of different nationalities, different races, each ignorant of the language of the other, and put them together, they will find a way to communicate at once.

One perhaps draws a circle with his finger, the other draws another circle beside it. By these means they have already established that they can understand one another. If a thick wall were put between them it would not hamper them in the least--one of them knocks three times, and the other knocks three times in response.

The communication is established. The idea of communicating with the inhabitants of other planets is founded upon the idea of light signals. It is proposed to make on the earth an enormous lighted circle or a square to attract the attention of the inhabitants of Mars and to be answered by them by means of the same signal. We live side by side with animals and yet cannot establish such communication. Evidently the distance between us and them is greater, and the difference deeper, than between men divided by the ignorance of language, stone walls, and enormous distances.

Another proof of the absence of concepts in the animal is its inability to use a lever, i.e., its incapacity to come independently to an understanding of the principle of the action of the lever. The usual objection that an animal cannot operate a lever because its organs (paws et cetera)are not adapted to such actions does not hold for the reason that almost any animal can be taught to operate a lever. This shows that the difficulty is not in the organs.

[p. 92]

[paragraph continues] The animal simply cannot of itself come to a comprehension of the idea of a lever.

The invention of the lever immediately divided primitive man from the animal, and it was inextricably bound up with the appearance of concepts. The psychic side of the understanding of the action of a lever consists in the construction of a correct syllogism. Without constructing the syllogism correctly it is impossible to understand the action of a lever. Having no concepts it is impossible to construct the syllogism. The syllogism in the psychic sphere is literally the same thing as the lever in the physical sphere.

His mastery of the lever differentiates man as strongly from the animal as does speech. If some learned Martians were looking at the earth, and should study it objectively from afar by means of a telescope, not hearing speech, nor entering into the subjective world of the inhabitants of the earth, nor coming in contact with them, they would divide the beings living on the earth into two groups: those acquainted with the action of the lever, and those unacquainted with such action.

The psychology of animals is in general very misty to us. The infinite number of observations made concerning all animals, from elephants to spiders, and the infinite number of anecdotes about the mind, spirit, and moral qualities of animals change nothing of all that. We represent animals to ourselves either as living automatons or as stupid men.

We too much confine ourselves within the circle of our own psychology. We fail to imagine any other, and think involuntarily that the only possible sort of soul is such as we ourselves possess. But it is this illusion which prevents us from understanding life. If we could participate in the psychic life of an animal, understand how it perceives, thinks and acts, we would find much of unusual interest. For example, could we represent to ourselves, and re-create mentally, the logic of an animal, it would greatly help us to understand our own logic and the laws of our own thinking. Before all else we would come to understand the conditionality and relativity of our own logical construction and with it the conditionality of our entire conception of the world.

An animal would have a peculiar logic. It indeed would not be logic in the true meaning of the word, because logic presupposes the existence of logos, i.e., of a word or concept.

[p. 93]

Our usual logic, by which we live, without which "the shoemaker will not sew the boot," is deduced from the simple scheme formulated by Aristotle in those writings which were edited by his pupils under the common name of Organon, i.e., the "Instrument" (of thought). This scheme consists in the following:

A is A.
 A is not Not-A.
 Everything is either A or Not-A.

The logic embraced in this scheme--the logic of Aristotle--is quite sufficient for observation. But for experiment it is insufficient, because the experiment proceeds in time, and in the formulae of Aristotle time is not taken into consideration. This was observed at the very dawn of the establishment of our experimental science--observed by Roger Bacon, and formulated several centuries later by his famous namesake, Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam, in the treatise Novum Organum--the "New Instrument" (of thought). Briefly, the formulation of Bacon may be reduced to the following:

That which was A, will be A.
 That which was Not-A, will be Not-A.
 Everything was and will be, either A or Not-A.

Upon these formula, acknowledged or unacknowledged, all our scientific experience is built, and upon them, too, is shoe-making founded, because if a shoemaker could not be sure that the leather bought yesterday would be leather tomorrow, in all probability he would not venture to make a pair of shoes, but would find some other more profitable employment.

The formulae of logic, such as those both of Aristotle and of Bacon, are themselves deduced from the observation of facts, and do not and cannot include anything except the contents of these facts. They are not the laws of reasoning, but the laws of the outer world as it is perceived by us, or the laws of our relation to the outer world.

Could we represent to ourselves the "logic" of an animal we should understand its relation to the outer world. Our cardinal error concerning the psychology of animals consists in the fact that

[p. 94]

we ascribe to them our own logic. We assume that logic is one, that our logic is something absolute, existing outside and independent of us, while as a matter of fact, logic but formulates the laws of the relations of our psyche to the outside world, or the laws which our psyche discovers in the outside world. Another psyche will discover other laws.

______

The logic of animals will differ from ours, first of all, from the fact that it will not be general. It will exist separately for each case, for each perception. Common properties, class properties, and the generic and specific signs of categories will not exist for animals. Each object will exist in and by itself, and all its properties will be the specific properties of it alone.

This house and that house are entirely different objects for an animal, because one is its house and the other is a strange house. Generally speaking, we recognize objects by the signs of their similarity; the animal must recognize them by the signs of their difference. It remembers each object by that sign which had for it the greatest emotional meaning. In such a manner, i.e., by their emotional tones, perceptions are stored in the memory of an animal. It is clear that such perceptions are much more difficult to store up in the memory, and therefore the memory of an animal is more burdened than ours, although in the amount of knowledge and in the quantity of that which is preserved in the memory, it stands far below us.

After seeing an object once, we refer it to a certain class, genus and species, place it under this or that concept, and fix it in the mind by means of some "word," i.e., algebraical symbol; then by another, defining it, and so on.

The animal has no concepts: it has not that mental algebra by the help of which we think. It must know always a given object, and must remember it with all its signs and peculiarities. No forgotten sign will return. For us, on the other hand, the principal signs are contained in the concept with which we have correlated that object, and we can find it in our memory by means of the sign for it.

From this it is clear that the memory of an animal is more burdened than ours, and this is the principal hindering cause to the

[p. 95]

mental evolution of an animal. Its mind is too busy. It has no time to develop. The mental development of a child may be arrested by making it memorize a series of words or a series of figures. The animal is in just such a position. Herein lies the explanation of the strange fact that an animal is wiser when it is young.

In man the flower of intellectual force blooms at a mature age, often even in senility; in the animal, quite the reverse is true. It is receptive only while it is young. At maturity its development stops, and in old age it undoubtedly degenerates.

The logic of animals, were we to attempt to express it by means of formulae similar to those employed by Aristotle and Bacon would be as follows:

The formula A is A, the animal will understand. It will say (as it were) I am I, etc.; but the formula, A is not Not-A, it will be incapable of understanding. Not Not-A is indeed the concept.

The animal will reason thus:

This is this. 
 That is that.
 This is not that.

or,

This man is this man.
 That man is that man.
 This man is not that man.

I shall be obliged to return to the logic of animals later on; for the present it is only necessary to establish the fact that the psychology of animals is peculiar, and differs in a fundamental way from our own. And not only is it peculiar, but it is decidedly manifold.

Among the animals known to us, even among domestic animals, the psychological differences are so great as to differentiate them into entirely separate planes. We ignore this, and place them all under a single rubric--"animals."

A goose, having entangled its foot in a piece of watermelon rind, drags it along by the web and thus cannot get it out, but it never thinks of raising its foot. This indicates that its mind is so vague

[p. 96]

that it does not know its own body, scarcely distinguishing between it and other objects. This would happen neither with a dog nor with a cat. They know their bodies very well. But in relation to outside objects the dog and the cat differ widely. I have observed a dog, a "very intelligent" setter. When the little rug on which he slept got folded and was uncomfortable to sleep on, he understood that the nuisance was outside of him, that it was in the rug, and in a certain definite position of the rug. Therefore he caught the rug in his teeth, turned it and pushed it here and there, the while growling, sighing, and moaning until some one came to his aid, for he was never able to rectify the difficulty.

With the cat such a question could not even appear. The cat knows her body very well, but everything outside of herself she takes as her due, as given. To correct the outside world, to accommodate it to her own comfort, never comes into the cat's head. Perhaps this is because she lives more in another world, in the world of dreams and fantasies, than in this. Accordingly, if there were something wrong with her bed the cat would turn herself about repeatedly until she could lie down comfortably, or she would go and lie in another place.

The monkey would spread the rug very easily indeed.

Here we have four beings, all quite different; and this is only one example: it would be possible to collect others by the hundred. And meanwhile there is for us just one "animal." We mix together many things that are entirely different; our "divisions" are often incorrect, and this hinders us when it comes to the examination of ourselves. To declare that manifest differences determine the "evolutionary grade," that animals of one type are "higher" or "lower" than those of another, would be entirely false. The dog and the monkey by their intellect, their aptness to imitate, and by reason of the dog's fidelity to man, are as it were higher than the cat, but the cat is infinitely superior to them in intuition, esthetic sense, independence, and force of will. The dog and the monkey manifest themselves in toto: all that they have is seen. The cat, on the other hand, is not without reason regarded as a magical and occult animal. In her there is much hidden of which she herself does not know. If one speaks in terms of evolution, it is more correct to say that the cat and the dog are animals of different evolutions, just as in all

[p. 97]

probability, not one, but several evolutions are simultaneously going forward in humanity.

The recognition of several independent and from one standpoint equivalent evolutions, developing entirely different properties, would lead us out of a labyrinth of endless contradictions in our understanding of man and would show us the path to the only real and important evolution for us--the evolution into superman.

Footnotes

^83:1 R. M. Bucke. "Cosmic Consciousness," p. 12.

^90:1 Generally speaking, we do not observe these actions, because we confuse them with "rational" actions; the principal cause of this confusion is that we call "rational" actions conscious--which they are not.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 98]

  

CHAPTER IX

          The   receptivity of the world by a man and by an animal. Illusions of the animal   and its lack of control of the receptive faculties. The world of moving planes.   Angles and curves considered as motion. The third dimension as motion. The   animal's two-dimensional view of our three-dimensional world. The animal as a   real two-dimensional being. Lower animals as one-dimensional beings. The time   and space of a snail. The time-sense as an imperfect space-sense. The time   and space of a dog. The change in the world coincident with a change in the   psychic apparatus. The proof of Kant's problem. The three-dimensional   world--an illusionary perception.

     
   WE have established the enormous difference existing between the psychology of a man and of an animal. This difference undoubtedly profoundly affects the receptivity of the outer world by the animal. But how and in what? This is exactly what we do not know, and what we shall try to discover.

To this end we shall return to our receptivity of the world, investigate in detail the nature of that receptivity, and then imagine how the animal, with its more limited psychic equipment, receives its impression of the world.

Let us note first of all that we receive the most incorrect impressions of the world as regards its outer form and aspect. We know that the world consists of solids, but we see and touch only surfaces. We never see and touch a solid. The solid--this is indeed a concept, composed of a series of perceptions, the result of reasoning and experience. For immediate sensation, surfaces alone exist. Sensations of gravity, mass, volume, which we mentally associate with the "solid," are in reality associated with the sensations of surfaces. We only know that the sensation comes from the solid, but the solid itself we never sense. Perhaps it would be possible to call the complex sensation of surfaces: weight, mass, density, resistance, "the sensation of a solid," but rather do we combine mentally all these sensations into one, and call that composite sensation a solid. We sense directly only surfaces; the weight and resistance of the solid, as such, we never separately sense.

[p. 99]

But we know that the world does not consist of surfaces: we know that we see the world incorrectly, and that we never see it as it is, not alone in the philosophical meaning of the expression, but in the most simple geometrical meaning. We have never seen a cube, a sphere, etc., but only their surfaces. Knowing this, we mentally correct that which we see. Behind the surfaces we think the solid. But we can never even represent the solid to ourselves. We cannot imagine the cube or the sphere seen, not in perspective, but simultaneously from all sides.

It is clear that the world does not exist in perspective; nevertheless we cannot see it otherwise. We see everything only in perspective; that is, in the very act of receptivity the world is distorted in our eye, and we know that it is distorted. We know that it is not such as it appears, and mentally we are continuously correcting that which the eye sees, substituting the real content for those symbols of things which sight reveals.

Our sight is a complex faculty. It consists of visual sensations plus the memory of sensations of touch. The child tries to feel with its finger-tips everything that it sees--the nose of its nurse, the moon, the reflection of sun rays from the mirror on the wall. Only gradually does it learn to discern the near and the distant by means of sight alone. But we know that even in mature age we are easily subject to optical illusions.

We see distant objects as flat, even more incorrectly, because relief is after all a symbol revealing a certain property of objects. A man at a long distance is pictured to us in silhouette. This happens because we never feel anything at a long distance, and the eye has not been taught to discern the difference in surfaces which at short distances are felt by the finger-tips. [*1]

[p. 100]

We can never see, even in the minute, any part of the outer world as it is, that is, as we know it. We can never see the desk or the wardrobe all at once, from all sides and inside. Our eye distorts the outside world in a certain way, in order that, looking about, we may be able to define the position of objects relatively to ourselves. But to look at the world from any other standpoint than our own is impossible for us, nor can we ever see it correctly, without distortion by our sight.

Relief and perspective--these constitute the distortions of the object by our eye. They are optical illusions, delusions of sight. The cube in perspective is but a conventional sign of the three-dimensional cube, and all that we see is the conditional image of that conditionally real three-dimensional world with which our geometry deals, and not that world itself. On the basis of what we see we surmise that it exists in reality. We know that what we see is incorrect, and we think of the world as other than it appears. If we had no doubt about the correctness of our sight, if we knew that the world were such as it appears, then obviously we should think of the world in the manner in which we see it. In reality we are constantly engaged in making corrections.

It is clear that the ability to make corrections in that which the eye sees demands, undoubtedly, the possession of the concept, because the corrections are made by a process of reasoning, which is impossible without concepts. Deprived of the faculty to make corrections in that which the eye sees we should have a different outlook on the world, i.e., much of that which is we should see incorrectly; we should not see much of that which is, but we should see much of that which does not exist in reality at all. First of all, we should see an enormous number of non-existent motions. Every

[p. 101]

motion of ours in our direct sensation of it, is bound up with the motion of everything around us. We know that this motion is an illusory one, but we see it as real. Objects turn in front of us, run past us, overtake one another. If we are riding slowly past houses, these turn slowly, if we are riding fast they turn quickly; also, trees grow up before us unexpectedly, run away and disappear.

This seeming animation of objects, coupled with dreams, has always inspired, and still inspires the fairy tale.

The "motions" of objects, to a person in motion, are very complex indeed. Observe how strangely the field of wheat behaves just beyond the window of the car in which you are riding. It runs to the very window, stops, turns slowly around itself and runs away. The trees of the forest run apparently at different speeds, overtaking one another. The entire landscape is one of illusory motion. Behold also the sun, which even up to the present time "rises" and "sets" in all languages--this "motion" having been in the past so passionately defended!

This is all seeming, and though we know that these motions are illusory, we see them nevertheless, and sometimes we are deluded. To how many more illusions should we be subject had we not the power of mentally analyzing their determining causes, but were obliged to believe that everything exists as it appears!

I see it; therefore this exists.

This affirmation is the principal source of all illusions. To be true, it is necessary to say:

I see it; therefore this does not exist--or at least, I see it; therefore this is not so.

Although we can say the last, the animal cannot, for to its apprehension things are as they appear. It must believe what it sees.

How does the world appear to the animal?

The world appears to it as a series of complicated moving surfaces. The animal lives in a world of two dimensions. Its universe has for it the properties and  of a surface. And upon this surface transpire an enormous number of different movements of a most fantastic character.

Why should the world appear to the animal as a surface?

First of all, because it appears as a surface to us.

But we know that the world is not a surface, and the animal can, not know it. It accepts everything just as it appears. It is powerless

[p. 102]

to correct the testimony of its eyes--or it cannot do so to the extent that we do.

We are able to measure in three mutually independent directions: the nature of our mind permits us to do this. The animal can measure simultaneously in two directions only--it can never measure in three directions at once. This is due to the fact that, not possessing concepts, it is unable to retain in the mind the idea of the first two directions, for measuring the third.

Let me explain this more exactly.

Suppose we imagine that we are measuring the cube.

In order to measure the cube in three directions, it is necessary while measuring in one direction, to keep in mind two others--to remember. But it is possible to keep them in mind as concepts only, that is, associating them with different concepts--pasting upon them different labels. So, pasting upon the first two directions the labels of length and breadth, it is possible to measure the height. It is impossible otherwise. As perceptions, the first two measurements of the cube are completely identical, and assuredly will mingle into one in the mind. The animal, without the aid of concepts, cannot paste upon the first two measurements the labels of length and breadth. Therefore, at the moment when it begins to measure the height of the cube, the first two measurements will be confused in one. The animal, attempting to measure the cube by means of perceptions only without the aid of concepts, will be like a cat I once observed. Her kittens--five or six in number--she dragged asunder into different rooms, and could not then collect them together. She seized one, put it beside another, ran for a third and brought it to the first two, but then she seized the first and carried it away to another room, putting it beside the fourth; after that she ran back, seized the second and dragged it to the room containing the fifth, and so on. For a whole hour the cat had no rest with her kittens, she suffered severely, and could accomplish nothing. It is clear that she lacked the concepts which would enable her to remember how many kittens she had altogether.

It is in the highest degree important to understand the relation of the animal consciousness to the measuring of bodies.

The great point is that the animal sees surfaces only. (We may say this with complete assurance, because we ourselves see surfaces only.) Thus seeing only surfaces the animal can imagine but two

[p. 103]

dimensions. The third-dimension, in contradistinction to the other two, can only be thought; that is, this dimension must be a concept; but animals do not possess concepts. The third dimension like the others appears as a perception. Therefore, at the moment of its appearance, the first two will inevitably mingle into one. The animal is capable of perceiving the difference between two dimensions: the difference between three it cannot perceive. This difference must be known beforehand, and to know it concepts are necessary.

Identical perceptions mix into one for the animal, just as we ourselves confuse two simultaneous, similar phenomena proceeding from the same point. For the animal it will be one phenomenon, just as for us all similar, simultaneous phenomena proceeding from a single point will be one phenomenon.

Therefore the animal will see the world as a surface, and will measure this surface in two directions only.

But how is it possible to explain the fact that the animal, inhabiting a two-dimensional world, or rather, perceiving itself as in a two-dimensional world, is perfectly oriented in our three-dimensional world? How explain the fact that the bird flies up and down, sideways and straight ahead--in all three directions; that the horse jumps over ditches and barriers; that the dog and cat appear to, understand the properties of depth and height simultaneously with those of length and breadth?

In order to explain these things it is necessary to return to the fundamental principles of animal psychology. It has been previously shown that many properties of objects remembered by us as general properties of genus, class, species, are remembered by animals as individual properties of objects. To orientate in this enormous reserve of individual properties preserved in the memory, animals are assisted by the emotional tone which is linked up in them with each perception and each remembered sensation.

For example, an animal knows two roads as two entirely separate phenomena having nothing in common; that is, one road consists of a series of definite perceptions colored by definite emotional tones; the other phenomenon--the other road--consists of another series of definite perceptions colored with other tones. We say that this, that, and the other are roads. One leads to one place, a second to another. For an animal the two roads have nothing in 

[p. 104]

common. But it remembers in their proper sequence all the emotional tones which are linked with the first road and with the second one, and it therefore remembers both roads with their turns, ditches, fences, etc.

Thus the remembering of definite properties of observed objects helps the animal to find itself in the world of phenomena. But as a rule before new  an animal is much more helpless than a man.

An animal sees two dimensions; the third dimension it senses constantly, but does not see. It senses the third dimension as something transient, just as we sense time.

The surfaces which an animal sees possess for it many strange properties; first of all, numerous and various motions.

As has been said already, all those illusory motions which seem to us real, but which we know to be illusory, are entirely real to the animal: the turning about of the houses as we ride past, the growth of a tree out of some corner, the passing of the moon between clouds, etc., etc.

But in addition to all this, many motions must exist for the animal of which we have no suspicion. The fact is that innumerable objects quite immobile for us--properly all objects--must seem to the animal to be in motion; AND THE THIRD DIMENSION OF SOLIDS WILL APPEAR TO IT IN THESE MOTIONS; i.e., THE THIRD DIMENSION OF SOLIDS WILL APPEAR TO IT AS A MOTION.

______

Let us try to imagine how the animal perceives the objects of the outer world.

Suppose it is confronted with a large disc, and simultaneously with a large sphere of the same diameter.

Standing directly opposite them at a certain distance, the animal will see two circles. Beginning to walk around them, it will observe that the sphere remains a circle, while the disc gradually narrows, transforming itself into a narrow strip. On moving farther around, the strip begins to expand and gradually transforms itself into a circle. The sphere will not change during this circumambulation. But when the animal approaches toward it certain strange phenomena ensue.

[p. 105]

Let us try to understand how the animal will perceive the surface of the sphere as contrasted with the surface of the disc.

One thing is sure: it will perceive the spherical surface differently from us. We perceive convexity or sphericality as a common property of many surfaces. The animal, on the contrary, because of the very properties of its psychic apparatus, will perceive that sphericality as an individual property of a given sphere. Now how will this sphericality as an individual property of a given sphere appear to it?

We may declare with complete assurance that the sphericality will appear to the animal as a movement on the surface which it sees.

During the approach of the animal toward the sphere something like the following must happen: the surface which the animal sees starts to move quickly; its center spreads out, and all of the other points run away from the center with a velocity proportional to their distance from the center (or the square of their distance from the center).

It is in this way that the animal senses the spherical surface--much as we sense sound.

At a certain distance from the sphere the animal perceives it as a plane. Approaching or touching some point on the sphere it sees that all other points have changed with relation to this particular point, they have all altered their position on the plane--have moved to one side, as it were. Touching another point, it sees that all the rest have moved in similar fashion.

This property of the sphere will appear as its motion, its "vibration." The sphere will actually resemble a vibrating, oscillating surface, in the same way that each angle of an immobile object will appear to the animal as a motion.

The animal can see an angle of a three-dimensional object only while moving past it, and during the time it takes, the object will seem to the animal to have turned--a new side has appeared, and the side first seen has disappeared or moved away. The angle will be perceived as rotation, as the motion of the object, i.e., as something transient, temporal, as a change of state in the object. Remembering the angles which it has seen before--seen as the motion of bodies--the animal will consider that they have ceased, have ended, have disappeared--that they are in the past.

[p. 106]

Of course the animal cannot reason in this way, but it acts as though it had thus reasoned.

Could the animal think about those phenomena which have not yet entered into its life (i.e., angles and curved surfaces) it would undoubtedly imagine them in time only: it could not prefigure for them any real existence at the present moment when they have not yet appeared. And were it able to express an opinion on this subject, it would say that angles exist in potentiality, that they will be, but that for the present they do not exist.

The angle of a house past which a horse runs every day is a phenomenon, repeating under certain circumstances, but nevertheless a phenomenon proceeding in time, and not a spatial and constant property of the house.

For the animal the angle will be a temporal phenomenon and not a spatial one, as it is for us.

Thus we see that the animal will perceive the properties of our third dimension as motions, and will refer these properties to time, i.e., to the past or future, or to the present--the moment of the transition of the future into the past.

This circumstance is in the highest degree important, for there-in lies the key to our own receptivity of the world; we shall therefore examine into it more in detail.

______

Up to the present time we have taken into consideration only the higher animals: the dog, the cat, the horse. Let us now try the lower: let us take the snail. We know nothing about its inner life, but undoubtedly its receptivity resembles ours scarcely at all. In all probability the snail possesses some obscure sensations of its environment. Probably it feels heat, cold, light, darkness, hunger--and it instinctively (i.e., urged by pleasure-pain guidance) strives to reach the uneaten edge of the leaf on which it rests, and instinctively avoids the dead leaf. Its movements are guided by pleasure-pain: it constantly strives toward the one, and away from the other. It always moves upon a single line, from the unpleasant to the pleasant, and in all probability except for this line it is not conscious of anything and does not sense anything. This line is its entire world. All sensations, entering from the outside, the snail senses upon this

[p. 107]

line of its motion, and these come to it out of time--from the potential they become the present. For the snail our entire universe exists in the future and in the past--i.e., in time. In space only one line exists; all the rest is time. It is more than probable that the snail is not conscious of its movements. Making efforts with its entire body it moves forward to the fresh edge of the leaf, but it seems as if the leaf were coming to it, appearing at that moment, coming out of time as the morning comes to us.

The snail is a one-dimensional being.

The higher animals--the dog, cat, the horse--are two-dimensional beings. To the higher animal all space appears as a surface, as a plane. Everything out of this plane lives for it in time.

Thus we see that the higher animal--the two-dimensional being compared with the one-dimensional--extracts or captures from time one more dimension.

The world of a snail has one dimension; our second and third dimensions are for it in time.

The world of a dog is two-dimensional; our third dimension is for it in time.

An animal can remember all "phenomena" which it has observed, i.e., all properties of three-dimensional solids with which it has come in contact, but it cannot know that the (for it) recurring phenomenon is a constant property of the three-dimensional solid--an angle, curvature, or convexity.

Such is the psychology of the receptivity of the world by a two-dimensional being.

For such a being a new sun will rise every day. Yesterday's sun is gone, and will not appear again; tomorrow's does not as yet exist.

Rostand did not understand the psychology of "Chantecler." The cock could not think that he woke up the sun by his crowing. To him the sun does not go to sleep, it goes into the past, disappears, suffers annihilation, ceases to be. If it comes on the morrow it will be a new sun, just as for us with every new year comes a new spring. In order to be the sun shall not wake up, but arise, be born. The cock (if it could think without losing its characteristic psychology) could not believe in the appearance today of the same sun which was yesterday. This is purely human reasoning.

For the animal a new sun rises every morning, just as for us a

[p. 108]

new morning comes with every day and a new spring with every year.

The animal is not in a position to understand that the sun is the same yesterday and today, EXACTLY IN THE SAME WAY THAT WE PROBABLY CANNOT UNDERSTAND THAT THE MORNING IS THE SAME AND THE SPRING IS THE SAME.

The motion of objects which is not illusory, even for us, but a real motion, like that of a revolving wheel, a passing carriage, and so on, will differ for the animal very much from that motion which it sees in all objects which are for us immobile--i.e., from that motion in which the third dimension of solids is as it were revealed to it. The first mentioned motion (real for us) will seem to the animal arbitrary, alive.

And these two kinds of motion will be incommensurable for it.

The animal will be in a position to measure an angle or a convex surface, though not understanding their true nature, and though regarding them as motion. But true motion, i.e., that which is true motion to us, it will never be in a position to measure, because for this it is necessary to possess our concept of time, and to measure all motions with reference to some one more constant motion, i.e., to compare all motions with some one. Without concepts the animal is powerless to do this. Therefore the (for us) real motions of objects will be incommensurable for it, and being incommensurable, will be incommensurable with other motions which are real and measurable for it, but which are illusory for us--motions which in reality represent the third dimension of solids.

This last conclusion is inevitable. If the animal apprehends and measures as motion that which is not motion, clearly it cannot measure by one and the same standard that which is motion and that which is not motion.

But this does not mean that it cannot know the character of motions going on in the world and cannot conform itself to them. On the contrary, we see that the animal orientates itself perfectly among the motions of the objects of our three-dimensional world. Here comes into play the aid of instinct, i.e., the ability, developed by millenniums of selection, to act expediently without consciousness of purpose. Moreover, the animal discerns perfectly the motions going on around it.

But discerning two kinds of phenomena, two kinds of motion, the

[p. 109]

animal will explain one of them by means of some incomprehensible inner property of objects, i.e., in all probability it will regard this motion as the result of the animation of objects, and the moving objects as animated beings.

The kitten plays with the ball or with its tail because ball and tail are running away from it.

The bear will fight with the beam which threatens to throw him off the tree, because in the swinging beam he senses something alive and hostile.

The horse is frightened by the bush because the hush unexpectedly turned and waved a branch.

In the last case the bush need not even have moved at all, for the horse was running, and it seemed therefore as though the bush moved, and consequently that it was animated. In all probability all movement is thus animated for the animal. Why does the dog bark so desperately at the passing carriage? This is not entirely clear to us for we do not realize that to the eyes of the dog the carriage is turning, twisting, grimacing all over. It is alive in every part--the wheels, the top, the mud-guards, seats, passengers--all these are moving, turning.

______

Now let us draw certain conclusions from all of the foregoing.

We have established the fact that man possesses sensations, perceptions and concepts; that the higher animals possess sensations and perceptions, and the lower animals sensations only. The conclusion that animals have no concepts we deduced from the fact that they have no speech. Next we have established that having no concepts, animals cannot comprehend the third dimension, but see the world as a surface; i.e., they have no means--no instrument--for the correction of their incorrect sensations of the world. Furthermore, we have found that seeing the world as a surface, animals see upon this surface many motions which for us are non-existent. That is, all those properties of solids which we regard as the properties of three-dimensionality, animals represent to themselves as motions. Thus the angle and the spherical surface appear to them as the movements of a plane. After that we came to the conclusion that everything which we regard as constant in the region of the third dimension,

[p. 110]

animals regard as transient things which happen to objects--temporal phenomena.

Thus in all its relations to the world the animal is quite analogous to the imagined, unreal two-dimensional being living upon a plane. All our world appears to the animal as the plane through which phenomena are passing, moving upon time, or in time.

And so we may say that we have established the following: that under certain limitations of the psychic apparatus for receiving the outer world, for the subject possessing this apparatus, the entire aspect and all properties of the world will suffer change. And two subjects, living side by side, but possessing different psychic apparatus, will inhabit different worlds--the properties of the extension of the world will be different for them. And we observed the conditions, not invented for the purpose, not concocted in imagination, but really existing in nature; that is, the psychic conditions governing the lives of animals, under which the world appears as a plane or as a line.

That is to say, we have established that the three-dimensional extension of the world depends upon the properties of our psychic apparatus.

Or, that the three-dimensionality of the world is not its property, but a property of our receptivity of the world.

In other words, the three-dimensionality of the world is a property of its reflection in our consciousness.

If all this is so, then it is obvious that we have really proved the dependence of space upon the space-sense. And if we have proved the existence of a space-sense lower in comparison with ours, by this we have proved the possibility of a space-sense higher in comparison with ours.

And we shall grant that if in us there develops the fourth unit of reasoning as different from the concept as the concept is different from perception, so simultaneously with it will appear for us in the surrounding world a fourth characteristic which we may designate geometrically as the fourth direction or the fourth perpendicular, because in this characteristic will be included the properties of objects perpendicular to all properties known to us, and not parallel to any of them. In other words, we shall see, or we shall feel ourselves in a space not of three, but of four dimensions; and in the objects surrounding us, and in our own bodies, will appear common 

[p. 111]

properties of the fourth dimension which we did not notice before, or which we regarded as individual properties of objects (or their motion), just as animals regard the extension of objects in the third dimension as their motion.

And when we shall see or feel ourselves in the world of four dimensions we shall see that the world of three dimensions does not really exist and has never existed: that it was the creation of our own fantasy, a phantom host, an optical illusion, a delusion--anything one pleases excepting only reality.

And all this is not an "hypothesis," not a supposition, but exact fact, just such a fact as the existence of infinity. For positivism to insure its existence it was necessary to annihilate infinity somehow, or at least to call it an "hypothesis" which may or may not be true. Infinity however is not an hypothesis, but a fact, and such a fact is the multi-dimensionality of space and all that it implies, namely, the unreality of everything three-dimensional.

Footnotes

^99:1 In this connection, there have been some interesting observations made upon the blind who are just beginning to see.

In the magazine Slepetz (The Blind, 1912) there is a description from direct observation of how those born blind learn to see after the operation which restored their sight.

This is how a seventeen-year-old youth, who recovered his sight after the removal of a cataract, describes his impressions. On the third day after the operation he was asked what he saw. He answered that he saw an enormous field of light and misty objects moving upon it. These objects he did not discern. Only after four days did he begin to discern them, and after an interval of two weeks, when his eyes were accustomed to the light, he started to use his sight practically, for the discernment of objects. He was shown all the colors of the spectrum and he learned to distinguish them very soon, except yellow and green, which he confused for a long time. The cube, sphere and pyramid, [p. 100] when placed before him seemed to him like the square, the flat disc, and the triangle. When the flat disc was put alongside the sphere he distinguished no difference between them. When asked what impression both kinds of figures produced on him just at first, he said that he noticed at once the difference between the cube and the sphere, and understood that they were not drawings, but was unable to deduce from them their relation to the square and to the circle, until he felt in his finger tips the desire to touch these objects. When he was allowed to take the cube, sphere and pyramid in his hands he at once identified these solids by the sense of touch, and wondered very much that he was unable to recognize them by sight. He lacked the perception of space, perspective. All objects seemed flat to him: though he knew that the nose protrudes, and that the eyes are located in cavities, the human face seemed flat to him. He was delighted with his recovered vision, but in the beginning it fatigued him to exercise it: the impressions oppressed and exhausted . For this reason. though possessing perfect sight, he sometimes turned to the sense of touch as to repose.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 112]

  

CHAPTER X

          The   spatial understanding of time. The angles and curves of the fourth dimension   in our life. Does motion exist in the world or not? Mechanical motion and   "life." Biological phenomena as the manifestation of motions going on   in the higher dimension. Evolution of the space-sense. The growth of the   space-sense and the diminution of the time-sense. The transformation of the   time-sense into the space-sense. The difficulties of our language and of our   concepts. The necessity for seeking a method of spatial expression for   temporal concepts. Science in relation to the fourth dimension. The solid of   four dimensions. The four-dimensional sphere.

     
   NOW from the basis of those conclusions already made, let us seek to define how we may discover the real four-dimensional world obscured from us by the illusory three-dimensional world. "See" it we may by two methods: either by sensing it directly, by developing the "space-sense" and other higher faculties, which will be discussed later; or by understanding it mentally by a perception of its possible properties through the exercise of the reason.

By abstract reasoning, we have already come to the conclusion that the fourth dimension of space must lie in time, i.e., that time is the fourth dimension of space. We have already discovered psychological proofs of this thesis. Comparing the receptivity of the world by living beings of different grades of consciousness--snail, dog and man--we have seen how different for them are the properties of one and the same world; namely, those properties which are expressed for us in the concepts of time and space. We have seen that time and space are sensed by each in a different manner: that what for the lower being (the snail) is time, for the being standing one degree higher (the dog) becomes space, and that the time of this being becomes space to a being standing still higher--man.

This is a confirmation of the supposition previously expressed, that our idea of time is complex in its nature, and that in it are properly included two ideas--that of a certain space and that of motion

[p. 113]

upon this space. Or to put the matter more exactly, the contact with a certain space of which we are not clearly conscious calls forth in us the sensation of motion upon that space; and all this taken together, i.e., the unclear consciousness of a certain space and the sensation of motion upon that space, we call time.

This last confirms the conception that the idea of time has not arisen from the observation of motion existing in nature, but that the very sensation and idea of motion has arisen from a "time-sense" existing in ourselves, which is an imperfect sense of space: the fringe, or limit of our space-sense.

The snail feels the line as space, i.e., as something constant. It feels the rest of the world as time, i.e., as something eternally moving. The horse feels the plane as space. It feels the rest of the world as time.

We feel an infinite sphere as space; the rest of the world, that which was yesterday and that which will be tomorrow, we feel as time.

In other words, every being feels as space that which is grasped by his space-sense: the rest he refers to time; i.e., the imperfectly felt is referred to time. Or it is possible to formulate the matter thus: every being feels as space that which, by the aid of his space-sense he is able to represent to himself in form, outside of himself; and that which he is not able thus to represent he feels as time, i.e., eternally moving, impermanent, so unstable that it is impossible to imagine it in terms of form.

THE SENSE OF SPACE (SPACE-SENSE) IS THE POWER OF REPRESENTATION BY MEANS OF FORM.

______

The "infinite sphere" by which we represent the universe to ourselves is constantly and continuously changing: in every consecutive moment it is not that which it was before. A constant change of pictures, images, relations, is going on therein. It is for us as it were the screen of a cinematograph upon which the swiftly running images of pictures appear and disappear.

But where are the pictures themselves? Where is the light throwing the image upon the screen? Whence do the pictures come, and whither do they go?

[p. 114]

If the "infinite sphere" is the screen of the cinematograph so our consciousness is the light, penetrating through our psyche: i.e., through the stores of our impressions (pictures) it (the light) throws upon the screen their images which we call life.

But where do the impressions come from to us?

From the same screen.

And herein dwells the most incomprehensible mystery of life as we see it. We are creating it and we are receiving everything from it.

Imagine a man sitting in the ordinary moving-picture theatre. Imagine that he knows nothing of the construction of the cinematograph, nothing of the existence of the lantern behind his back, nor of the small transparent picture on the moving film. Let us imagine that he wants to study the cinematograph, and begins to study that which proceeds on the screen, to make notes, to take pictures, to observe the order, to calculate, to construct hypotheses, and so forth.

At what will he arrive?

Evidently at nothing at all, unless he will turn his back to the screen, and will begin to study the cause of the appearance of the pictures upon the screen. The cause is confined in the lantern (i.e., in consciousness), and in the moving films of pictures (in the psyche). These it is necessary to study, desiring to understand the "cinematograph."

Positive philosophy studies only the screen and the pictures passing upon it. For this reason the eternal enigma remains for it: wherefrom are the pictures coming and where are they going, and why are they coming and going instead of remaining eternally the same?

But it is necessary to study the cinematograph beginning with the source of light, i.e., with consciousness, then to pass on to the pictures on the moving film, and only after that to study the projected image.

______

We have established that the animal (the horse, the cat, the dog) must perceive the immobile angles and curves of the third dimension as motion, i.e., as temporal phenomena.

The question arises: do not we perceive as motion, i.e., as temporal

[p. 115]

phenomena, the immobile angles and curves of the fourth dimension? We ordinarily say that our sensations are the moments of the apprehension of certain changes proceeding outside of us; such are sound, light, etc., all "vibrations of the ether." But what are these "changes?" Perhaps in reality there are no changes at all. Perhaps the immobile sides and angles of certain things which exist outside of us--of certain things which we know nothing about--only appear to us as motions, i.e., as changes.

It may be that our consciousness, not being able to embrace these things with the aid of the organs of sense, and to represent them to itself in their entirety, just as they are, and grasping only the separate moments of its contact with them, is constructing the illusion of motion, and conceives that something is moving outside of it (of consciousness), i.e., that the "things" are themselves moving.

If such is the case, then "motion" must be in reality something only "derived," arising in our intellect during its contact with things which it does not grasp in their totality. Let us imagine that we are approaching an unknown city, and that it is slowly "growing up" before us as we approach. It appears to us as if it is really growing up, i.e., as though it did not exist before. There disappeared the river, which was visible for so long a time; there appeared the bell-tower, which was invisible before.

Such, exactly, is our relation to time, which is a continual coming--arising, as it were, from nothing and going into naught.

Every thing lies for us in time, and only the section of the thing lies in space. Transferring our consciousness from the section of the thing to those parts of it which lie in time, we receive the illusion of motion on the part of the thing itself.

It is possible to formulate the matter thus: the sensation of motion is the consciousness of the transition from space to time, i.e., from a clear space-sense to one that is unclear. With this in mind it is not difficult to realize that we are receiving as sensations, and projecting into the outside world as phenomena, the immobile angles and curves of the fourth dimension.

On this account is it not necessary and possible to recognize that the world is immobile and constant, and that it seems to us to be moving and evolving simply because we are looking at it through the narrow slit of our sensuous receptivity?

We are returning again to the question: what is the world and what

[p. 116]

is consciousness? But now the question concerning the relation of our consciousness to the world is beginning to be formulated for us.

If the world is a Great Something, possessing the consciousness of itself, so we are rays of that consciousness which are conscious of themselves, but unconscious of the whole.

______

If there be no motion, if it be an illusion, then we must search further--whence could this illusion have arisen?

The phenomena of life--biological phenomena--much resemble the transition through our space of certain four-dimensional circles, the circles being extremely complicated, every one consisting of a great number of interlaced lines.

The life of a man or of any other living being suggests a complicated circle. It begins always at one point (birth) and ends always at one point (death). We have complete justification for supposing that it is one and the same point. The circles are large and small, but they begin and end similarly, and they end at the same point where they began, i.e., at the point of non-existence, from the physico-biological standpoint, or of some existence other than the  one.

What is the biological phenomenon, the phenomenon of life? Our science does not answer this question. This is the enigma. In the living organism, in the living cell, in the living protoplasm there is something indefinable, differentiating, living matter from dead matter. We recognize this something only by its functions. The chief of these functions is the power of self-reproduction--absent in the dead organism, the dead cell, dead matter.

The living organism multiplies infinitely, incorporating and assimilating dead matter into itself. This ability to reproduce itself and to absorb dead matters with its mechanical laws is the inexplicable function of "life," showing that life is not simply a complex of mechanical forces, as the positivist philosophy attempts to prove.

This thesis, that life is not a complex of mechanical forces, is corroborated also by the incommensurability of the phenomena of mechanical motion with the phenomena of life. Life phenomena cannot be expressed in terms of mechanical energy, calories of

[p. 117]

heat or units of horse power; nor can the phenomena of life be artificially created by the physico-chemical method.

If we shall regard every separate life as a circle of the fourth dimension, this will make clear to us why every circle is inevitably escaping from our space. This happens because the circle inevitably ends in the same point at which it began, and the "life" of the separate being, beginning with birth, must end in death, which is the return to the point of departure. But during its transit through our space, the circle puts forth from itself certain lines, which, uniting with others, yield new circles.

In reality of course all this proceeds quite otherwise: nothing is born and nothing dies; it only so represents itself to us, because we see but the sections of things. In reality, the circle of life is only the section of something, and that something undoubtedly exists before birth, i.e., before the appearance of the circle in our space, and continues to exist after death, i.e., after the disappearance of the circle from the field of our vision.

To our observation the phenomena of life are similar to the phenomena of motion as these appear to the two-dimensional being; and therefore it may be that this is "the motion in the fourth dimension."

We have seen that the two-dimensional being is bound to regard the properties of the three-dimensionality of solids as motions, and the real motions of solids, going on in the higher space as the phenomena of life.

In other words, that motion which remains a motion in the higher space appears to the lower being as a phenomenon of life, and that which disappears in the higher space, transforming itself into the property of an immobile solid, appears to the lower being as mechanical motion.

The phenomena of "life" and the phenomena of "motion" are just as incommensurable for us as are the two kinds of motion in its world for the two-dimensional being; one of these motions being real and the other illusory.

Hinton says of this incommensurability: "There is something in life not included in our conception of mechanical movement. Is this something a four-dimensional movement?

"If we look at it from the broadest point of view there is something striking in the fact that where life comes in there arises an entirely

[p. 118]

different set of phenomena from those of the inorganic world." [*1]

Upon this basis it is justifiable to assume that those phenomena which we call the phenomena of life are movements in higher space. Those phenomena which we call mechanical motion become in turn the phenomena of life in a space lower relatively to ours, and in one higher, simply the properties of immobile solids. This means that if we consider three kinds of existence--the two-dimensional, ours, and the higher dimensional--then it will appear that the "motion" which is observed by the two-dimensional being in two-dimensional space, is for us a property of immobile solids; "life" as it is apprehended in two-dimensional space, is "motion" as we observe it in our space. Moreover, motions in three-dimensional space, i.e., all our mechanical motions and the manifestations of physico-chemical forces--light, sound, heat, etc.,--are only our sensations of some to us incomprehensible properties of four-dimensional solids; and our "phenomena of life" are the motions of solids of higher space which appear to us as the birth, growth, and life of living beings. But if we presuppose a space not of four, but of five dimensions, then in it the "phenomena of life" would probably appear as the properties of immobile solids--genus, species, families, peoples, races, and so forth--and motions would seem, perhaps, only the phenomena of thought.

_____

We know that the phenomena of motion or the manifestations of energy are involved with the expenditure of time, and we see how, with the gradual transcendence of the lower space by the higher, motion disappears, being converted into the properties of immobile solids; i.e., the expenditure of time disappears--and the necessity for time. To the two-dimensional being time is necessary for the understanding of the most simple phenomena--an angle, a hill, a ditch. For us time is not necessary for the understanding of such phenomena, but is necessary for the explanation of the phenomena of motion and physical phenomena. In a space still higher, our phenomena of motion and physical phenomena would probably be regarded independently of time, as properties of immobile solids; and biological phenomena--

[p. 119]

birth, growth, reproduction, death--would be regarded as phenomena of motion.

Thus we see how the idea of time recedes with the expansion of consciousness.

We see its complete conditionality.

We see that by time are designated the characteristics of a space relatively higher than a given space--i.e., the characteristics of the perceptions of a consciousness relatively higher than a given consciousness.

For the one-dimensional being all the indices of two-, three-, four-dimensional space and beyond, lie in time--all this is time. For the two-dimensional being time embraces within itself the indices of three-dimensional space, four-dimensional space, and all spaces beyond. For man, i.e., the three-dimensional being, time contains the indices of four-dimensional space and all spaces beyond.

Therefore, according to the degree of expansion and elevation of the consciousness and the forms of its receptivity the indices of space are augmented and the indices of time are diminished.

In other words, the growth of the space-sense is proceeding at the expense of the time-sense. Or one may say that the time-sense is an imperfect space-sense (i.e., an imperfect power of representation which, being perfected, translates itself into the space-sense, i.e., into the power of representation in forms.

If, taking as a foundation the principles elucidated here, we attempt to represent to ourselves the universe very abstractedly, it is clear that this will be quite other than the universe which we are accustomed to imagine to ourselves. Everything will exist in it always.

This will be the universe of the Eternal Now of Hindu philosophy--a universe in which will be neither before nor after, in which will be just one present, known or unknown.

Hinton feels that with the expansion of the space-sense our vision of the world will change completely, and he tells about this in his book, A New Era of Thought. (p. 66.)

The conception which we shall form of the universe will undoubtedly be as different from our present one, as the Copernican view differs from the more pleasant view of a wide, immovable earth beneath a vast vault. Indeed, any conception of our place in the universe will be more agreeable

[p. 120]

than the thought of being on a spinning ball, kicked into space without any means of communication with any other inhabitants of the universe.

______

But what does the world of many dimensions represent in itself--what are these solids of many dimensions the lines and boundaries of which we perceive as motion?

A great power of imagination is necessary to transcend the limits of our perceptions and to visualize mentally the world in other categories even for a moment.

Let us imagine some object, say a book, outside of time and space. What will this last mean? Were we to take the book out of time and space it would mean that all books which have existed, exist now, and will exist, exist together, i.e., occupy one and the same place and exist simultaneously, forming as it were one book which includes within itself the properties, characteristics and peculiarities of all books possible in the world. When we say simply, a book, we have in mind something possessing the common characteristic of all books--this is a concept. But that book about which we are talking now, possesses not only these common characteristics but the individual characteristics of all separate books.

Let us take other things--a table, a house, a tree, a man. Let us imagine them out of time and space. The mind will have to open its doors to objects each possessing such an enormous, such an infinite number of signs and characteristics that to comprehend them by means of the reason is absolutely impossible. And if one wants to comprehend them by his reason he will certainly be forced to dismember these objects somehow, to take them at first in some one sense, from one side, in one section of their being. What is "man" out of space and time? He is all humanity, man as the "species"--Homo Sapiens, but at the same time possessing the characteristics, peculiarities and individual ear-marks of all separate men. This is you, and I, and Julius Caesar and the conspirators who killed him, and the newsboy I pass every day--all kings, all slaves, all saints, all sinners--all taken together, fused into one indivisible being of a man, like a great living tree in which are bark, wood, and dry twigs; green leaves

[p. 121]

flowers and fruit. Is it possible to conceive of and understand such a being by our reason?

The idea of such a "great being" inspired the artist or artists who created the Sphinx.

______

But what is motion? Why do we feel it if it does not exist? About this last, Mabel Collins, a theosophical writer of the first period of modern theosophy, writes very beautifully in her poetical Story of the Year.

. . . The entire true meaning of the earthly life consists only in the mutual contact between personalities and in the efforts of growth. Those things which are called events and circumstances and which are regarded as the real contents of life--are in reality only the conditions which make these contacts and this growth possible.

In these words there sounds already quite a new understanding of the real. And truly the illusion of motion cannot arise out of nothing. When we are travelling by train, and the trees are running, overtaking one another, we know that this motion is an illusory one, that the trees are immobile, and that the illusion of their motion is created by our own.

As in these particular cases, so also in general as regards all motion in the material world, the foundation of which the "positivists" consider to be motion in the finest particles of matter, we, recognizing this motion as an illusory one, will ask: Is not an illusion of this motion created by some motion inside our consciousness?

So it will be.

And having established this, we shall endeavor to define what kind of motion is going on inside our consciousness, i.e., what is moving relatively to what?

H. P. Blavatsky, in her first book, Isis Unveiled, touched upon the same question concerning the relation of life to time and motion. She writes:

As our planet revolves every year around the sun and at the same time turns once in every twenty-four hours upon its own axis, thus traversing

[p. 122]

minor cycles within a larger one, so is the work of the smaller cyclic periods accomplished and recommenced.

The revolution of the physical world, according to the ancient doctrine, is attended by a like revolution in the world of intellect--the spiritual evolution of the world proceeding in cycles, like the physical one.

Thus we see in history a regular alternation of ebb and flow in the tide of human progress. The great kingdoms and empires of the world, after reaching the culmination of their greatness, descend again in accordance with the same law by which they ascended; till, having reached the lowest point, humanity reasserts itself and mounts up once more, the height of its attainment being, by this law of ascending progression by cycles, somewhat higher than the point from which it had before descended.

The division of the history of mankind into Golden, Silver, Copper and Iron Ages, is not a fiction. We see the same thing in the literature of peoples. An age of great inspiration and unconscious productiveness is invariably followed by an age of criticism and consciousness. The one affords material for the analyzing and critical intellect of the other.

Thus all those great characters who tower like giants in the history of mankind, like Buddha-Siddartha, and Jesus, in the realm of spiritual, and Alexander the Macedonian and Napoleon the Great, in the realm of physical conquests, were but reflexed images of human types which had existed ten thousand years before, in the  decimillennium, reproduced by the mysterious powers controlling the destinies of our world. There is no prominent character in all the annals of sacred or profane history whose prototype we cannot find in the half-fictitious and half-real traditions of bygone religions and mythologies. As the star, glimmering at an immeasurable distance above our heads, in the boundless immensity of the sky, reflects itself in the smooth waters of a lake, so does the imagery of men of the antediluvian ages reflect itself in the periods we can embrace in an historical retrospect.

As above, so below. That which has been will return again. As in heaven, so on earth.

Anything that can be said about the understanding of temporal relations is inevitably extremely vague. This is because our language is absolutely inadequate to the spatial expression of temporal relations. We lack the necessary words for it, we have no verbal forms, strictly speaking, for the expression of these relations  are new to us, and some other quite new forms--not verbal--are indispensable. The language for the transmission of the new temporal relations must be a language without verbs. New parts of speech are necessary, an infinite number of new words. At present, in our human language we can speak about "time" by hints only. Its true essence is inexpressible for us.

[p. 123]

We should never forget about this inexpressibility. This is the sign of the truth, the sign of reality. That which can be expressed, cannot be true.

All systems dealing with the relation of the human soul to time--all ideas of post-mortem existence, the theory of re-incarnation, that of the transmigration of souls, of karma--are symbols, trying to transmit relations which cannot be expressed directly because of the poverty and the weakness of our language. They should not be understood literally any more than it is possible to understand the symbols and allegories of art literally. It is necessary to search for their hidden meanings, that which cannot be expressed in words.

The literal understanding of these symbolical forms in certain lines of contemporary literature, and the union with them of ideas of "evolution" and "morals" taken in the most narrow, dualistic meaning, completely disfigures the inner content of these forms, and deprives them of their value and meaning.

Footnotes

^118:1 "The Fourth Dimension," p. 77.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 124]

  

CHAPTER XI

          Science   and the problem of the fourth dimension. The address of Prof. N. A. Oumoff   before the Mendeleevskian Convention in 1911--"The Characteristic   Traits and Problems of Contemporary Scientific Thought." The new   physics. The electro-magnetic theory. The principle of relativity. The works   of Einstein and Minkowsky. Simultaneous existence of the past and the future.   The Eternal Now. Van Manen's book about occult experiences. The drawing of a   four-dimensional figure.

     
   SPEAKING generally with regard to the problems propounded in the foregoing chapters--those of time, space, and the higher dimensions--it is impossible not to dwell once more upon the relation of science to these problems. To many persons the relation of "exact science" to these questions which undoubtedly constitute the most important problem now engaging human thought appears highly enigmatical.

If it is important why does not science deal with it? And why, on the contrary, does science repeat the old, contradictory affirmations, pretending not to know or not to notice an entire series of theories and hypotheses advanced?

Science should be the investigation of the unknown. Why, therefore, is it not anxious to investigate this unknown, which has been in process of revelation for a long time--which soon will cease to be the unknown?

It is possible to answer this question only by acknowledging that unfortunately official, academic science is doing but a small part of what it should be doing in regard to the investigation of the new and unknown. For the most part, it is only teaching that which has already become the commonplace of the independent thinker; or still worse, has already become antiquated and rejected as valueless.

So it is the more pleasant to remark that even in science may sometimes be discerned an aspiration toward the search of new horizons of thought; or, to put it differently, not always and not in

[p. 125]

all the academic routine, with its obligatory repetition of an endless number of commonplaces, has the love of knowledge and the power of independent thinking been crowded out.

Although timidly and tentatively, science, through its boldest , in the last few decades has after all been touching upon the problems of higher dimensions, and in such cases has arrived at results almost identical with those propounded in the preceding chapters.

In December, 1911, the second Mendeleevskian Convention [*1] was opened by the address of Prof. N. A. Oumoff, dedicated to the problems of time and higher dimensions under the title, The Characteristic Traits and Problems of Contemporary Natural-Scientific Thought.

The address of Prof. Oumoff, though not altogether outspoken, was nevertheless an event of great importance in the history of the development of exact science, and some time it will doubtless be recognized as an unusually bold and brilliant attempt to come forward and proclaim absolutely new ideas which practically renounce all positivism: and in the very citadel of positivism which the Mendeleevskian Convention represents.

But inertia and routine of course did their work. Prof. Oumoff's address was heard along with the other addresses, was printed in the Proceedings of the Convention, and there rested, without producing at all the impression of an exploded bomb that it should have produced had the listeners been more in a position to appreciate its true meaning and significance, and--more important--had they the desire to do so.

In this diminution of its significance the reserves and limitations which Prof. Oumoff himself made in his address assisted to a degree, as did the title, in failing to express its substance and general tendency, which was to show that science goes now in a new direction, and one which is not in reality--i.e., that the new direction goes against science.

Professor Oumoff died in 1916, and I am unwilling to impose upon him thoughts which he did not share. I talked with him in January, 1912, and from our conversation I saw that he was stopping half way, as it were, between the ideas of the fourth dimension approximating

[p. 126]

those expressed by me in the first edition of Tertium Organum and those physical theories which still admit motion as an independent fact. What I wish to convey is that Prof. Oumoff, admitting time as being the fourth dimension of space, did not regard motion as the illusion of our consciousness, but recognized the reality of motion in the world, as a fact independent of us and of our psyche.

I speak of this, because later I shall quote extracts from Prof. Oumoff's paper, choosing generally those places containing the ideas almost identical with the thoughts expressed in the preceding chapters.

That part of the address which pictures the evolution of modern physics from the atom to the electron I shall omit, because this seems to me somewhat artificially united to those ideas upon which I wish to dwell, and is not inwardly connected with them at all.

From my standpoint it is immaterial whether we make the foundation of matter the atom or the electron. I believe that at the foundation of matter lies illusion, or, in other words, a form of perception. And the consistent development of those ideas of higher space which Prof. Oumoff made the basis of his address leads, in my opinion, to the negation of motion; just as the consistent development of the ideas of mathematical physics has led to the negation of matter as substance.

Having mentioned electrons, I may add that there is a method whereby modern scientific ideas and the data of the psychological method may be reconciled; namely, by the aid of the very ancient systems of the Kabala, Alchemy and so forth, which establish the foundation of the material world in four principles or elements, of which the first two--fire and water--correspond to the positive and negative electrons of modern physics.

But in such case the electrons must be regarded, not simply as electro-magnetic units, but as principles, i.e., as two opposite aspects or phases constituting the world.

Prof. Oumoff's address is interesting and remarkable in that he stands already on the very threshold of metaphysics, and he is perhaps hindered from entering only by a lingering faith in the value of the positivistic method, which dies when the new watch-words of science are declared.

The introductory word to our forthcoming labors [says Prof. Oumoff] it will be most proper to dedicate to the excursions of scientific thought

[p. 127]

in its  for the image of the world. The necessity for scientific research along this path will become clear if we will turn to the covenants of our high priests of science. These covenants convey the deep motives of active service to natural science and to men. It is useful to express them in our time, wherein thought is preeminently directed to the questions of the organization of life. Let us remember the credo of the natural scientist:

To establish the authority of man over energy, time and space:

To know the architecture of the universe, and in this knowledge to find a basis of creative foresight. This foresight inspires confidence that natural science continuing the great and responsible work of creation in the fields of nature which it has already made its own, will not fail to enter a new field adapted to the enlarged necessities of mankind.

This new nature has become a vital necessity of personal and public activity. But its grandeur and power summon the mind as it were to tranquillity.

The demand for stability in the household and the brevity of the personal experience in comparison with the evolution of the earth lead men to faith, and create in them an image of the durability of the surrounding order of things not for the present only, but for the future. The pioneers of natural science do not enjoy such a serene point of view, and to this circumstance the natural sciences are indebted for their continuous development. I venture to lift the brilliant and familiar veil and throw open the sanctuaries of scientific thought, now poised upon the summit of two contrasted contemplations of the world.

The steersman of science shall be ceaselessly vigilant, despite the felicity of his voyage; above him shall invariably shine the stars by which he finds his way upon the ocean of the unknown.

At the time in which we are living now the constellations in the skies of our science have changed, and a new star has flashed out, having no equal to itself in brightness.

Persistent scientific investigation has expanded the volume of the knowable to dimensions which could scarcely be imagined only a short time--fifteen or twenty years--ago. Number remains, as before, the lawmaker of nature, but, being capable of representation, it has escaped from that mode of contemplating the world which regarded as possible its representation by mechanical models.

This augmentation of knowledge gives a sufficient number of images for the construction of the world, but they destroy its architecture as that is known to us, and create as it were a new order, extending far, in its free lines, beyond the limits not only of the old visible world, but even beyond the fundamental forms of our thinking.

I have now to lead you to the summits from which open the perspectives that are re-forming the very basis of our understanding of the world.

The ascent to them amid the ruins of classical physics is attended with

[p. 128]

no small difficulty, and I ask in advance your indulgence and shall exercise all my efforts to simplify and shorten our path as far as possible.

Prof. Oumoff proceeds to picture the evolution of form "from the atom to the electron," from materialistic and mechanistic ideas about the universe to the electro-magnetic theory.

The axioms of mechanics are only fragments, and their application may be compared to the judgment concerning the contents of an entire chapter by means of a single sentence.

Therefore it is not strange that the attempt of the mechanistic explanation of the properties of the electro-magnetic ether by the aid of axioms in which these properties were either denied or one-sidedly predetermined was doomed to failure. . . .

The mechanistic contemplation of the world appeared as one-sided. . . . In the image of the world, unity was not in evidence. The electro-magnetic world could not remain as something quite alien, unrelated to matter. The material mode of contemplating the world, with its fixed formula, had no sufficient flexibility to bring about unification through it and its principles. There remained only one way out--to sacrifice one of the worlds--the material, the mechanistic, or the electro-magnetic. It was necessary to find sufficient foundations for decision on the one side or on the other. These were not slow to appear.

The consequent development of physics is a process against matter, which ended with its expulsion. But along with this negative activity has gone the creative work of the reformation of electro-magnetic symbolics; it was forced to become adequate to express the properties of the material world: its atomic structure, inertia, radiation and absorption of energy, electromagnetic phenomena. . . .

. . . On the horizon of scientific thought was arising the electronic theory of matter.

Through electrical corpuscles was opening the connection between matter and vacuum. . . .

. . . The idea of a special substratum filling the vacuum--ether--became superfluous.

. . . Light and heat are born by the motion of electrons. They are the suns of microcosms.

. . . The universe consists of positive and negative corpuscles, bound by electro-magnetic fields.

Matter disappeared; its variety was replaced by a system of mutually related electric corpuscles and instead of the accustomed material world one deeply different--the electro-magnetic world--is envisaging itself to us....

But the recognition of the electro-magnetic world did not annihilate many unsolved problems and difficulties, and the necessity for a generalizing system was felt.

In our difficult ascent we have reached the point [according to Prof. Oumoff] at which the road divides. One stretches horizontally to that plane

[p. 129]

which has been pictured, another goes to the high summit which is already visible, and the grade is not steep.

Let us look about us at the point which we have reached. It is very dangerous; not one theory only has suffered wreck there. It is the more dangerous that its subtlety is covered by the mask of simplicity. Its basis is the experimental attempts which gave a negative answer to the researches of careful and skilled experimenters.

Prof. Oumoff shows the contradictions which were the outcome of certain experiments. The necessity to explain these contradictions served as the incentive to the discovery of the unifying principle: this was the principle of relativity.

The deductions of Lorentz, which were made in 1909, and which in general had in view electro-optical phenomena only, gave the impetus to the promulgation by Albert Einstein of a new principle and to its remarkable generalization by the recently deceased Hermann Minkowsky.

We are approaching the summit of modern physics. It is occupied by the principle of relativity, the expression of which is so simple that it is difficult to discern its all-important significance. It asserts that the laws of phenomena in the system of bodies for the observer who is connected with it, will be the same, whether this system is at rest, or is moving uniformly and rectilinearly.

Hence it follows that the observer cannot detect by the aid of the phenomena which are proceeding in the system of bodies with which he is connected, whether this system has a uniform translational motion or not.

Thus we cannot detect from any phenomena proceeding on the earth, its translational motion in space.

The principle of relativity includes the observing intellect within itself, which is a circumstance of extraordinary significance. The intellect is connected with a complex physical instrument--the nervous system. This principle therefore gives directions concerning things proceeding in moving bodies, not only in relation to physical and chemical phenomena, but also in relation to the phenomena of life and therefore to the quests of man. It is remarkable as an example of a thesis, founded upon strictly scientific experiment, in a purely physical region, which erects a bridge between two worlds usually regarded as quite distinct.

Prof. Oumoff gives examples of the explanation of complex phenomena by the aid of the principle of relativity.

He shows further how the most enigmatical problems of life are explained from the standpoint of the electro-magnetic theory and the principle of relativity, and he comes at last to that which is the most interesting to us.

Time is involved in all spatial measurements. [*1] We cannot define the geometrical form of a solid moving in relation to us; we are always defining 

[p. 130]

its kinematical form. Therefore our spatial measurements are in reality proceeding not in a three-dimensional manifold, i.e., having three dimensions, of height, length and width, like this hall; but in a four-dimensional manifold: the first three dimensions we can represent by the divisions of a tape-measure upon which are marked feet, yards, or some other measure of length; the fourth dimension we will represent by the film of a cinematograph upon which each point corresponds to a new phase of the world's phenomena. The distances between the points of this film are measured by a clock going indifferently with this or that velocity. One observer will measure the distance between two points by a year--another by a hundred years. The transition from one point to another of this film corresponds to our concept of the flow of time. This fourth dimension we will call, therefore, time. The film of a cinematograph can replace the reel of any tape-measure, and contrariwise. The ingenious mathematician, Minkowsky, who died too young, proved that all these four dimensions are equivalent. How shall we comprehend this? Persons who arrive in St. Petersburg from Moscow have passed through Tver. They are not at this station (Tver) any longer, but nevertheless it continues to exist. In the same manner, that moment of time corresponding to some event which has already passed--the beginning of life on earth, for example--has not disappeared, it exists still. It is not outlived by the universe, but only by the earth. The place of this event is defined by a certain point in the four-dimensional universe and this point existed, is existing, and will exist; now through it, through this station passed by the earth, passes another wanderer. Time does not flow, any more than space flows. It is we who are flowing, wanderers in a four-dimensional universe. Time is just the same measurement of space as is length, breadth and height. Having changed them in the expression of some law of nature we are returning to the identical law.

These new concepts are embodied by Minkowsky in an elegant mathematical theory; we shall not enter the magnificent temple erected by his genius, from which proceeds this voice:

"In nature all is given: for her the past and future do not exist; she is the eternal present; she has no limits, either of space or of time. Changes are proceeding in individuals and correspond to their displacements upon world-ways in a four-dimensional eternal and limitless manifold. These concepts in the region of philosophical thought will produce a revolution considerably greater than that caused by the displacement of the earth from the centre of the universe by Copernicus." From the times of Newton to those of natural science, more brilliant perspectives have never opened up. Is not the power of natural science proclaimed in the transition from the undoubted experimental fact--the impossibility of the absolute motion of the earth--to a problem of the soul! A contemporary philosopher exclaimed in his confusion, "beyond truth and falsehood."

When the cult of a new God is born his word is not perfectly understood; the true meaning only becomes clear after the lapse of time. I

[p. 131]

think that this is true also as regards the principle of relativity. The elimination of anthropomorphism from scientific conceptions was of enormous service to science. On the same path stands the principle of relativity showing the dependence of our observations on general conditions of phenomena.

The electro-magnetic theory of the world (and the principle of relativity) explains only those phenomena the place of which is defined by that part of the universe which is occupied by matter; the rest of it, which presents itself to our senses as a vacuum remains as yet beyond the reach of science. But at the shores of the material world is changelessly dashing the surf of new energy from that deep ocean empty for our senses, but not for our reason.

Is not this dualism of matter and vacuum the anthropomorphism of science, and the last one? Let us put the fundamental question: What part of the universe is filled by matter? Let us surround our planetary system with a sphere the radius of which is equal to half of the distance  the sun to the nearest stars: the length of this radius is traversed by a light-ray in one and a half years. The volume of this sphere let us take as the volume of the world. Let us now describe, with the sun as a centre, another, lesser sphere with a radius equal to the distance of our sun to the outermost planet. I admit that the matter of our world, collected in one place, will not take more than one-tenth of the volume of the planetary sphere: Ii think that this figure is considerably exaggerated. After calculations of volume it will appear that in our world the volume occupied by the matter will be related to the volume of the vacuum as the figure 1 to the number represented by the figure 3 with 13 zeros. This relation is equivalent to the relation of one second to one million years.

According to the calculations of Lord Kelvin, the density of matter corresponding to such a relation would be less than the density of water by ten thousand million times, i.e., it would be in an extreme degree of rarefaction. . . .

Prof. Oumoff gives the example of such a number of balls as correspond to the number of seconds in one million years. Upon one of these balls (corresponding to the matter in the universe) is written all that we know, because all that we know is related to matter. And matter is only one ball among millions and millions of "balls of vacuum."

This is his conclusion; says he:

Matter represents a highly improbable fact in the universe. This event came into existence because small probability does not mean impossibility. But where, and in what manner, are realized more probable events? Is it not in the domain of radiant energy?

The theory of probability includes the immense part of the universe--the vacuum--in the world of becoming. We know that radiant energy possesses the preponderating mass. Among the different phenomena in the world of inter-crossing rays, out of elements attracting one another are not the tiny fragments born which by their congregation compose our

[p. 132]

material world? Is not the vacuum the laboratory matter? The material world corresponds to that limited horizon which is open to a man who has come out into a field. To his senses life is teeming only within the limits of this horizon; outside of it for the senses of man there is only a vacuum.

I do not desire to start a polemic about those thoughts in Prof. Oumoff's address with which I do not agree. Yet I shall mention and enumerate the questions which in my opinion are raised by the incompatibility of certain principles.

The contrast between the vacuum and the material world sounds almost naive after the just quoted words of Minkowsky concerning the necessity of a transfer of attention, on the part of science, from purely physical problems to questions of consciousness. Moreover I do not see any fundamental difference between the material, the mechanical, and the electro-magnetic universe. All this is three-dimensional. In the electro-magnetic universe there is as yet no true transition to the fourth dimension. And Prof. Oumoff makes only one clear attempt to bind the electro-magnetic world with the higher dimensions. He says:

That sheet of paper, written in electro-magnetic symbols, with which we covered the vacuum, it is possible to regard as billions of separate superimposed sheets, but of which each one represents the field of one small electric quantity or charge.

But this is all. The rest is just as three-dimensional as the theory of atoms and the ether.

"We are present at the funeral of the old physics," says Prof. Oumoff, and this is true. But the old physics is losing itself and disappears not in the electro-magnetic theory, but in the idea of a new dimension of space which up to the present has been called time and motion.

Truly, the new physics will be that in which there will be no motion, i.e., there will be no dualism of rest and motion, and no dualism of matter and vacuum.

Understanding the universe as thought and consciousness we completely divorce ourselves from the idea of a vacuum. And from this standpoint is explained the small probability of matter to which

[p. 133]

[paragraph continues] Prof. Oumoff referred. Matter, i.e., everything finite, is an illusion in an infinite world. [*1]

Among many attempts at the psychological investigation of the fourth dimension I shall note one in the book by Johan Van Manen, Some Occult Experiences.

In this book is a remarkable drawing of a four-dimensional figure which the author "saw" by means of his inner vision. This interesting experience Van Manen describes in the following way:

When residing and touring in the North of England, several years ago, I talked and lectured several times on the fourth dimension. One day after having retired to bed, I lay fully awake, thinking out some problems connected with this subject. I tried to visualize or think out the shape of a four-dimensional cube, which I imagined to be the simplest four-dimensional shape. To my great astonishment I saw plainly before me first a four-dimensional globe and afterwards a four-dimensional cube, and learned only then from this object-lesson that the globe is the simplest body, and not the cube, as the third-dimensional analogy ought to have told me beforehand. The remarkable thing was that the definite endeavor to see the one thing made me see the other. I saw the forms as before me in the air (though the room was dark), and behind the forms I saw clearly a rift in the curtains through which a glimmer of light filtered into the room. This was a case in which I can clearly fix the impression that the objects seen were outside my head. In most of the other cases I could not say so definitely, as they partake of a dual character, being almost equally felt as outside and inside the brain.

I forego the attempt to describe the fourth-dimensional cube as to its form. Mathematical description would be possible, but would at the same time disintegrate the real impression in its totality. The fourth-dimensional globe can be better described. It was an ordinary three-dimensional globe, out of which, on each side, beginning at its vertical circumference, bent, tapering horns proceeded,  which, with a circular bend, united their points above the globe from which they started. The effect is best indicated by circumscribing the numeral 8 by a circle. So three circles are formed, the lower one representing the initial globe, the upper one representing empty space, and the greater circle  the whole. If it be now understood that the upper circle does not exist and the lower (small) circle is identical with the outer (large) circle, the impression will have been conveyed, at least to some extent.

[p. 134]

I have always been easily able to recall this globe; to recall the cube is far more difficult, and I have to concentrate to get it back.

I have in a like manner had rare visions of the fifth and sixth-dimensional figures. At least I have felt as if the figures I saw were fifth- and sixth-dimensional. In these matters the greatest caution is necessary. I am aware that I have come into contact with these things as far as the physical brain allows it, without denying that beyond what the brain has caught there was something further, felt at the time, which was not handed on. the sixth-dimensional figure I cannot describe. All I remember of it is that it gave me at the time an impression in form of what we might call diversity in unity, or synthesis in differentiation. The fifth-dimensional vision is best described, or rather hinted at, by saying that it looked like an Alpine relief map, with the singularity that all mountain peaks and the whole landscape represented in the map were one mountain, or again in other words as if all the mountains had one single base. This was the difference between the fifth and the sixth, that in the fifth the excrescences were in one sense exteriorized and yet rooted in the same unit; but in the sixth they were differentiated but not exteriorized; they were only in different ways identical with the same base, which was their whole.

C. W. Leadbeater on a note to these remarkable pages says:

Striking as this drawing is, its value lies chiefly in its suggestiveness to those who have once seen that which it represents. One can hardly hope that it will convey a clear idea of the reality to those who have never seen it. It is difficult to get an animal to understand a picture--apparently because he is incapable of grasping the idea that perspective on a flat surface is intended to represent objects which he knows only as solid. The average man is in exactly the same position with regard to any drawing or model which is intended to suggest to him the idea of the fourth dimension; and so, clever and suggestive as this is, I; doubt whether it will be of much help to the average reader.

The man who has seen the reality might well be helped by this to bring into his ordinary life a flash of that higher consciousness; and in that case he might perhaps be able to supply, in his thought, what must necessarily be lacking in the physical-plane drawing.

For my part, I may say that the true meaning of Van Manen's "vision" is difficult even to appreciate with the means at our disposal. After seeing the drawing in his book I at once felt and understood all that it means, but I disagree somewhat with the author in the interpretation of his drawing. He says:

"We may also call the total impression that of a ring. I think

[p. 135]

it was then that I understood for the first time that so-called fourth-dimensional sight is sight with reference to a space-conception arising from the visual perception of density."

This remark though very cautions seems to me dangerous, because it creates the possibility of the same mistake which stopped Hinton in many things and which I partly repeated in the first edition of the book The Fourth Dimension. [*1] This mistake consists in the possibility of the construction of some pseudo fourth dimension, which lies in reality completely in three dimensions. In my opinion there is very much of motion in the figure. The entire figure appears to me as a moving one, continuously generating itself, as though it were at the point of contact of the acute ends, coming from there and involving back there. But I shall not analyze and comment upon Van Manen's experience now, leaving it to readers who have had similar experiences.

So far as Van Manen's descriptions of his observations of the "fifth" and "sixth" dimensions are concerned, it seems to me that nothing in them warrants the supposition that they are related to any region higher or more complex than the four-dimensional world. In my opinion all these are just observations of the region of the fourth dimension. But the similarity to the experience of certain mystics is very remarkable in them, especially those of Jacob Boehme.  the method of object-lesson is very interesting--i.e., those two images which Van Manen saw and from the comparison of which he deduced his conclusions.

Footnotes

^125:1 A convention of Russian scientists, named in honor of the famous Russian chemist, Prof. Mendeleeyeff. Transl.

^129:1 Italicized by me. P. Ouspensky.

^133:1 The works on Relativity by Dr. A. Einstein make possible a more thorough acquaintance with the scientific (physical) treatment of this subject.

^135:1 One of P. D. Ouspensky's books. Transl.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

  

CHAPTER XII

          Analysis   of phenomena. What defines different orders of phenomena for us? Methods and   forms of the transition of one order of phenomena into another. Phenomena of   motion. Phenomena of life, Phenomena of consciousness. The central question   of our knowledge of the world: what mode of phenomena is generic and produces   the others? Can the origin of everything lie in motion? The laws of   transformation of energy. Simple transformation and liberation of latent   energy. Different liberating forces of different orders of phenomena. The   force of mechanical energy, the force of a living cell, the force of an idea.   Phenomena and noumena of our world.

     
   THE order of phenomena is defined for us, first, by the method of apprehending them, and second, by the form of the transition of one order of phenomena into another. According to our method of apprehending them and by the form of their transition into one another we discern three orders of phenomena:

Physical phenomena (i.e., all phenomena studied by physics and chemistry); phenomena of life (all phenomena studied by biology and its subdivisions); psychic phenomena (thoughts, feelings, sensations, etc.).

We know physical phenomena by means of our sense organs or by the aid of apparatus. Many recognized physical phenomena are not observed directly; they are merely projections of the assumed causes of our sensations, or those of the causes of other phenomena. Physics recognizes the existence of many phenomena which have never been observed by the sense organs or by means of apparatus (the temperature of absolute zero etc., for example).

The phenomena of life, as such, are not observed directly. We cannot project them as the cause of definite sensations. But certain groups of sensations force us to assume in certain groups of physical phenomena the presence of the phenomena of life. It may be said that a certain grouping of physical phenomena forces us to assume the presence of the phenomena of life. We define the cause of the phenomena of life as a something not capable of being

[p. 137]

grasped by the senses or by apparatus, and incommensurable with the causes of physical sensations. A sign of the presence of the phenomena of life consists in the power of organisms to reproduce themselves, i.e., the multiplication of them in the same forms, the indivisibility of separate units and their especial adaptability, which is not observed outside of life.

Psychic phenomena are the feelings and the thoughts that we know in ourselves by direct sensation. We assume their existence in others (1) from analogy with ourselves; (2) from their manifestation in actions and (3) from that which we gather by the aid of speech. But, as has been shown by certain philosophical theories, it is impossible to establish strictly objectively, the presence of consciousness other than our own. A man establishes this usually because of his inner assurance of its truth.

Physical phenomena transform themselves into one another completely. It is possible to transform heat into light, pressure into motion, etc. It is possible to produce any physical phenomenon from other physical phenomena; to produce any chemical combination by the synthetic method, combining the composite parts in proper proportions and under proper physical conditions. Modern physics assumes electro-magnetic phenomena as the basis of all physical phenomena. But physical phenomena do not transform themselves into the phenomena of life. By no combination of physical conditions can science create life, just as by chemical synthesis it cannot create living matter--protoplasm. We can tell what amount of coal is necessary to generate the certain amount of heat necessary to transform a given quantity of ice into water; but we cannot tell what amount of coal is necessary to create the vital energy with which one living cell forms another living cell. In similar manner physical, chemical and mechanical phenomena cannot themselves produce the phenomena of consciousness, i.e., of thought. Were it otherwise, a rotating wheel, after the expenditure of a certain amount of energy, or after the lapse of a certain time, could generate an idea. Yet we know perfectly well that the wheel can go on rotating for millions of years, and no single idea will be produced by it at all. Thus we see that the phenomena of motion differ in a fundamental way from the phenomena of life and of consciousness.

The phenomena of life change into other phenomena of life, multiply infinitely, and transform themselves into physical phenomena,

[p. 138]

generating whole series of mechanical and chemical combinations. The phenomena of life manifest themselves to us in physical phenomena, and in the existence of such phenomena.

Psychic phenomena are sensed directly, and having enormous potential force, transform themselves into physical phenomena and into manifestations of life. We know that at the basis of our procreative force lies desire--that is, a psychical state, or a phenomenon of consciousness. Desire is possessed of enormous potential force. Out of the united desire of a man and of a woman, a whole nation may come into being. At the root of the active, constructive, creative force of man, that can change the course of rivers, unite oceans, cut through mountains, lies desire, i.e., again a psychical state, or a phenomenon of consciousness. Thus psychic phenomena possess even greater unifying force with relation to physical phenomena than do the phenomena of life.

Positive philosophy affirms that all three orders of phenomena proceed from one cause lying within the sphere of the study of physics. This cause is called by different names at different times, but it is assumed to be identical with physical energy in general.

Seriously analyzing such an affirmation, it is easily seen to be absolutely arbitrary, and not founded upon anything. Physical phenomena of themselves, inside the limits of our existence and observation, never create the phenomena of life and the phenomena of consciousness. Consequently we may with greater right assume that in the phenomena of life and in the phenomena of consciousness there is something which does not exist in physical phenomena.

_______

Moreover, we cannot measure physical, biological, and psychic phenomena by the same unit of measurement. Or more correctly, we cannot measure the phenomena of life and the phenomena of consciousness at all. It is only the phenomena first mentioned, i.e., the physical, that we fancy we can measure, though this is very doubtful, too.

In any case we undoubtedly know that we can express neither the phenomena of life nor psychic phenomena in the formula of physical phenomena; and generally speaking we have for them no formulae at all.

[p. 139]

In order to clarify the relation between phenomena of different kinds, let us examine in detail the laws of their transformation one into another.

First of all it is necessary to consider physical phenomena, and make a detailed study of the conditions and properties of their transformation one into another.

In an essay on Wundt (The Northern Messenger, 1888) A. L. Volinsky, elucidating the principles of Wundt's physiological psychology, says:

The actions of sensation are provoked by the actions of irritation. But both these actions need not be at all equal. It is possible to burn a whole city by a spark from a cigarette. It is necessary to understand why this is possible. Place a board upon the edge of some object scalewise, so that it will balance. On both ends of the board put now an equal amount of weight. The weights will not fall: although both of them will tend to fall, they balance one another. If we lift the least weight from one end of the board, then the other end will overbalance, and the board will fall--i.e., the force of gravity which existed before as an invisible tendency, will have become a visible motive force. If we put the board and weights on the earth, the force of gravity will not produce any action, but it will not be eliminated: it will only transform itself into other forces.

Those forces which are only striving to produce motion are called constrained, or dead, forces. The forces which are actually manifesting themselves in certain definite actions are called free, or live forces; but as regards free forces it is necessary to differentiate those forces which are liberating, setting free, from the forces which are liberated, or set free.

An enormous difference exists between the liberation of a force and its transformation into another.

When one kind of motion transforms itself into another kind, the amount of free force remains the same; and contrariwise, when one force liberates another, the amount of free force changes. The free force of an irritation liberates the tied-up forces of a nerve. And this liberation of tied-up forces is proceeding at each point of the nerve. The first motion increases like a fire, like a snow-slide carrying along with it new and ever new drifts. It is for this reason that the action (phenomenon) of sensation need not be exactly equal to the action of irritation.

Let us look more broadly at the relation between liberated and liberating forces in the different kinds of phenomena.

We shall discover that sometimes an almost negligible amount of physical force may liberate an enormous, a colossal amount of physical energy. But all that we can ever assemble of physical 

[p. 140]

force is powerless to liberate a single iota of that vital energy necessary for the independent existence of a single microscopic living organism.

The force contained in living organisms, the vital force, is capable of liberating infinitely greater amounts of vital and also of physical energy than the force of motion.

The microscopic living cell is capable of infinite dissemination, to evolve new species, to cover continents with vegetation, to fill the oceans with seaweed, to build islands out of coral, to deposit powerful layers of coal, etc., etc.

Concerning the latent energy contained in the phenomena of consciousness, i.e., in thoughts, feelings, desires, we discover that its potentiality is even more immeasurable, more boundless. From personal experience, from observation, from history, we know that ideas, feelings, desires, manifesting themselves, can liberate enormous quantities of energy, and create infinite series of phenomena. An idea can act for centuries and millenniums and only grow and deepen, evoking ever new series of phenomena, liberating ever fresh energy. We know that thoughts continue to live and act when even the very name of the man who created them has been converted into a myth, like the names of the founders of ancient religions, the creators of the immortal poetical works of antiquity--heroes, leaders, prophets. Their words are repeated by innumerable lips, their ideas are studied and commented upon. Their preserved works are translated, printed, read, studied, staged, illustrated. And this is done not only with the masterpieces of men of genius, but some single little verse may live millenniums, making hundreds of men work for it, serve it, in order to transmit it further.

Observe how much of potential energy there is in some little verse of Pushkin or Lermontoff. This energy acts not only upon the feelings of men, but by reason of its very existence it acts upon their will. See how vital and immortal are the words, thoughts and feelings of half-mythical Homer--how much of "motion" each word of his, during the time of its existence, has evoked.

Undoubtedly each thought of a poet contains enormous potential force, like the power confined in a piece of coal or in a living cell, but infinitely more subtle, imponderable and potent.

This remarkable correlation of phenomena may be expressed in the following terms: the farther a given phenomenon is from the

[p. 141]

visible and sensed--from the physical, the farther it is from matter--the more there is in it of hidden force, the greater the quantity of phenomena it can produce, can leave in its wake, the greater amount of energy it can liberate, and so the less it is dependent upon time.

______

If we would correlate all of the above with the principle of physics that the amount of energy is constant, then we must state more exactly that in the preceding discussion nothing has been said of the creation of new energy, but of the liberation of latent force. And we have found that the liberating force of life and thought is infinitely greater than the liberating force of mechanical motion and of chemical reactions. The microscopic living cell is more powerful than a volcano--the idea is more powerful than the geological cataclysm.

Having established these differences between phenomena, let us endeavor to discover what phenomena themselves represent, taken by themselves, independently of our receptivity and sensation of them.

We at once discover that we know nothing about them.

We know a phenomenon just as much and just as far as it is irritation, i.e., to the extent that it provokes sensation.

The positivistic philosophy sees mechanical motion or electromagnetic energy as the basis of all phenomena. But the hypothesis of vibrating atoms or of units of energy--electrons and cycles of motion, combinations of which create different "phenomena"--is only an hypothesis, built upon a perfectly arbitrary and artificial assumption concerning the existence of the world in time and space. Just as soon as we discover that the conditions of time and space are merely the properties of our sensuous receptivity, we absolutely destroy the validity of the hypothesis of "energy" as the foundation of everything; because time and space are necessary for energy, i.e., it is necessary for time and space to be properties of the world and not properties of consciousness.

Thus in reality we know nothing about the causes of phenomena.

We do know that some combinations of causes, acting through the organism upon our consciousness, produce the series of sensations which we recognize as a green tree. But we do not know if

[p. 142]

this perception of a tree corresponds to the real substance of the causes which evoked this sensation.

The question concerning the relation of the phenomenon to the thing-in-itself, i.e., to the indwelling reality, has been from far back the chief and most difficult concern of philosophy. Can we, studying phenomena, get at the very cause of them, at the very substance of things? Kant has said definitely: No!--by studying phenomena we do not even approach to the understanding of things in themselves. Recognizing the correctness of Kant's view, if we desire to approach to an understanding of things in themselves, we must seek an entirely different method, an utterly different path from that which positive science, which studies phenomena, is treading.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 143]

  

CHAPTER XIII

          The   apparent and the hidden side of life. Positivism as the study of the   phenomenal side of life. Of what does the "two-dimensionality" of   positive philosophy consist? The regarding of everything upon a single plane,   in one physical sequence. The streams which flow underneath the earth. What   can the study of life, as a phenomenon, yield? The artificial world which   science erects for itself. The unreality of finished and isolated phenomena.   The new apprehension of the world.

     
   THERE exist visible and hidden causes of phenomena; there exist also visible and hidden effects. Let us consider some one example. In all textbooks on the history of literature we are told that in its time Goethe's Werther provoked an epidemic of suicides.

What did provoke these suicides?

Let us imagine that some "scientist" appears, who, being interested in the fact of the increase of suicides, begins to study the first edition of Werther according to the method of exact, positive science. He weighs the book, measures it by the most precise instruments, notes the number of its pages, makes a chemical analysis of the paper and the ink, counts the number of lines on every page, the number of letters, and even how many times the letter A is repeated, how many times the letter B, and how many times the interrogation mark is used, and so on. In other words he does everything that the pious Mohammedan performs with relation to the Koran of Mohammed, and on the basis of his investigations writes a treatise on the relation of the letter A of the German alphabet to suicide.

Or let us imagine another scientist who studies the history of painting, and deciding to put it on a scientific basis, starts a lengthy series of analyses of the pigment used in the pictures of famous painters in order to discover the causes of the different impressions produced upon the beholder by different pictures.

Imagine a savage studying a watch. Let us admit that he is a wise and crafty savage. He takes the watch apart and counts all

[p. 144]

its wheels and screws, counts the number of teeth in each gear, finds out its size and thickness. The only thing that he does not know is what all these things are for. He does not know that the hand completes the circuit of the dial in half of twenty-four hours, i.e., that it is possible to tell time by means of a watch.

All this is "positivism."

We are too familiar with "positivistic" methods, and so fail to realize that they end in absurdities and that if we are seeking to explain the meaning of anything, they do not lead to the goal at all.

The difficulty is that for the explanation of the meaning positivism is of no use. For it nature is a closed book of which it studies the appearance only.

In the matter of the study of the operations of nature, the positive methods have achieved much, as is proven by the innumerable successes of modern technics, including the conquest of the air. But everything in the world has its own definite sphere of action. Positivism is very good when it seeks an answer to the question of how something operates under given conditions; but when it makes the attempt to get outside of its definite conditions (space, time, causation), or presumes to affirm that nothing exists outside of these given conditions, then it is transcending its own proper sphere.

It is true that the more serious positive thinkers deny the possibility of including in "positive investigation" the question of why and what for. But as a matter of fact the positive standpoint is not the only possible one. The usual mistake of positivism consists in its not seeing anything except itself--it either considers everything as possible to it, or considers as generally impossible much that is entirely possible, but not for positive inquiry.

Humanity will never cease to search, however, for answer to the questions why, and wherefore.

The positivistic scientist finds himself in the presence of nature almost in the position of a savage in a library of rare and valuable books. For a savage a book is a thing of definite size and weight. However long he may ask himself what purpose this strange thing serves, he will never discover the truth from its appearance; and the contents of the book will remain for him the incomprehensible noumenon. In like manner the contents of nature are incomprehensible to the positivistic scientist.

But if a man knows of the existence of the contents of the book--

[p. 145]

the noumenon of life--if he knows that a mysterious meaning is hidden under visible phenomena, there is the possibility that in the long run he will discover the contents.

For success in this it is necessary to grasp the idea of the inner contents, i.e., the meaning of the thing in itself.

The scientist who discovers little tablets with hieroglyphics, or wedge-shaped inscriptions in an unknown language, deciphers and reads them after great labor. And in order to accomplish this he needs only one thing: it is necessary for him to know that these little signs represent an inscription. As long as he regards them simply as an ornament, as the outside embellishment of little tablets, or as an accidental tracing without meaning--up to that time their meaning and significance will be closed to him absolutely. But let him only assume the existence of that meaning and the possibility of its comprehension will be already within sight.

No secret cipher exists which cannot be solved without the aid of any key. But it is necessary to know that it is a cipher. This is the first and necessary condition. Lacking this it is impossible to accomplish anything.

______

The idea of the existence of the visible and the hidden sides of life was known to philosophy long ago. Phenomena were regarded as only one aspect of the world, and as being infinitely small compared to the hidden aspect--seeming, not existing really, arising in consciousness at the moment of its contact with the real world. Another side, noumena, was recognized as really existing in itself, but inaccessible for our receptivity.

But there is no greater error than to regard the world as divided into phenomena and noumena--to conceive of phenomena and noumena apart from one another, and susceptible of being separately known. This is philosophic illiteracy, which shows itself most clearly in the dualistic spiritistic theories. The division into phenomena and noumena exists only in our minds. The "phenomenal world" is simply our incorrect perception of the world.

As Carl DuPrel has said, "The world beyond is this world, only perceived strangely." It would be more accurate to say, that this world is the world beyond perceived strangely.

[p. 146]

Kant's idea is quite correct, that the study of the phenomenal side of the world will not bring us any nearer to the understanding of "things-in-themselves." The "thing-in-itself"--that is the thing as it exists in itself, independently of us. The "phenomenon of the thing"--that is the thing in such semblance as we perceive it.

The example of a book in the hands of an illiterate savage shows us quite clearly that it is sufficient not to know about the existence of the noumenon of a thing (the contents of the book in this case) in order that it shall not manifest itself in phenomena. On the other hand, the knowledge of its existence is sufficient to make possible its discovery with the aid of the very phenomena which, without the knowledge of the noumenon, would be perfectly useless.

Just as it is impossible for a savage to attain to an understanding of the nature of a watch by a study of its phenomenal side--the number of wheels, and the number of teeth in each gear--so also for the positivistic scientist, studying the external, manifesting side of life, its secret raison d'etre and the aim of separate manifestations will be forever hidden.

To the savage the watch will be an extremely interesting, complicated, but entirely useless toy. Somewhat after this manner a man appears to the scientist-materialist--a mechanism infinitely more complex, but equally unknown as regards the purpose for which it exists and the manner of its creation.

We pictured to ourselves how incomprehensible the functions of a candle and of a coin would be for a plane-man, studying two similar circles on his plane. In like manner the functions of a man are in comprehensible to the scientist, studying him as a mechanism. The reason for this is clear. It is because the coin and the candle are not two similar circles, but two different objects, having an entirely different use and meaning in that world which is relatively higher than the plane--and man is not a mechanism, but something having an aim and meaning in the world relatively higher than the visible one.

The functions of a candle and of a coin in our world are for the imaginary plane-man an inaccessible noumenon. It is evident that the phenomenon of a circle cannot give any understanding of the function of a candle, and its difference from the function of a coin. But two-dimensional knowledge exists not alone on the plane. Materialistic thought tries to apply it to real life. A curious result

[p. 147]

follows, the true meaning of which is, unhappily, incomprehensible to many people. One of such applications is "the economic man"--this is quite clearly the two-dimensional and flat being moving in two directions--those of production and consumption--i.e., living upon the plane of production-consumption. How is it possible to imagine man in general as such an obviously artificial being? And how is it possible to hope to understand the laws of the life of man, with his complex spiritual aspirations and his great impulse to know, to understand everything around about him and within himself--by studying the imaginary laws of the imaginary being upon an imaginary plane? The inventors of this theory alone possess the secret of the answer to this question. But the economic theory of human life attracts men as do all simple theories giving a short answer to a series of complicated questions. And we are ourselves too entangled in materialistic theories to see anything beyond them.

_____

Positivistic science does not really deny the theory of phenomena and noumena, it only affirms, in opposition to Kant, that in studying phenomena we are gradually approaching to noumena. The noumena of phenomena science considers to be the motion of atoms and the ether, or the vibrations of electrons; it conceives of the universe as a whirl of mechanical motion or the field of manifestation of electro-magnetic energy taking on the "phenomenal tint" for us on their reception by the organs of sense.

"Positivism" affirms that the phenomena of life and psychic phenomena are simply the functions of physical phenomena, that without physical phenomena the phenomena of life, thought and emotion cannot exist and that they represent only certain complex combinations of the foregoing; and furthermore that all these three kinds of phenomena are one and the same thing in substance--and the higher, i.e., the phenomena of life and of consciousness, are only different expressions of the lower, i.e., of one and the same physico-mechanical or electro-magnetic energy.

But to all this it is possible to answer one thing. If it were true it would have been proven long ago. Nothing is easier than to prove the energetic hypothesis of life and the psyche. Just create 

[p. 148]

life and thought by the mechanical method. Materialism and energetics are those "obvious" theories which cannot be true without proofs, because they cannot not have proofs if they contain even a little grain of truth.

But there are no proofs at the disposition of these theories; quite the reverse: the infinitely greater potentiality of the phenomena of life and the psyche compared with physical phenomena assures us of the exact opposite.

The simple fact, above shown, of the enormous liberating, unbinding force of psychic phenomena is sufficient to establish quite really and firmly the problem of the world of the hidden.

And the world of the hidden cannot be the world of unconscious mechanical motion, of unconscious development of electro-magnetic forces. The positivistic theory admits the possibility of explaining the higher through the lower, the invisible through the visible. But it has been shown at the very beginning that this is the explanation of one unknown by another unknown. There is still less justification for explaining the known through the unknown. Yet that "lower" (matter and motion) through which the positivists strive to explain the "higher" (life and thought) is itself unknown. Consequently it is impossible to explain and define anything else in terms of it, while the higher, i.e., the thought, this is our sole known: it is this alone that we do know, that we are conscious of in ourselves, that we can neither mistake nor doubt. And if thought can evoke or unbind physical energy, and motion can never create or unbind thought (out of a revolving wheel no thought ever arose) so of course we shall strive to define, not the higher in terms of the lower, but the lower in terms of the higher. If the invisible, like the contents of a book or the purpose of a watch, defines by itself the visible, so also we shall endeavor to understand not the visible, but the invisible.

Starting from a false assumption concerning the mechanicality of the noumenal side of nature, positive science, upon which the view of the world of the intelligent majority of contemporary humanity is founded, makes still another mistake in regard to cause and effect, or the law of functions--that is, it mistakes what is cause, and what is effect.

______

[p. 149]

Just as the two-dimensional plane-man thinks of all phenomena touching his consciousness as lying on one plane, so the positivistic method strives to interpret upon one plane all phenomena of different orders, i.e., to interpret all visible phenomena as the effects of antecedent visible phenomena, and as the inevitable cause of subsequent visible phenomena. In other words, it sees in causal and functional interdependence merely phenomena proceeding upon the surface, and studies the visible world, or the phenomena of the visible world, not admitting that causes can enter into this world which are not contained in it or that the phenomena of this world can possess functions extending beyond it.

But this could be true only in case there were no phenomena of life and of thought in the world, or if the phenomena of life and thought were really derivatives from physical phenomena, and did not possess infinitely greater latent force than they. Then only should we have the right to consider the chains of phenomena in their physical or visible sequence alone, as positivistic philosophy does. But taking into consideration the phenomena of life and thought we shall inevitably recognize that the chain of phenomena often translates itself from a sequence purely physical to a biological sequence, i.e., one in which there is much of the hidden and in-visible to us--or to a psychical sequence where there is even more of the hidden; but during reverse translations from biological and psychical spheres into physical sequences actions proceed often, if not always, from regions which are hidden from us; i.e., the cause of the visible is the invisible. In consequence of this we must admit that it is impossible to consider the chains of sequences in the world of physical phenomena only. When such a sequence touches the life of a man or that of a human society, we perceive clearly that it escapes from the "physical sphere" and returns into it. Regarding the matter from this standpoint we see that, just as in the life of one man and in the life of a society there are many streams, at times appearing on the surface and spouting up in boisterous torrents, and at other times disappearing deep underground, hidden from view, but only waiting for their moment to appear again on the surface, so do we observe in the world continuous chains of phenomena and we perceive how these chains shift from one order of phenomena to another without a break. We observe how the phenomena of consciousness--thoughts, feelings, desires--are accompanied by

[p. 150]

physiological phenomena--creating them perhaps--and inaugurate a series of purely physical phenomena; and we see how physical phenomena, becoming the object of sensations of sight, hearing, touch, smell and the like, induce physiological phenomena, and then psychological. But looking at life from that side, we see only physical phenomena, and having assured ourselves that it is the only reality we may not notice the others at all. Herein appears the enormous power of suggestion in current ideas. To a sincere positivist any metaphysical argument proving the unreality of matter or energy seems sophistry. It strikes him as a thing unnecessary, disagreeable, hindering a logical train of thought, an assault without aim or meaning on that which in his opinion is firmly established, alone immutable, lying at the foundation of everything. He vexedly fans away from himself all "idealistic" or "mystical" theories as he would a buzzing mosquito.

But the fact is that thought and energy are different in substance and cannot be one and the same thing, because they are different sides of one and the same thing. For if we open the cranium of a living man in order to observe all the vibrations of the cells of the gray matter of the brain, and all the quivering white fibres, in spite of everything there will be merely motion, i.e., the manifestation of energy, and thought will remain somewhere beyond the limits of investigation, retreating like a shadow at every approach. The "positivist," when he begins to realize this, feels that the ground is quaking underneath his feet, feels that by his method be will never approach to the thought. Then he sees clearly the necessity for a new method. As soon as he begins to think about it he begins quite unexpectedly to notice things around him which he did not see before. His eyes begin to open to that which he did not wish to see before. The walls which he had erected around himself begin to fall one after another, and behind the falling walls infinite horizons of possible knowledge, hitherto undreamed of, unroll before him.

Thereupon he completely alters his view of everything surrounding him. He understands that the visible is produced by the invisible; and that without understanding the invisible it is impossible to understand the visible. His "positivism" begins to totter and, if he is a man with a bold thought, then in some splendid

[p. 151]

moment he will perceive those things which he was wont to regard as real and true to be unreal and false, and those things regarded as false to be real and true.

First of all he will see that manifested physical phenomena often hide themselves, like a stream that has gone underground. Yet they do not disappear altogether, but continue to exist in latent form in some minds, in someone's memory, in the words or books of someone, just as the future harvest is latent in the seeds. And thereafter they again burst into light; out of this latent state they come into an apparent one, making a roar, reverberation, motion.

We observe such transitions of the invisible into the visible in the personal life of man, in the life of peoples, and in the history of humanity. These chains of events go on continuously, inter-weaving among themselves, entering one into another, sometimes hidden from our eyes, and sometimes visible.

I find an admirable description of this idea in the chapter on "Karma" in Light on the Path by Mabel Collins. [*1]

Consider with me that the individual existence is a rope which stretches from the infinite to the infinite, and has no end and no commencement, neither is it capable of being broken. This rope is formed of innumerable fine threads, which, lying closely together, form its thickness. . . . and remember that the threads are living--are like electric wires; more, are like quivering nerves. . . .

But eventually the long strands, the living threads which in their unbroken continuity form the individual, pass out of the shadow into the shine. . . .

This illustration presents but a small portion--a single side of the truth: it is less than a fragment. Yet dwell on it; by its aid you may be led to perceive more. What it is necessary first to understand is not that the future is formed by any separate acts of the present, but that the whole of the future is in unbroken continuity with the present, as the present is with the past. In the plane, from one point of view, the illustration of the rope is correct.

The passages quoted show us that the idea of karma, developed in remote antiquity by Hindu philosophy, embodies the idea of the unbroken consecutiveness of phenomena. Each phenomenon, no matter how insignificant, is a link of an infinite and unbroken chain,

[p. 152]

extending from the past into the future, passing from one sphere into another, sometimes manifesting as physical phenomena, sometimes hiding in the phenomena of consciousness.

If we regard karma from the standpoint of our theory of time and space of many dimensions, then the connection between distant events will cease to be wonderful and incomprehensible. If events most distant from one another in relation to time touch one another in the fourth dimension, this means that they are proceeding simultaneously as cause and effect, and the walls dividing them are just an illusion which our weak intellect cannot conquer. Things are united, not by time, but by an inner connection, an inner correlation. And time cannot separate those things which are inwardly near, following one from another. Certain other properties of these things force us to think of them as being separated by the ocean of time. But we know that this ocean does not exist in reality and we begin to understand how and why the events of one millennium can directly influence the events of another millennium.

The hidden activity of events becomes comprehensible to us. We understand that the events must become hidden in order to preserve for us the illusion of time.

We know this--know that the events of today were the ideas and feelings of yesterday--and that the events of tomorrow are lying in someone's irritation, in someone's hunger, in someone's suffering, and possibly still more in someone's imagination, in someone's fantasy, in someone's dreams.

We know all this, yet nevertheless our "positive" science obstinately seeks to establish correlations between visible phenomena only, i.e., to regard each visible or physical phenomenon as the effect of some other physical phenomenon only, which is also visible.

This tendency to regard everything upon one plane, the unwillingness to recognize anything outside of that plane, horribly narrows our view of life, prevents our grasping it in its entirety--and taken in conjunction with the materialistic attempts to account for the higher as a function of the lower, appears as the principal impediment to the development of our knowledge, the chief cause of the dissatisfaction with science, the complaints about the bankruptcy of science, and its actual bankruptcy in many of its relations.

The dissatisfaction with science is perfectly well grounded, and the complaints about its insolvency are entirely just, because science

[p. 153]

has really entered a cul de sac out of which there is no escape, and the official recognition of the fact that the direction it has taken is entirely the wrong one, is only a question of time.

_____

We may say--not as an assumption, but as an affirmation--that the world of physical phenomena in itself represents the section, as it were, of another world, existing right here, and the events of which are proceeding right here, but invisibly to us. There is nothing more miraculous or supernatural than life. Consider the street of a great city, in all its details. An enormous diversity of facts will result. But how much is hidden underneath these facts of that which it is impossible to see at all! What desires, passions, thoughts, greed, covetousness; how much of suffering both petty and great; how much of deceit, falsity; how much of lying; how many invisible threads-sympathies, antipathies, interests--bind this street with the entire world, with all the past and with all the future. If we realize this imaginatively, then it will become clear that it is impossible to study the street by that which is visible alone. It is necessary to plunge into the depths. The complex and enormous phenomena of the street will not reveal its infinite noumenon, which is bound up both with eternity and with time, with the past and with the future, and with the entire world.

Therefore we have a full right to regard the visible phenomenal world as a section of some other infinitely more complex world, manifesting itself at a given moment in the first one.

And this world of noumena is infinite and incomprehensible for us, just as the three-dimensional world, in all its manifoldness of function, is incomprehensible to the two-dimensional being. The nearest approach to "truth" which is possible for a man is contained in the saying: everything has an infinite variety of meanings, and to know them all is impossible. In other words, "truth," as we understand it, i.e., the finite definition, is possible only in a finite series of phenomena. In an infinite series it will certainly become its own opposite.

Hegel has given utterance to this last thought: "Every idea, extended into infinity, becomes its own opposite."

In this change of meaning is contained the cause of the incomprehensibility

[p. 154]

to man of the noumenal world. The substance of a thing, i.e., the thing-in-itself, contains an infinite quantity of meanings and functions of something which it is impossible to grasp with our mind. And in addition to this it involves a change of meaning of one and the same thing. In one meaning it represents an enormous whole, including within itself a great number of things; in another meaning it is an insignificant part of a great whole. Our mind cannot bind all this into one; therefore, the substance of a thing recedes from us according to the measure of our knowledge, just as a shadow flees before us. Light on the Path says:

"You will enter the light, but you will never touch the flame."

This means, that all knowledge is relative. We can never grasp all the meanings of any one thing, because in order to grasp them all, it is necessary for us to grasp the whole world, with all the variety of meanings contained in it.

The principal difference between the phenomenal and noumenal aspects of the world is contained in the fact that the first one is always limited, always finite; it includes those properties of a given thing which we can generally know as phenomena: the second, or noumenal aspect, is always unlimited, always infinite. And we can never say where the hidden functions and the hidden meanings of a given thing end. Properly speaking, they end nowhere. They may vary infinitely, i.e., may seem various, ever new from some new standpoint, but they cannot utterly vanish, any more than they can cease, come to an end.

All that is highest to which we shall come in the understanding of the meaning, the significance, of the soul of any phenomenon, will again have another meaning, from another, still higher standpoint, in still broader generalization--and there is no end to it! In this is the majesty and the horror of infinity.

______

Let us also remember that the world as we know it does not represent anything stable. It must change with the slightest change in the foams of our knowledge. Phenomena which appear to us as unrelated can be seen by some other more inclusive consciousness as parts of a single whole. Phenomena which appear to us as similar may reveal themselves as entirely different. Phenomena which appear

[p. 155]

to us as complete and indivisible, may be in reality exceedingly complex, may include within themselves different elements, having nothing in common. And all these together may be one whole in a category quite incomprehensible to us. Therefore, beyond our view of things another view is possible--a view, as it were, from another world, from "over there," from "the other side."

Now "over there" does not mean some other place, but a new method of knowledge, a new understanding. And should we regard phenomena not as isolated, but bound together with inter-crossing chains of things and events, we would begin to regard them not from over here, but from over there.

Footnotes

^151:1 Theosophical Publishing Co., London, 1912, pp. 96-98.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 156]

  

CHAPTER XIV

          The   voices of stones. The wall of a church and the wall of a prison. The mast of   a ship and a gallows. The shadow of a hangman and of an ascetic. The soul of   a hangman and of an ascetic. The different combinations of known phenomena in   higher space. The relationship of phenomena which appear unrelated, and the   difference between phenomena which appear similar. How shall we approach the   noumenal world? The understanding of things outside the categories of space   and time. The reality of many "figures of speech." The occult   understanding of energy. The letter of a Hindu occultist. Art as the   knowledge of the noumenal world. What we see and what we do not see. Plato's   dialogue about the cavern.

     
   IT seems to us that we see something and understand something. But in reality all that proceeds around us we sense only very confusedly, just as a snail senses confusedly the sunlight, the darkness, and the rain.

Sometimes in things we sense confusedly their difference in function, i.e., their real difference.

On one occasion I was crossing the Neva with one of my friends, A, with whom I happened to have had many conversations upon the themes touched on in this book. We had been talking, but both fell silent as we approached the fortress, gazing up at its walls and making probably the same reflection. "Right there are also factory chimneys!" said A. Behind the walls of the fortress indeed appeared some brick chimneys blackened by smoke.

On his saying this, I too sensed the difference between the chimneys and the prison walls with unusual clearness and like an electric shock. I realized the difference between the very bricks themselves, and it seemed to me that A realized this difference also.

Later in conversation with A, I recalled this episode, and he told me that not only then, but always, he sensed these differences and was deeply convinced of their reality. "Positivism assures itself that a stone is a stone and nothing more," he said, "but any

[p. 157]

simple woman or child knows perfectly that a stone from the wall of a church and one from a prison wall are different things."

It seems to me also, that in considering a given phenomenon in connection with all the chains of sequences of which it is a link, we shall see that the subjective sensation of the difference between two physically similar objects--which we are accustomed to think of only as poetic expression, metaphor, and the reality of which we deny--is entirely real; we shall see that these objects are really different, just as different as the candle and the coin which appear as similar circles (moving lines) in the two-dimensional world of the plane-man. We shall see that things of the same material constitution but different in their functions are really different, and that this difference goes so deep as to make different the very material which is physically the same. There are differences in stone, in wood, in iron, in paper, which no chemistry will ever detect: but these differences exist, and there are men who feel and understand them.

The mast of a ship, a gallows, a crucifix at a cross-roads on the steppes--these may be made of the same kind of wood, but in reality they are different objects made of different material. That which we see, touch, investigate, is nothing more than "the circles on the plane" made by the coin and the candle. They are only the shadows of real things, the substance of which is contained in their function. The shadow of a sailor, of a hangman, and of an ascetic may be quite similar--it is impossible to distinguish them by their shadows, just as it is impossible to find any difference between the wood of a mast, of a gallows and of a cross by chemical analysis. But they are different men and different objects--their shadows only are equal and similar.

And if we take men as we know them--the sailor, the hang-man, the ascetic: men who seem to us similar and equal--and consider them from the standpoint of their differences in function, we shall see that in reality they are entirely different and that there is nothing in common between them. They are quite different beings, belonging to different categories, to different planes of the world between which there are no bridges, no avenues at all. These men seem to us equal and similar because in most cases we see only the shadows of real facts. The "souls" of these men are actually quite different, different not only in their quality, their

[p. 158]

magnitude, their "age," as some people like now to put it, but as different in the very nature, origin and purpose of their existence as things belonging to entirely different categories can be.

When we shall begin to understand this, the general concept man will take on a different meaning.

And this relation holds in the observation of all phenomena. The mast, the gallows, the cross--these are things belonging to such different categories, the atoms of such different objects (known only by their functions), that there cannot be a question of any similarity at all. Our misfortune consists in the fact that we regard the chemical constitution of a thing as its most real attribute, while as a matter of fact its true attributes must be sought for in its functions. Could we broaden and deepen our vision of the chains of causation the links of which are forged by our action and our conduct; could we learn to see them not only in their narrow relation to the life of man--to our personal life--but in their broad cosmical meaning; could we succeed in finding and establishing a connection between the simple phenomena of our life and the life of the cosmos; then without doubt in these "simplest" phenomena would be unveiled for us an infinity of the new and the unexpected.

For example, in this way we may come to know something entirely new about those simple physical phenomena which we are accustomed to regard as natural and obvious and about which we think we know something. Then, unexpectedly, we may find that we know nothing, that everything heretofore known about them is only an incorrect deduction from incorrect premises. There may be revealed to us something infinitely great and immeasurably important in such phenomena as the expansion and contraction of solids, electrical phenomena, heat, light, sound, the movements of the planets, the coming of day and of night, the change of seasons, a thunderstorm, heat-lightning, etc., etc. Generally speaking, we may find explained in the most unexpected manner the properties of phenomena which we used to accept as given things, as not containing anything within themselves that we could not see and understand.

The constancy, the time, the periodicity or unperiodicity of phenomena may take on quite a new meaning and significance

[p. 159]

for us. The new and the unexpected may reveal itself in the transition of some phenomena into others. Birth, death, the life of a man, his relations with other men; love, enmity, sympathies, antipathies, desires, passions--these may unexpectedly receive illumination by an entirely new light. It is impossible now to imagine the nature of this newness which we shall sense in familiar things, and once felt it will be difficult to understand.

But it is really only our inaptitude to feel and understand this "newness" which divides us from it, because we are living in it and amidst it. Our senses, however, are too primitive, our concepts are too crude, for that fine differentiation of phenomena which must unfold itself to us in higher space. Our minds, our powers of correlation and association are insufficiently elastic for the grasping of new relations. Therefore, the first emotion at the rising of the curtain on "that world"--i.e., this our world, but free of those limitations under which we usually regard it--must be of wonderment, and this wonderment must grow greater and greater according to our better acquaintance with it. And the better we know a certain thing or a certain relation of things--the nearer, the more familiar they are to us--the greater will be our wonder at the new and the unexpected therein revealed.

Desiring to understand the noumenal world we must search for the hidden meaning in everything. At present we are too heavily enchained by the habit of the positivistic method of searching always for the visible cause and the visible effect. Under this weight of positivistic habit it is extremely difficult for us to comprehend certain ideas. Among other things we have difficulty in understanding the reality of the difference in the noumenal world between objects of our world which are similar, but different in function.

But if we desire to approach to an understanding of the noumenal world, we must try with all our might to notice all those seeming, "subjective" differences between objects which astonish us sometimes, of which we are often painfully aware--those differences expressed in the symbols and metaphors of art which are often revelations of the world of reality. Such differences are the realities of the noumenal world, far more real than all maya (illusion) of our phenomena.

We should endeavor to notice these realities and to develop

[p. 160]

within ourselves the ability to feel them, because exactly in this manner and only by such a method do we put ourselves in contact with the noumenal world or the world of causes.

______

I find an interesting example of the understanding of the hidden meaning of phenomena contained in The Occult World in the letter of a Hindu occultist to the author of the book, A. P. Sinnett.

We see a vast difference between the two qualities of two equal amounts of energy expended by two men, of whom one, let us suppose, is on his way to his daily quiet work, and another on his way to denounce a fellow creature at the police station, while the men of science see none; and we--not they--see a specific difference between the energy in the motion of the wind and that of a revolving wheel.

Every thought of man upon being evolved passes into the inner world, and becomes an active entity by associating itself, coalescing we might term it, with an elemental--that is to say, with one of the semi-intelligent forces of the kingdom.

If we ignore the last part of this quotation for the moment, and consider only the first part, we shall easily see that the "man of science" does not recognize the difference in the quality of the energy spent by two men going, one to his work, and another to denounce someone. For the man of science this difference is negligible: science does not sense it and does not recognize it. But perhaps the difference is much deeper and consists not in the difference between modes of energy but in the difference between men, one of whom is able to develop energy of one sort and another that of a different sort. Now we have a form of knowledge which senses this difference perfectly, knows and understands it. I am speaking of art. The musician, the painter, the sculptor well understand that it is possible to walk differently--and even impossible not to walk differently: a workman and a spy cannot walk alike.

Better than all the actor understands this, or at least he should understand it better.

The poet understands that the mast of a ship, the gallows, and the cross are made of different wood. He understands the difference

[p. 161]

between the stone from a church wall and the stone from a prison wall. He hears "the voices of stones," understands the whisperings of ancient walls, of tumuli, of mountains, rivers, woods and plains. He hears "the voice of the silence," understands the psychological difference between silences, knows that one silence can differ from another. And this poetical understanding of the world should be developed, strengthened and fortified, because only by its aid do we come in contact with the true world of reality. In the real world, behind phenomena which appear to us similar, often stand noumena so different that only by our blindness is it possible to account for our idea of the similarity of those phenomena.

Through such a false idea the current belief in the similarity and equality of men must have arisen. In reality the difference between a "hangman," a "sailor," and an "ascetic" is not an accidental difference of position, state and heredity, as material-ism tries to assure us; nor is it a difference between the stages of one and the same evolution, as theosophy affirms; but it is a deep and IMPASSABLE difference--such as exists between murder, work and prayer--involving entirely different worlds. The representatives of these worlds may seem to us to be similar MEN, only because we see, not them, but their shadows only.

It is necessary to accustom oneself to the thought that this difference is not metaphysical but entirely real, more real than many visible differences between things and between phenomena.

All art, in essence, consists of the understanding and representation of these elusive differences. The phenomenal world is merely a means for the artist--just as colors are for the painter, and sounds for the musician--a means for the understanding of the noumenal world and for the expression of that understanding. At the present stage of our development we possess nothing so powerful, as an instrument of knowledge of the world of causes, as art. The mystery of life dwells in the fact that the noumenon, i.e., the hidden meaning and the hidden function of a thing, is reflected in its phenomenon. A phenomenon is merely the reflection of a noumenon in our sphere. THE PHENOMENON IS THE IMAGE OF THE NOUMENON. It is possible to know the noumenon by the phenomenon. But in this field the chemical reagents and spectroscopes can accomplish nothing. Only that fine apparatus which is called the soul of an artist can understand and feel the reflection of the

[p. 162]

noumenon in the phenomenon. In art it is necessary to study "occultism"--the hidden side of life. The artist must be a clairvoyant: he must see that which others do not see; he must be a magician: must possess the power to make others see that which they do not themselves see, but which he does see.

Art sees more and farther than we do. As was said before, we usually see nothing, we merely feel our way; therefore we do not notice those differences between things which cannot be expressed in terms of chemistry or physics. But art is the beginning of vision; it sees vastly more than the most perfect apparatus can discover; and it senses the infinite invisible facets of that crystal, one facet of which we call man.

The truth is that this earth is the scene of a drama of which we only perceive scattered portions, and in which the greater number of the actors are invisible to us.

Thus says the theosophical writer, Mabel Collins, the author of Light on the Path, in a little book, Illusions. And this is very true: we see only a little.

But art sees farther than merely human sight, and therefore concerning certain sides of life art alone can speak, and has the right to speak.

_______

A remarkable attempt to portray our relation to the "noumenal world"--to that "great life"--is found in Book VII of Plato's Republic. [*1]

Behold! human beings living in a sort of underground den; they have been there from their childhood, and have their legs and necks chained--the chains are arranged in such a manner as to prevent them from turning round their heads. At a distance above and behind them the light of a fire is blazing, and between the fire and the prisoners there is a raised way; and you will see, if you look, a low wall built along the way, like the screen which marionette players have before them, over which they show the puppets. Imagine men passing along the wall carrying vessels, which appear over the wall; also figures of men and animals, made of wood

[p. 163]

and stone and various materials; and some of the passengers, as you would expect, are talking, and some of them are silent!

That is a strange image, he said, and they are strange prisoners.

Like ourselves, I replied; and they see only their own shadows, or the shadows of one another, which the fire throws on the opposite wall of the cave?

True, he said; how could they see anything but the shadows if they were never allowed to move their heads?

And of the objects which are being carried in like manner they would only see the shadows?

Yes, he said.

And if they were able to talk with one another, would they not suppose that they were naming what was actually before them?

Very true.

And suppose further that the prison had, an echo which came from the other side, would they not be sure to fancy that the voice which they heard was that of a passing shadow?

No question, he replied.

There can be no question, I said, that the truth would be to them just nothing but the shadows of the images.

That is certain.

And now look again and see how they are released and cured of their folly. At first, when any one of them is liberated and compelled suddenly to go up and turn his neck around and walk and look at the light, he will suffer sharp pains; the glare will distress him and he will be unable to see the realities of which in his former state he had seen the shadows; and then imagine someone saying to him, that what he saw before was an illusion, but that now he is approaching real being and has a truer sight and vision of more real things,--what will be his reply? And you may further imagine that his instructor is pointing to the objects as they pass and requiring him to name them,--will he not be in a difficulty? Will he not fancy that the shadows which he formerly saw are truer than the objects which are now shown to him?

Far truer.

And if he is compelled to look at the light, will he not have a pain in his eyes which will make him turn away to take refuge in the object of vision which he can see, and which he will conceive to be clearer than the things which are now being shown to him?

True, he said.

And suppose once more, that he is reluctantly dragged up a steep and rugged ascent, and held fast and forced into the presence of the sun himself, do you not think that he will be pained and irritated, and when he approaches the light he will have his eyes dazzled, and will not be able to see any of the realities which are now affirmed to be the truth?

Not all in a moment, he said.

[p. 164]

He will require to get accustomed to the sight of the upper world. And first he will see the shadows best, next the reflections of men and other objects in the water, and then the objects themselves; next he will gaze upon the light of the moon and the stars; and he will see the sky and the stars by night, better than the sun, or the light of the sun, by day?

Certainly.

And at last he will be able to see the sun, and not mere reflections of him in the water, but he will see him as he is in his own proper place, and not in another, and he will contemplate his nature.

Certainly.

And after this he will reason that the sun is he who gives the seasons and the years, and is the guardian of all that is in the visible world, and in a certain way the cause of all things which he and his fellows have been accustomed to behold?

Clearly, he said, he would come to the other first and to this afterwards.

And when he remembered his old habitation, and the wisdom of the den and his fellow-prisoners, do you not suppose that he would felicitate himself on the change, and pity them?

Certainly, he would.

And if they were in the habit of conferring honors on those who were quickest to observe and remember and foretell which of the shadows went before, and which followed after, and which were together, do you think that he would care for such honors and glories, or envy the possessors of them?

Would he not say with Homer,--

"Better to be a poor man, and have a poor master," and endure anything, than to think and live after their manner?

Yes, he said, I think that he would rather suffer anything than live after their manner.

Imagine once more, I said, that such an one coming suddenly out of the sun were to be replaced in his old situation, is he not certain to have his eyes full of darkness?

Very true, he said.

And if there were a contest, and he had to compete in measuring the shadows with the prisoners who have never moved out of the den, during the time that his sight is weak, and before his eyes are steady (and the time which would be needed to acquire this new habit of sight might be very considerable), would he not be ridiculous? Men would say of him that up he went and down he comes without his eyes; and that there was no use in even thinking of ascending: and if anyone tried to loose another and lead him up to the light, let them only catch the offender in the act, and they would put him to death.

No question, he said.

This allegory, I said, you may now append to the previous argument; the prison is the world of sight, the light of the fire is the sun, the ascent

[p. 165]

and vision of the things above you may truly regard as the upward progress of the soul into the intellectual world.

And you will understand that those who attain to this beatific vision are unwilling to descend to human affairs; but their souls are ever hastening into the upper world in which they desire to dwell. And is there anything surprising in one who passes from divine contemplations to human things, misbehaving himself in a ridiculous manner.

There is nothing surprising in that, he replied.

Any one who has common sense will remember that the bewilderments of the eyes are of two kinds, and arise from two causes, either from coming out of the light or from going into the light, which is true of the mind's eye, quite as much as of the bodily eye; and he who remembers this when he sees the soul of any one whose vision is perplexed and weak, will not be too ready to laugh; he will first ask whether that soul has come out of the brighter life, and is unable to see because unaccustomed to the dark, or having turned from darkness to the day is dazzled by excess of light. And then he will count one happy in his condition and state of being.

Footnotes

^162:1 "The Dialogues of Plato," Transl. by B. Jowett, Vol. II, pp. 341-345, Chas. Scribner's Sons, N. Y. 1911.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 166]

  

CHAPTER XV

          Occultism   and love. Love and death. Our different relations to the problems of death   and to the problems of love. What is lacking in our understanding of love?   Love as an every-day and merely psychological phenomenon. The possibility of   a spiritual understanding of love. The creative force of love. The negation   of love. Love and mysticism. The "wondrous" in love. Nietzsche,   Edward Carpenter and Schopenhauer on love. "The Ocean of Sex."

     
   THERE is not a single side of life which is not capable of revealing to us an infinity of the new and the unexpected, if we approach it with the knowledge that it is not exhausted by its visibility, that beyond this visibility there is a whole "invisible world"--a world of to us new and incomprehensible forces and relations. The knowledge of the existence of this invisible world: this is the first key to it.

A wealth of "newness" unfolds to us in the most mysterious sides of our existence, in those sides through which we come into direct contact with eternity--in love and in death. In Hindu mythology love and death are the two faces of one deity. Siva, god of the creative force of nature, is at the same time the god of violent death, of murder and destruction. His wife is Parvati, goddess of beauty, love and happiness, and she is also Kali or Durga--goddess of evil, of misfortune, of sickness and of death. Together Siva and Kali are the gods of wisdom, the gods of the knowledge of good and evil.

In the beginning of his book, The Drama of Love and Death, [*1] Edward Carpenter very well defines our relation to these deeply incomprehensible and enigmatical sides of existence:

Love and death move through this world of ours like things apart--underrunning it truly, and everywhere present, yet seeming to belong to some other mode of existence.

[p. 167]

And further:

These figures, Love and Death, move through the world like closest friends indeed, never far separate, and together dominating it in a kind of triumphant superiority; and yet like bitterest enemies, dogging each other's footsteps, undoing each other's work, fighting for the bodies and souls of mankind.

In these few words is shown the contents of the enigma which confronts us, encompasses us, creates and annihilates us. But man's relation to the two aspects of this enigma is not identical. Strange as it may seem, the face of death has ever been more attractive to the mystical imagination of men than the face of love. There have always been many attempts to understand and define the hidden meaning of death; all religions, all religious doctrines begin with giving to man this or that idea about death. It is impossible to construct any system of world-contemplation without some definition of death; and there are numerous systems such as contemporary spiritism which consist almost entirely of "views upon death," of doctrines about death and post-mortem existence. (In one of his articles, V. V. Rosanoff [*1] observes that all religions consist in substance of teachings about death.)

But the problem of love, in the contemporary way of looking at the world, is regarded as something given, as something already understood and known. Different systems contribute little that is enlightening to an understanding of love. So although in reality love is for us the same enigma as is death, yet for some strange reason we think about it less. We seem to have developed certain cut and dried standards in regard to an understanding of love, and men thoughtlessly accept this or that standard. Art. which from its very nature should have much to say on this subject, gives a great deal of attention to love; love ever has been, and perhaps still is, the principal theme of art. But even art chiefly confines itself merely to descriptions and to the psychological analysis of love, seldom touching those infinite and eternal depths which love contains for man.

In reality love is a cosmic phenomenon, in which men, humanity, are merely accidents: a cosmic phenomenon which has nothing to do with either the lives or the souls of men, any more than because

[p. 168]

the sun is shining, by its light men may go about their little affairs, and may utilize it for their own purposes. If men would only understand this, even with a part of their consciousness, a new world would open, and to look on life from all our usual angles would become very strange.

For then they would understand that love is something else, and of quite a different order from the petty phenomena of earthly life.

Perhaps love is a world of strange spirits who at times take up their abode in men, subduing them to themselves, making them tools for the accomplishment of their inscrutable purposes. Perhaps it is some particular region of the inner world wherein the souls of men sometimes enter, and where they live according to the laws of that world, while their bodies remain on earth, bound by the laws of earth. Perhaps it is an alchemical work of some Great Master wherein the souls and bodies of men play the role of elements out of which is compounded a philosopher's stone, or an elixir of life, or some mysterious magnetic force necessary to someone for some incomprehensible purpose.

Love in relation to our life is a deity, sometimes terrible, sometimes benevolent, but never subservient to us, never consenting to serve our purposes. Men strive to subordinate love to themselves, to warp it to the uses of their every-day mode of life, and to their souls' uses; but it is impossible to subordinate love to anything, and it mercilessly revenges itself upon those little mortals who would subordinate God to themselves and make Him serve them. It confuses all their calculations, and forces them to do things which confound themselves, forcing them to serve itself, to do what it wants.

Mistaken about the origin of love, men are mistaken about its result. Positivistic and spiritistic morality equally recognize in love only one possible result--children, the propagation of the species. But this objective result, which may or may not be, is in any case an effect of the outer, objective side of love, of the material fact of impregnation. If it is possible to see in love nothing more than this material fact and the desire for it, so be it; but in reality love consists not at all in a material fact, and the results of it--except material ones--may manifest themselves on quite another plane. This other plane, upon which love acts, and the

[p. 169]

ignored, hidden results of love, are not difficult to understand, even from the strictly positivistic, scientific standpoint.

To science, which studies life from this side, the purpose of love is the continuation of life. More exactly, love is a link in the chain of facts supporting the continuation of life. The force which attracts the two sexes to each other is acting in the interests of the continuation of the species, and is accordingly created by the forms of the continuation of the species. But if we regard love in this way, then it is impossible not to recognize that there is much more of this force than is necessary. Herein lies the key to the correct understanding of the true nature of love. There is more of this force than is necessary, infinitely more. In reality only an infinitesimal part of love's force incarnate in humanity is utilized for the purpose of the continuation of the species. But where does the major part of that force go?

We know that nothing can be lost. If energy exists, then it must transform itself into something. Now if a merely negligible percentage of energy goes into the creation of the future by begetting, then the remainder must go into the creation of the future also, but in another way. We have in the physical world many cases in which the direct function is effected by a very small percentage of the consumed energy, and the greater part is spent without return, as it were. But of course this greater part of energy does not disappear, is not wasted, but accomplishes other results quite different from the direct function.

Take the example of a common candle. It gives light, but it also gives considerably more heat than light. Light is the direct function of a candle, heat the indirect, but we get more heat than light. A candle is a furnace adapted to the purpose of lighting. In order to give light a candle must burn. Combustion is a necessary condition for the receiving of light from a candle; it is impossible to ignore this combustion; but the same combustion gives heat. At first thought it appears that the heat from a candle is spent unproductively; sometimes it is superfluous, unpleasant, annoying; if a room is lighted by candles it will soon grow excessively hot. But the fact remains that light is received from a candle only because of combustion--by the development of heat and the incandescence of volatilized gases.

[p. 170]

The same thing is true in the case of love. We may say that a merely  part of love's energy goes into posterity; the greater part is spent by the fathers and mothers on their personal emotions as it were. But this also is necessary. Without this expenditure the principal thing could not be achieved. Only because of these at first sight collateral results of love, only because of all this tempest of emotions, feelings, effervescences, desires, thoughts, dreams, fantasies, inner creations; only because of the beauty which it creates, can love fulfil its immediate function.

Moreover--and this perhaps is the most important--the superfluous energy is not wasted at all, but is transformed into other forms of energy, possible to discover. Generally speaking, the significance of the indirect results may very often be of more importance than the significance of direct ones. And since we are able to trace how the energy of love transforms itself into instincts, ideas, creative forces on different planes of life; into symbols of art, song, music, poetry; so can we easily imagine how the same energy may transform itself into a higher order of intuition, into a higher consciousness which will reveal to us a marvelous and mysterious world.

In all living nature (and perhaps also in that which we consider as dead) love is the motive force which drives the creative activity in the most diverse directions.

In springtime with the first awakening of love's emotions the birds begin to sing, and build nests.

Of course a positivist would strive to explain all this very simply: singing acts as an attraction between the females and the males, and so forth. But even a positivist will not be in a position to deny that there is a good deal more of this singing than is necessary for "the continuation of the species." For a positivist, indeed, "singing" is merely "an accident," a "by-product." But in reality it may be that this singing is the principal function of a given species, the realization of its existence, the purpose pursued by nature in creating this species; and that this singing is necessary, not so much to attract the females, as for some general harmony of nature which we only rarely and imperfectly sense.

Thus in this case we observe that what appears to be a collateral

[p. 171]

function of love, from the standpoint of the individual, may serve as a principal function of the species.

Furthermore, there are no fledglings as yet: there is even no intimation of them, but "homes" are prepared for them nevertheless. Love inspires this orgy of activity, and instinct directs it, because it is expedient from the standpoint of the species. At the first awakening of love this work begins. One and the same desire creates a new generation and those conditions under which this new generation will live. One and the same desire urges forward creative activity in all directions, brings the pairs together for the birth of a new generation, and makes them build and create for this same future generation.

We observe the same thing in the world of men: there too love is the creative force. And the creative activity of love does not manifest itself in one direction only, but in many ways. It is indeed probable that by the spur of love, Eros, humanity is aroused to the fulfilment of its principal function, of which we know nothing, but only at times by glimpses hazily perceive.

But even without reference to the purpose of the existence of humanity, within the limits of the knowable we must recognize that all the creative activity of humanity results from love. Our entire world revolves around love as its centre.

Love unfolds in a human being traits of his which he never knew in himself. In love there is much both of the Stone Age and of the Witches' Sabbath. By anything less than love many men cannot be induced to commit a crime, to be guilty of a treason, to reanimate in themselves such feelings as they thought to have killed out long ago. In love is hidden an infinity of egoism, vanity and selfishness. Love is the potent force that tears off all masks, and men who run away from love do so in order that they may preserve their masks.

If creation, the birth of ideas, is the light which comes from love, then this light comes from a great fire. In this eternally burning fire in which humanity and all the world are being incessantly purified, all the forces of the human spirit and of genius are being evolved and refined; and perhaps indeed, from this same fire or by its aid a new force will arise which shall deliver from the chains of matter all who follow where it leads.

[p. 172]

Speaking not figuratively, but literally, it may be said that love, being the most powerful of all emotions, unveils in the soul of man all its qualities patent and latent; and it may also unfold those new potencies which even now constitute the object of occultism and mysticism--the development of powers in the human soul so deeply hidden that by the majority of men their very existence is denied. [*1]

In the majority of cases love, as it exists in modern life, has become a trifling away of feelings, of sensations. It is difficult, in the conditions which govern life in the world, to imagine such a love as will not interfere with mystical aspirations. Temples of love and the mystical celebration of love's mysteries exist in reality no longer: there is the "every-day manner of life," and psychological labyrinths from which those who rise a little above the ordinary level can only desire to run away.

For this reason certain fine forms of asceticism are developing quite naturally. This asceticism does not slander love, does not blaspheme against it, does not try to convince itself that love is an abomination from which it is necessary to run away. It is Platonism rather than asceticism. It recognizes that love is the sun, but often does not see its way to live in the sunlight, and so considers it better not to see the sun at all, to divine it in the soul only, rather than receive its light through darkened or smoked glasses.

In general, however, love represents for men too great an enigma; and often the denial of love and asceticism take on strange and unnatural forms, even with persons who are quite sincere, but unable to understand the great mystical aspect of love. When one encounters these perversions of love, one involuntarily calls to mind the words of Zarathustra: [*2]

Voluptuousness: unto all hair-shirted despisers of the body, a string

[p. 173]

and stake; and cursed as "the world" by all backworldsmen: for it mocketh and befooleth all erring, misinferring teachers.

Voluptuousness: to the rabble the slow fire at which it is burnt: to all wormy wood, to all stinking rags, the prepared heat and stew furnace.

Voluptuousness: to free hearts, a thing innocent and free, the garden-happiness of the earth, all the future's thanks-overflow to the present.

Voluptuousness: only to the withered a sweet poison: to the lion-willed, however, the great cordial, and the reverently saved wine of wines.

Voluptuousness: the great symbolic happiness of a higher happiness and highest hope. For to many is marriage promised and more than marriage--to many that are more unknown to each other than man and woman--and who hath fully understood how unknown to each other are man and woman.

______

I have dwelt so long on the subject of the understanding of love because it has the most vital significance; because to the majority of men, approaching the threshold of the great mystery, much is closed or opened to them in this way, and because for many this question represents the greatest obstacle.

In love the most important element is that which is not, which absolutely does not exist from the usual worldly, materialistic point of view.

In this sensing of that which is not, and in the contact through it with the world of the wondrous, i.e., truly real, consists the principal element of love in human life.

It is a well-known psychological fact that in moments of powerful emotion, of great joy or great suffering, everything happening round about a man seems to him unreal--a dream. This is the beginning of the soul's awakening. When a man in a dream begins to be conscious of the fact that he is asleep and that what he sees is a dream, then he is waking up; so also the soul, beginning to be conscious of the fact that all visible life is a dream, approaches its awakening. And the more powerful, the brighter the inner emotions are, so much the more quickly will the moment of consciousness of the unreality of life come.

It is very interesting to consider love and men's relation to love in the light of that method and those analogies which we have already applied to the comparative study of different dimensions.

Again it is necessary to imagine a world of plane beings, observing phenomena entering their plane from another unknowable

[p. 174]

world (such as the change of the color of lines on a plane, in reality depending upon the rotation through the plane of a wheel with many-coloured spokes). The plane beings believe that the phenomena arise within the limits of their plane, from causes also belonging to the same plane, and that they are finished there. Also, all similar phenomena are to them identical, such as two circles which in reality belong to two entirely different objects.

On this foundation they erect their science and their morality. Yet if they would decide to discard their "two-dimensional" psychology and try to understand the true substance of these phenomena, then with the aid and by means of these phenomena they could sever their connection with their plane, arise, fly up above it, and discover a great unknown world.

The question of love holds exactly the same place in our life.

Only he who can see considerably beyond the facts discerns love's real meaning; and it is possible to illumine these very facts by the light of that which lies behind them.

And he who is able to see beyond the "facts" begins to discern much of "newness" in love and through love.

I shall quote in this connection a poem in prose by Edward Carpenter, from the book Towards Democracy.

  

THE OCEAN OF SEX

To hold in continence the great sea, the great ocean of Sex, within one,
 With flux and reflux pressing on the bounds of the body, the beloved genitals,
 Vibrating, swaying emotional to the star-glint of the eyes of all human beings,
 Reflecting Heaven and all Creatures,
 How wonderful!

Scarcely a figure, male or female, approaches, but a tremor travels across it.
 As when on the cliff which bounds the edge of a pond someone moves, then in the bowels of the water also there is a mirrored movement,
 So on the edge of this Ocean.
 The glory of the human form, even faintly outlined under the trees or by the shore, convulses it with far reminiscences;
 (Yet strong and solid the sea-banks, not lightly overpassed);
 Till maybe to the touch, to the approach, to the incantation of the eyes of one, [p. 175]
 It bursts forth, uncontrollable.
 O wonderful ocean of Sex,

Ocean of millions and millions of tiny seed-like human forms contained (if they be truly contained) within each person,
 Mirror of the very universe,
 Sacred temple and innermost shrine of each body, Ocean-river flowing ever on through the great trunk and branches of Humanity,
 From which after all the individual only springs like a leaf-bud!
 Ocean which we so wonderfully contain (if indeed we do not contain thee), and yet who containest us!
 Sometimes when I feel and know thee within, and identify myself with thee,
 Do I understand that I also am of the dateless brood of Heaven and Eternity.

Returning to that from which I started, the relation between the fundamental laws of our existence, love and death, the true mutual correlation of which remains enigmatical and incomprehensible to us, I shall merely recall Schopenhauer's words with which he ends his Counsels and Maxims.

I should point out how Beginning and End meet together, and how closely and intimately Eros is connected with Death; how Orcus, or Amenthes, as the Egyptians called him, is not only the receiver but the giver of all things . . . Death is the great reservoir of Life. Everything comes from Orcus--everything that is alive now and was once there. Could we but understand the great trick by which that is done, all the world would be clear. [*1]

Footnotes

^166:1 Mitchell Kennerly, 1912, New York and London.

^167:1 A Russian journalist and author. Transl.

^172:1 In the first Russian edition of this book, in those sketches which took the place of the present chapter, among other things I made the attempt to classify love, and to differentiate between "love" (individualized feeling) and "sexual emotion" (not individualized and undiscriminating in its longing for the satisfaction of the purely physical desire). But it seems to me now that this division, like all similar divisions, is unsatisfactory. The difference is not in facts but in men.

On earth there are living two entirely different races of men; and the difficulty of making psychological distinctions depends, in great measure, upon the fact that we endeavor to impose on all men common characteristics which they do not possess.

^172:2 F. Nietzsche: "Thus spake Zarathustra." (Boni and Liveright New York), pp. 195, 196.

^175:1 Transl. by T. B. Saunders, M. A. Macmillan Co., New York.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 176]

  

CHAPTER XVI

          The   phenomenal and the noumenal side of man. "Man-in-himself." How do we   know the inner side of man? Can we know of the existence of consciousness in   conditions of space not analogous to ours? Brain and consciousness. Unity of   the world. Logical impossibility of the simultaneous existence of spirit and   matter. Either all spirit or all matter. Rational and irrational actions in   nature and in the life of man. Can rational actions exist alongside   irrational? The world as an accidentally self-created mechanical toy. The   impossibility of reason in a mechanical universe. The irreconcilability of   mechanicalness with the existence of reason. Kant concerning   "hosts." Spinoza on the knowledge of the invisible world. Necessity   for the intellectual definition of that which can be, and that which cannot   be, in the world of the hidden.

     
   WE know what man is only imperfectly; our conceptions regarding him are extremely fallacious and easily create new illusions. First of all, we are inclined to regard man as a certain unity, and to regard the different parts and functions of man as being bound together, and dependent upon one another. Moreover, in the physical apparatus, in man visible, we see the cause of all his properties and actions. In reality, man is a very complicated something, and complicated in various meanings of the word. Many sides of the life of a man are not bound together among themselves at all, or are bound only by the fact that they belong to one man; but the life of man goes on simultaneously on different planes, as it were, while the phenomena of one plane only at times and partially touch those of another, and may not themselves touch at all. And the relations of the same man to the various sides of himself and to other men are entirely dissimilar.

Man includes within himself all three of the above-mentioned orders of phenomena, i.e., he represents in himself the combination of physical phenomena with those of life and psychic phenomena. And the mutual relations between these three orders of phenomena are infinitely more complex than we are accustomed to think. Psychic phenomena we feel, sense and are conscious of in ourselves;

[p. 177]

physical phenomena and the phenomena of life we observe and make conclusions about on the basis of experience. We do not sense the psychic phenomena of others, i.e., the thoughts, feelings and desires of another man; but the fact that they exist in him we conclude from what he says, and by analogy with ourselves. We know that in ourselves certain actions, certain thoughts, and feelings proceed, and when we observe the same actions in another man, we conclude that he has thought and felt like us. Analogy with ourselves--this is our sole criterion and method of reasoning and drawing conclusions about the psychic life in other men if we cannot communicate with them, or do not wish to believe in what they tell us about themselves.

Suppose that I should live among men without the possibility of communicating with them and having no way to make conclusions based upon analogy; in that case I should be surrounded by moving and acting automatons, the cause, purpose and meaning of whose actions would be perfectly incomprehensible to me. Perhaps I would explain their actions by "molecular motion," perhaps by the "influence of the planets," perhaps by "spiritism," i.e., by the influence of "spirits," possibly by "chance" or by a haphazard combination of causes--but in any case I should not and could not see the psychic life in the depth of these men's actions.

Concerning the existence of thought and feeling I can usually only conclude by analogy with myself. I know that certain phenomena are connected in me with my possession of thought and feeling. When I see the same phenomena in another man I conclude that he also possesses thought and feeling. But I cannot convince myself directly of the existence of psychic life in another man. Studying man from one side only I should stand in the same position in relation to him as, according to Kant, we stand with relation to the world surrounding us. We know merely the form of our knowledge of it. The world-in-itself we do not know.

Thus the psyche, with all its functions and with all its contents--I have two methods--analogy with myself, and intercourse with him by the exchange of thoughts. Without this, man is for me a phenomenon merely, a moving automaton.

The noumenon of a man is his psyche together with everything this psyche includes within itself and that with which it unites him.

In "man" are opened to us both worlds, though the noumenal

[p. 178]

world is open only slightly, because it is cognized by us through the phenomenal.

Noumenal means apprehended by the mind; and the characteristic property of the things of the noumenal world is that they cannot be comprehended by the same method by which the things of the phenomenal world are comprehended. We may speculate about the things of the noumenal world; we may discover them by a process of reasoning, and by means of analogy; we may feel them, and enter into some sort of communion with them; but we can neither see, hear, touch, weigh, measure them; nor can we photograph them or decompose them into chemical elements or number their vibrations.

Thus, the psyche, with all its functions and with all its contents--thoughts, feelings, desires, will--does not relate itself to the world of phenomena. We cannot know even a single element of the psyche objectively. Emotion as such is a thing which it is impossible to see, just as it is impossible to see the value of a coin. You can see the stamp upon a coin, but you will never see its value. It is just as impossible to photograph thought as it is to imagine "Egyptian darkness" in a vial. To think otherwise, to experiment with the photographing of thought, simply means to be unable to think logically. On a phonographic record are the tracings of the needle, elevations and depressions, but there is no sound. He who holds a phonographic record to his ear, hoping to hear something, will be sure to listen in vain.

______

Including within himself two worlds, the phenomenal and the noumenal, man gives us the opportunity to understand in what relation these worlds stand to one another everywhere throughout nature. It is necessary however to remember, that defining a noumenon in terms of the psyche, we take but one of its infinity of aspects.

We have already arrived at the conclusion that the noumenon of a thing consists in its function in another sphere--in its meaning which is incomprehensible in a given section of the world. [*1] Next

[p. 179]

we came to the conclusion that the number of meanings of one and the same thing in different sections of the world must be infinitely great and infinitely various, that it must become its own opposite, return again to the beginning (from our standpoint), etc., etc., infinitely expanding, contracting again, and so forth.

It is necessary to remember that the noumenon and the phenomenon are not different things, but merely different aspects of one  the same thing. Thus, each phenomenon is the finite expression, in the sphere of our knowledge through the organs of sense, of something infinite.

A phenomenon is the three-dimensional expression of a given noumenon.

This three-dimensionality depends upon the three-dimensional forms of our knowledge, i.e., speaking simply, upon our brains, nerves, eyes, and finger-tips.

______

In "man" we have found that one side of his noumenon is his psychic life, and that therefore in the psyche lies the beginning of the solution of the riddle of the functions and meanings of man which are incomprehensible from an outside point of view. What is the psyche of man if it is not his function--incomprehensible in the three-dimensional section of the world? Truly, if we shall study and observe man by all accessible means, objectively, from without, we shall never discover his psyche and shall never define the function of his consciousness. We must first of all become aware of the existence of our own psyche, and then either begin a conversation (by signs, gestures, words) with another man, begin to exchange thoughts with him, and from his answers deduce the conclusion that he possesses the same thing that we do--or come to the conclusion about it from external indications (actions similar to ours in similar circumstances). By the direct method of objective investigation, without the help of speech, or without the help of conclusions based upon analogy, we shall not discover the psyche in another man.

[p. 180]

[paragraph continues] That which is inaccessible to the direct method of investigation, but exists, is NOUMENAL. Consequently we shall not be in a position to define the functions and meanings of man in another section of the world than that world of Euclidian geometry, solely accessible to the "direct methods of investigation." Therefore we have a perfect right to regard "the psyche of man" as his function in some section of the world different from that three-dimensional section wherein "the body of man" functions.

Having established this much we may ask ourselves the question: Have we not the right to make a reverse conclusion, and regard as a psyche of its own kind the to us unknown function of the "world" and of "things" outside of their three-dimensional section?

______

Our usual positivistic view regards psychic life as a function of the brain. Without a brain we cannot imagine rationality.

Max Nordau, when he wanted to imagine the world's consciousness (in Paradoxes), was obliged to say that we cannot be certain that somewhere in the infinite space of the universe is not repeated on a grandiose scale the same combination of physical and chemical elements as constitutes our brains. This is very characteristic and typical of "positive science." Desiring to imagine the "world's consciousness" positivism is first of all forced to imagine a gigantic brain. Does not this at once savor of the two-dimensional or plane world? Surely the idea of a gigantic brain somewhere beyond the stars reveals the appalling poverty and impotence of positivistic thought. This thought cannot leave its usual grooves; it has no wings for a soaring flight.

Let us imagine that some curious inhabitant of Europe in the seventeenth century should try to foresee the means of transportation in the twentieth century, and should picture to himself an enormous stage-coach, large as an hotel, harnessed to one thousand horses; he would be pretty near to the truth, but also at the same time infinitely far from it. And yet even in his time some minds which foresaw along correct lines already existed: already the idea of the steam engine had been broached and models were appearing.

The thought expressed by Nordau reminds one of a favorite concept of popular philosophy relating to an accidentally caught

[p. 181]

idea, that the planets and satellites of the solar system are merely molecules of some tremendous organism, an insignificant part of which that system represents.

"Perhaps the entire universe is located on the tip of the little finger of some great being," says such a philosophizer, "and perhaps our molecules are also worlds." The deuce! Perhaps on my little finger there are several universes too! And such a philosophizer gets frightened. But all such reasonings are merely the gigantic stage-coach over again. [*1] This is the way a little girl thought, about whom I was reading, if I mistake not, in The Theosophical Review. The girl was sitting near the fireplace, and beside her slept a cat. "Well, the eat is sleeping," the girl reflected, "perhaps she sees in a dream that she is not a cat, but a little girl. And maybe I am not a little girl at all, but a cat, and only see in a dream that I am a little girl. . . ." The next moment the house resounds with a violent cry, and the parents of the little girl have a hard time to convince her that she is not a cat but really a little girl.

All this shows that it is necessary to philosophize with a certain amount of skill. Our thought is encompassed by many blind alleys, and positivism, always attempting to apply the rule of proportion, is in itself such a blind alley.

______

Our analysis of phenomena, the relation which we have shown to exist between physical phenomena and those of life and of the psyche, permits us to assert quite definitely that psychic phenomena cannot be a function of physical phenomena--or phenomena of a lower order. We established that the higher cannot be a function of the lower. And this division into higher and lower is also based upon the clear fact of the different potentialities of various orders of phenomena--of the different amount of latent force contained in them (or liberated by them). And of course we have the right to call those phenomena the higher which possess immeasurably greater potentiality, immeasurably more latent force; and to call those the lower which possess less potentiality, less latent force.

[p. 182]

The phenomena of life are the higher in comparison with physical phenomena.

Psychic phenomena are the higher, in comparison with the phenomena of life and physical phenomena.

Which must be the function of which is clear.

Without making a palpable logical mistake we cannot declare life and the psyche to be dependent functionally upon physical phenomena, i.e., to be a result of physical phenomena. The truth is quite the opposite of this: everything forces us to recognize physical phenomena as the result of life, and life (in a biological sense) as the result of some form of psychic life, which is perhaps unknown to us.

But of which life, and of which psyche? Here lies the question. Of course it would be absurd to regard our planetary sphere as a function of the vegetable and animal life proceeding upon it--and the visible stellar universe as a function of the human psyche. But nothing of this sort is meant. In the occult understanding of things we speak always of another life and another psyche, the particular manifestation of which is our life and our psyche. It is important to establish the general principle that physical phenomena, being the lower, depend upon the phenomena of life and of the psyche, which are higher.

If we admit this principle as established, then it is possible to proceed further.

The first question which arises is this: In what relation does the psychic life of man stand to his body and his brain?

This question has been answered differently in different times. Psychic life has been regarded as a direct function of the brain ("Thought is the motion of brain substance"), thus of course denying any possibility of thought without the existence of a brain. Then followed an attempt to establish a parallelism between psychic activity and the activity of the brain. But the nature of this parallelism has always remained obscure. Yes, evidently, the brain works parallel to thinking and feeling: an arrestment or a disorder of the activity of the brain brings as a consequence a visible arrestment or disorder of psychic activity. But after all the activity of the brain is merely motion, i.e., an objective phenomenon, whereas the activity of the psyche is a phenomenon objectively undefinable,

[p. 183]

and at the same time more powerful than anything objective. How shall we reconcile all this?

Let us endeavor to consider the activity of the brain and the activity of the psyche from the standpoint of the existence of those two data, the "world" and "consciousness," accepted by us at the very beginning.

If we consider the brain from the standpoint of consciousness, then the brain will be part of the "world," i.e., part of the outer world lying outside of consciousness. Therefore the psyche and the brain are different things. But the psyche, as experience and observation shows, can act only through the brain. The brain is that necessary prism, passing through which, part of the psyche manifests itself to us as intellect. Or to put it a little differently, the brain is a mirror, reflecting psychic life in our three-dimensional section of the world. This last means that in our three-dimensional section of the world not all of the psyche (the true dimensions of which we do not know) is acting, but only so much of it as can be reflected in a brain. It is clear that if the mirror be broken, then the image will be broken too, or if the mirror be injured or imperfect, then the reflection will be blurred or distorted. But there is absolutely no reason to believe that when the mirror is broken the object which it reflects is thereby destroyed, i.e., psychic life in the given case.

The psyche cannot suffer from any disorder of the brain, but the manifestations of it may suffer very much or may even disappear from the field of our observation altogether. Therefore it is clear that a disorder in the activity of the brain causes an enfeeblement or a distortion, or even a complete disappearance of the psychic faculties manifesting in our sphere.

The idea of the comparison between a three-dimensional body and a four-dimensional one enables us to affirm that not all the psychic activity goes through the brain, but a part of it only. [*1]

Each of us is in reality an abiding physical entity far more extensive than he knows--an individuality which can never express itself completely through any corporeal manifestation. The self manifests through the organism; but there is always some part of the self unmanifested. [*2]

[p. 184]

The "positivist" will remain unconvinced. He will say: prove to me that thought can act without a brain, then I will believe it.

I shall answer him by the question: WHAT, in the given case, will constitute a proof?

There are no proofs and there can not be any. The existence of the psyche without a brain (without a body), if that be possible, is for us a fact which cannot be proven like a physical fact.

And if my opponent will reason sincerely, then he will be convinced there can be no proof, because he himself has no means of being convinced of the existence of a psyche acting independently of a brain. Let us assume that the thought of a dead man (i.e., of a man whose brain has ceased to act) continues to function. How can we convince ourselves of this? By no possible means whatever. We have means of communication (speech, writing) with beings which are in conditions similar to our own--i.e., acting through brains; concerning the existence of the psyche of those same beings we can conclude by analogy with ourselves; but concerning the existence of the psychic life of other beings, whether they do or they do not exist is immaterial, we can not by ordinary means convince ourselves that they exist.

It is exactly this that gives us a key to the understanding of the true relation of psychic life to the brain. Our psyche being a reflection from the brain, we can observe only those reflections which are similar to itself. We have before established that we can make conclusions concerning the psychic life of other beings from the exchange of thoughts with them and from analogies with ourselves. Now we may add to this, that for this very reason we can know only about the existence of psychic lives similar to our own, and we cannot know any other at all, whether they exist or not, unless we ourselves enter their plane.

Should we ever realize our psychic life, not only as it is reflected from a brain, but in a condition more universal, simultaneously with this the possibility would open up of discovering beings with a psychic life independent of the brain analogical to ourselves, if such exist in nature.

[p. 185]

But do such beings exist or not? How can we gain information on this point with our thought such as it is now?

Observing the world from our standpoint, we perceive in it actions proceeding from rational conscious causes, such as the work of a man seems to us; and other actions proceeding from the unconscious blind forces of nature, such as the movement of waves, the ebbing and flowing of the tide, the descent of great rivers, etc., etc.

In such a division of observed actions into rational and mechanical there is something naive, even from the positivistic standpoint. For if we have learned anything from the study of nature, if the positivistic method has given us anything at all, then it is the assurance of the necessity for the uniformity of phenomena. We know, and with great certainty, that things basically similar cannot proceed from dissimilar causes. Our scientific philosophy knows this too. Therefore it also regards the foregoing division as naive, and conscious of the impossibility of such dualism--that one part of observed phenomena proceeds from rational and conscious causes and another part from unreasoned and unconscious ones--positivistic philosophy finds it possible to explain everything as proceeding from mechanical causes.

Scientific observation holds that the seeming rationality of human actions is an illusion and a self-deception. Man is a toy in the hands of elemental forces. He is merely a transforming station of forces. All that which as it seems to him, he is doing, is in reality done instead by external forces which enter him through air, food, sunlight. Man does not perform a single action by himself. He is merely a prism in which a line of action is refracted in a certain manner. But just as the beam of light does not proceed from the prism, so action does not proceed from the reason of man.

The "theoretical experiment" of certain German psycho-physiologists is usually advanced in confirmation of this. They affirmed that if it were possible, from the time of his birth, to deprive a man of ALL EXTERNAL IMPRESSIONS: light, sound, touch, heat, cold, etc., and at the same time preserve him alive, then such a man would not be able to perform EVEN THE MOST INSIGNIFICANT ACTION.

From this it follows that man is an automaton, like that automaton projected by the American inventor Tesla, which, obeying electric currents and vibrations coming from a great distance without

[p. 186]

wires, was calculated to execute a whole series of complicated movements.

It follows from this that all the actions of a man depend upon outer impulses. For the smallest reflex, outer irritation is necessary. For more complex action a whole series of preceding complex irritations is necessary. Sometimes between the irritation and the action a considerable time elapses, and a man does not feel any connection between the two. Therefore he regards his actions as voluntary, though in reality there are no voluntary actions at all--man cannot do anything by himself, just as a stone cannot jump voluntarily: it is necessary that something should throw it up. Man needs something to give him an impulse, and then he will develop exactly as much force as such an impulse (and all pre-ceding impulses) put into him and no trifle more. Such is the teaching of positivism.

From the STANDPOINT OF LOGIC such a theory is more correct than the theory of two classes of actions--REASONED AND UN-REASONED. It at least establishes the principle of NECESSARY UNIFORMITY. It is really impossible to suppose that in an immense machine certain parts move according to their own desire and reasoning; there must be something uniform--either all parts of the machine possess a consciousness of their function and act according to this consciousness, or all are worked from one motor and are driven by one transmission. The enormous service per-formed by positivism is that it established this principle of uniformity. It is left to us to define in what this uniformity consists.

The positivistic hypothesis of the world considers that the basis of everything is unconscious energy, which arose from unknown causes at a time that is not known. This energy, after it has passed through a whole series of invisible electro-magnetic and physico-chemical processes, is expressed for us in visible and sensed motion, then in growth, i.e., in the phenomena of life, and at last in psychic phenomena.

This view has been already investigated and the conclusion reached that it is impossible to regard physical phenomena as the cause of PSYCHIC PHENOMENA, while on the other hand, psychic phenomena serve as an undoubted cause for a great number of the physical phenomena observed by us. The observed process of

[p. 187]

origination of psychic phenomena under the influence of outside mechanical impulses does not at all mean that physical phenomena create psychic phenomena. Such do not constitute the cause, but are merely a shock, disturbing the balance. In order that outer shocks may evoke psychic phenomena an organism is necessary, i.e., a complex and animated life. The cause of psychic life lies in the organism, its animatedness, which can be defined as a potential of psychic life.

Then, from the very essence of the idea of motion--which is the foundation of the physico-mechanical world--was deduced the conclusion that motion is not an entirely obvious truth, that the idea of motion arose in us because of the limitation and in-completeness of our sense of space (a slit through which we observe the world). And it was established, not that the idea of time is deduced from the observation of motion, but that the idea of motion results from our "time-sense"--and that the idea of motion is quite definitely the function of the "time-sense," which in itself is a limit or boundary of the space-sense belonging to a being of a given psyche. It was also established that the idea of motion could arise out of a comparison between two different fields of consciousness. And in general, all analysis of the fundamental categories of our knowledge of the world--space and time--showed that we have absolutely no data whatever for accepting motion as the fundamental principle of the world.

And if this is so--if it is impossible to assume behind the scenes of the creation of the world the presence of an unconscious mechanical motor--then it is necessary to consider the world as living and rational. Because one or the other of two things must be true: either it is mechanical and dead--"accidental"--or it is living and animated. There can be nothing dead in living nature and there can be nothing living in dead nature.

Nature exhibits a continual progress, starting from the mechanical and chemical activity of the inorganic world, proceeding to the vegetable, with its dull enjoyment of self, from that to the animal world, where intelligence and consciousness began at first very weak, and only after many intermediate stages attaining its last great development in man, whose intellect is nature's crowning point, the goal of all her efforts, the most perfect and difficult of all her works.

[p. 188]

So writes Schopenhauer in his Counsels and Maxims, and indeed it is very effectively expressed, but we have no foundation whatsoever for regarding man as the summit of that which nature has created. This is only THE HIGHEST THAT WE KNOW.

Positivism would be absolutely correct in its picture of the world, there would not be even one deficiency, if there were no reason in the world, anywhere or at any time. Then it would be necessary, nolens volens, to regard the universe as an accidentally self-created mechanical toy in space. But the fact of the existence of psychic life "spoils all the statistics." It is impossible to exclude it.

We are either forced to admit the existence of two principles--"spirit" and "matter"--or to select one of them.

Then dualism annihilates itself, because if we admit the separate existence of spirit and matter, and reason further on this basis, it will be inevitably necessary to conclude, either that spirit is unreal and matter real; or that matter is unreal and spirit real--i.e., either that spirit is material or that matter is spiritual. Consequently it is necessary to select some one thing--spirit or matter.

But to think really MONISTICALLY is considerably more difficult than it seems. I have met many men who have called themselves "monists," and sincerely considered themselves as such, but in reality they never departed from the most naive dualism, and no spark of  of the world's unity ever flashed upon them.

Positivism, regarding "motion" or "energy" as the basis of everything, can never be "monistic." It is impossible to annihilate the fact of psychic life. If it were possible not to take this fact into consideration at all, then everything would be splendid, and the universe could be something like an accidentally self-created mechanical toy. But to its sorrow, positivism cannot deny the existence of the psyche. It can only try to degrade it as low as possible, calling it the reflection of reality, the substance of which consists of motion.

But how deal with the fact that the "reflection" possesses in this case an infinitely greater potentiality than the "reality"? How can this be? From what does this reality reflect, or what is it refracted in, that in its reflected state it possesses infinitely greater potentiality than in its original state?

[p. 189]

The consistent "materialist-monist" will be forced to say that "reality" reflects from itself, i.e., "one motion" reflects from another motion. But this is merely dialectics, and fails to make clear the nature of psychic life, for it is something other than motion.

______

No matter how hard we may try to define thought in terms of motion, we nevertheless know that they are two different things, different as regards our receptivity of them, belonging to different worlds, incommensurable, capable of existing simultaneously. Moreover, thought can exist without motion, but motion cannot exist without thought, because out of the psyche comes the necessary condition of motion--time: no psychic life--no time, as it exists for us; no time--no motion.

We cannot escape this fact, and thinking logically, we must inevitably recognize two principles. But if we begin to consider the very recognition of two principles as illogical, then we must recognize THOUGHT as a single principle, and motion as AN ILLUSION OF THOUGHT.

But what does this mean? It means that there can be no "monistic materialism." Materialism can be only dualistic, i.e., it must recognize two principles: motion and thought.

Here a new difficulty arises.

Our concepts are limited by language. Our language is deeply dualistic. This is indeed a terrible obstacle. I showed previously how language retards our thought, making it impossible to express the relations of a being universe. In our language only an eternally becoming universe exists. The "Eternal Now" cannot be expressed in language.

Thus our language pictures to us beforehand a false universe--dual, when in reality it is one; and eternally becoming when it is in reality eternally being.

And if we come to realize the degree to which our language falsifies the real view of the world, then the understanding of this fact will enable us to see that it is not only difficult, but even absolutely impossible to express in language the correct relation of the things of the real world.

[p. 190]

This difficulty can be conquered only by the formation of new concepts and by extended analogies.

Later on the principles and methods of this expansion of what we already have, and what we can extract from our stores of knowledge will be made clear. For the present it is only import-ant to establish one thing--THE NECESSITY FOR UNIFORMITY: the monism of the universe.

As a matter of principle it is not important which one we regard as first cause, spirit or matter. It is essential to recognize their unity.

______

--But what then is matter?

From one point of view, it is a logical concept, i.e., a form of thinking. Nobody ever saw matter, nor will he ever--it is possible only to think matter. From another point of view it is an illusion accepted for reality. Even more truly, it is the incorrectly perceived form of that which exists in reality. Matter is a section of something; a non-existent, imaginary section. But that of which matter is a section, exists. This is the real, four-dimensional world.

Wood, the substance from which this table (for example) is made, exists; but the true nature of its existence we do not know. All that we know about it is just the form of our receptivity of it. And if we should cease to exist, it would continue to exist, but only for a receptivity acting similarly to ours. But in itself this substance exists in some other way--HOW, we do not know. Certainly not in space and time, for we ourselves impose these forms upon it. Probably all similar wood, of different centuries, and different parts of the world, constitutes one mass--one body--perhaps one being. Certainly that substance (or that part of it) of which this table is made, has no separate existence apart from our receptivity. We fail to understand that a particular thing is merely an artificial definition by our senses, of some indefinable cause infinitely surpassing that thing.

But a thing may acquire its own individual and unique soul; and in that case the thing exists quite independently of our receptivity.

[p. 191]

[paragraph continues] Many things possess such souls, especially old things--old houses, old books, works of art, etc.

______

But what ground have we for thinking that there is psychic life in the world other than our human one, that of animals and of plants?

First of all, of course, the thought that everything in the world is alive and animated and that manifestations of life and animatedness would naturally exist on all planes and in all forms. But we can discern the psychic life only in forms analogous to ours.

The question stands in this way: how could we know about the existence of the psychic life of other sections of the world if they exist?

By two methods: through COMMUNICATION, EXCHANGE OF THOUGHTS, and through CONCLUSIONS BY ANALOGY.

For the first, it is necessary that our psyche should become similar to theirs, should transcend the limits of the three-dimensional world, i.e., it is necessary to change the form of receptivity and perception.

The second may result as a consequence of the gradual expansion of the faculty of drawing inferences by analogy. By trying to think out of the usual categories, by trying to look at things and at ourselves from a new angle and simultaneously from many sides, by trying to liberate our thinking from its accustomed categories of perception in space and time, little by little we begin to notice analogies between things which we did not notice before. Our mind grows, and with it grows the power to discover analogies. This ability, with each new step attained, expands and enriches the mind. Each minute we advance more rapidly, each new step makes the next more easy. Our psyche becomes different. Then, applying to ourselves this expanded ability to construct analogies, and looking about we suddenly perceive all around ourselves a psychic life the existence of which we were previously unaware. And we understand the reason for this unawareness: this psychic life belongs to another plane, and not to that to which our psychic life is native. Thus in this case the ability to discover new analogies 

[p. 192]

is the beginning of changes, which translate us into another plane of existence.

The thought of a man begins to penetrate into the world of noumena, which is in affinity with it. Then his point of view changes likewise with regard to the things and events of the phenomenal world. Phenomena may suddenly assume, to his eyes, quite a different grouping. As already said, similar things may be different from one another in reality, different things may be similar; quite separate, disconnected things may be part of one great whole, of some entirely new category; and things which appear inextricably united in one, constituting one whole, may in reality be manifestations of different beings having nothing in common among themselves, even knowing nothing whatever about the existence of one another. Such indeed may be any whole of our world--man, animal, planet, planetary system--i.e., consisting of different psychic lives, a battle-field as it were of warring entities.

In each whole of our world we perceive a multitude of opposing tendencies, aspirations, efforts. Each aggregate is as it were an arena of struggle for multitudes of opposing forces, each of which acts by itself, is directed to its own goal, usually to the disruption of the whole. But the interaction of these forces represents the life of the whole; and in everything something is always acting which limits the activity of separate tendencies. This something is the psychic life of the whole. We cannot establish the existence of such a life by analogy with ourselves, or by intercourse with it, or by exchange of thoughts, but a new path opens before us. We perceive a certain separate and quite definite function (the preservation of the whole) . Behind this function we infer a certain separate something. A separate something having a definite function is impossible without a separate psychic life. If the whole possesses its own psychic life then the separate tendencies or forces must also possess a psychic life of their own. A body or organism is the point of intersection of such lines of forces, a place of meeting, perhaps a battle-field. Our "I" is also that battle-field on which this or that emotion, this or that habit or inclination gains an advantage, subjecting to itself all of the rest at every given moment, and  itself with the I. Our I is a being, having its own life, imperfectly conscious of that of which it itself consists, and identifying

[p. 193]

itself with this or another portion of itself. Have we any warrant for supposing that the organs and members of a body, thoughts and emotions, are BEINGS also? We have, because we know that there exists nothing purely mechanical; and any something, having a separate function, MUST BE animated and can be called a being.

All the beings assumed by us to exist in the world of many dimensions, cannot know one another, i.e., cannot know that we are binding them together in different wholes in our phenomenal world, just as in general they cannot know our phenomenal world and its relations. But they must know themselves, although it is impossible for us to define the degree of clearness of this consciousness. It may be clearer than ours, and it may be more vague--dreamlike, as it were. Between these beings there may be a continuous but imperfectly perceived exchange of thoughts, analogous to the exchange of substance in a living organism. They may experience certain feelings in common, certain thoughts may arise in them spontaneously as it were, under the influence of general causes. Upon the lines of this inner communion they must divide themselves into different wholes of some categories to us entirely incomprehensible, or only guessed at. The essence of each such separate being must consist in its knowledge of itself and its nearest functions and relations; it must feel things analogous to itself, and must have the faculty of telling about itself and them, i.e., this consciousness must always behold a picture of itself and its conditioning relations. It is eternally studying this picture and instantly communicating it to another being coming into communion with it.

Whether these consciousnesses in sections of the world other than ours exist or not, we, under the existing conditions of our receptivity, cannot say. They can be sensed only by the changed psyche. Our usual receptivity and thinking are too absorbed by the sensations of the phenomenal world, and by themselves, and therefore do not reflect impressions coming to them from other beings, or reflect them so weakly that they are not fixed there in any intelligible form. Moreover we do not recognize the fact that we are in constant communion with the noumena of all surrounding things, near and remote, with beings like ourselves and others entirely different, with the life of everything in the world and of all the world. But if the impressions coming from other beings are so forceful

[p. 194]

that the consciousness feels them, then our mind immediately projects them into the outer world of phenomena and seeks for their cause in the phenomenal world, exactly in the same manner that a two-dimensional being, inhabiting a plane, seeks in its plane for the cause of the impressions which come from a higher world.

______

Our psyche is limited by its phenomenal receptivity, i.e., it is surrounded by itself. The world of phenomena, i.e., the form of its own perception, surrounds it as a ring, or as a wall, and it sees nothing save this wall.

But if the psyche succeeds in escaping out of this limiting circle, it will invariably see much that is new in the world.

If we will separate self-elements in our perception, writes Hinton [A New Era of Thought, pp. 36, 37], then it will be found that the deadness which we ascribe to the external world is not really there, but is put in by us because of our own limitations. It is really the self-elements in our knowledge which make us talk of mechanical necessity, dead matter. When our limitations fall, we behold the spirit of the world as we behold the spirit of a friend--something which is discerned in and through the material presentation of a body to us.

Our thought means are sufficient at present to show us human souls; but all except human beings is, as far as science is concerned, inanimate. Our self-element must be got rid of from our perception, and this will be changed.

But is the unknowableness of the noumenal world as absolute for us as it sometimes seems?

In The Critique of Pure Reason and in other writings, Kant denied the possibility of "spiritual sight." But in Dreams of a Ghost-seer he not only admitted this possibility, but gave to it one of the best definitions which we have ever had up to now. He clearly affirms:

I confess that I am very much inclined to assert the existence of immaterial natures in the world, and to put my soul itself into that class of beings. These immaterial beings . . . are immediately united with each other, they might form, perhaps, a great whole which might be called the immaterial world. Every man is a being of two worlds: of the incorporeal world and of the material world . . . and it will be proved I don't know where or when, that the human soul also in this life forms an indissoluble communion with all immaterial natures of the spirit-world, that, alternately, it acts upon and receives impressions from that world of which

[p. 195]

nevertheless it is not conscious while it is still man and as long as everything is in proper condition . . .

We should, therefore, have to regard the human soul as being conjoined in its present life with two worlds at the same time, of which it clearly perceives only the material world, in so far as it is conjoined with a body, and thus forms a personal unit. . . .

It is therefore, indeed, one subject, which is thus at the same time a member of the visible and of the invisible world, but not one and the same person; for on account of their different quality, the conceptions of the one world are not ideas associated with those of the other world; thus, what I think as a spirit, is not remembered by me as a man, and, conversely, my state as a man does not at all enter into the conception of myself as a spirit.

Birth, life, death are the states of soul only . . . Consequently, our body only is perishable, the essence of us is not perishable, and must have been existent during that time when our body had no existence. The life of the man is dual. It consists of two lives--one animal and one spiritual. The first life is the life of man, and man needs a body to live this life. The second life is the life of spirit; his soul lives in that life separately from the body, and must live on in it after the separation from the body.

In an essay on Kant in The Northern Messenger (1888, Russian), A. L. Volinsky says that both in Vorlesungen, and also in Dreams of a Ghost-seer, Kant denied the possibility of one thing only--the possibility of the physical receptivity of spiritual phenomena.

Thus Kant admitted not only the possibility of the existence of a spiritual conscious world, but also the possibility of communion with it.

Hegel built all his philosophy upon the possibility of a direct knowledge of truth, upon spiritual vision.

Approaching the question of two worlds from the psychological standpoint, from the standpoint of the theory of knowledge, let us firmly establish the principle that before we can hope to comprehend anything in the region of noumena, we must define everything that it is possible to define of the world of many dimensions by a purely intellectual method, by a process of reasoning. It is highly probable that by this method we cannot define very much. Perhaps our definitions will be too crude, will not quite correspond to the fine differentiation of relations in the noumenal world: all this is possible and must be taken into consideration. Nevertheless we shall define what we can, and at the outset make as clear as possible what the noumenal world cannot be; then what it can be--

[p. 196]

show what relations are impossible in it, and what are possible.

This is necessary in order that we, coming in contact with the real world, may discriminate between it and the phenomenal world, and what is more important, that we may not mistake simple reflections of the phenomenal world for the noumenal. We do not know the world of causes; we are confined in the jail of the phenomenal world simply because we do not know how to discern where one ends and where the other begins.

We are in constant touch with the world of causes, we live in it, because our psyche and our incomprehensible function in the world are part of it or a reflection of it. But we do not see or know it because we either deny it--consider that everything existing is phenomenal, and that nothing exists except the phenomenal--or we recognize it, but try to comprehend it in the forms of the three-dimensional phenomenal world; or lastly, we search for it and find it not, because we lose our way amid the deceits and illusions of the reflected phenomenal world which we mistakenly accept for the noumenal world.

In this dwells the tragedy of our spiritual questings: we do not know what we are searching for. And the only method by which we can escape this tragedy consists in a preliminary intellectual definition of the properties of that of which we are in search. Without such definitions, going merely by indefinite feelings, we shall not approach the world of causes or else we shall get lost on its borderland.

Spinoza understood this, saying that he could not speak of God, not knowing his attributes.

When I studied Euclid, I learned first of all that the sum of three angles of a triangle was equal to two right angles, and this property of a triangle was entirely comprehensible to me, although I did not know its many other properties. But so far as spirits and ghosts are concerned, I do not know even one of their attributes, but constantly hear different fantastic tales about them in which it is impossible to discover any truth.

______

We have established certain criteria which permit us to deal with the world of noumena or the "world of spirits." These we shall make use of now.

[p. 197]

First of all we may say that the world of noumena cannot be three-dimensional and that there cannot be anything three-dimensional in it, i.e., commensurable with physical objects, similar to them in outside appearance, having form--there cannot be anything having extension in space and changing in time. And most important, there cannot be anything dead or inanimate. In the world of causes everything must be alive, because it is life itself: the soul of the world.

Let us remember also that the world of causes is the world of the marvelous; that what appears simple to us can never be real. The real appears to us as the marvelous. We do not believe in it, we do not recognize it; and therefore we do not feel the mysteries of which life is so full.

The simple is only that which is unreal. The real must seem marvelous.

The mystery of time penetrates all. It is felt in every stone, which perhaps might have witnessed the glacial period, seen the ichthyosaurus and the mammoth. It is felt in the approaching day, which we do not see, but which possibly sees us, which per-chance is our last day; or on the other hand is the day of some transformation the nature of which we do not ourselves now know.

The mystery of thought creates all. As soon as we shall understand that thought is not a "function of motion," but that motion itself is only a function of thought--and shall begin to feel the depth of THIS MYSTERY--We shall perceive that the entire phenomenal world is some gigantic hallucination, which fails to frighten us, and does not drive us to think that we are mad simply because we have become accustomed to it.

The mystery of infinity--the greatest of all mysteries--it tells us that all the visible universe and its galaxies of stars have no dimension: that in relation to infinity they are equal to a point, a mathematical point which has no extension whatever, and that points which are not measurable for us may have a different extension and different dimensions.

In "positive" thinking we make the effort TO FORGET ABOUT ALL THIS: NOT TO THINK ABOUT IT.

At some future time positivism will be defined as a system by the aid of which it was possible not to think of real things and to limit oneself to the region of the unreal and illusory.

Footnotes

^178:1 The expression "section of the world" is taken as an indicator of the unreality of the forms of each section. The world is infinite, and all forms are infinite, but to grasp them with the finite brain-consciousness, i.e., by consciousness reflected in the brain, we must imagine the infinite forms as being finite, and these are "sections of the world." The [p. 179] world is one, but the number of possible sections is infinite. Let us imagine an apple: it is one, but we may imagine an infinite number of sections in all directions and these sections will differ from one another. If instead of an apple we take a more complicated body, for instance the body of some animal: then the sections taken in different directions will be even more unlike one another.

^181:1 The incorrectness here is not in the idea itself, but in a literal analogy. The thought itself, that molecules are worlds and worlds are but molecules, deserves attention and study.

^183:1 Frederick Myers, "Essay on the Subliminal Consciousness," as quoted in William James' "The Varieties of Religious Experience," Longmans, Green & Co., New York, p. 512.

^183:2 In all the above it would be more correct to substitute for the word brain the word body--organism. The present trend of scientific psychology leads to an understanding of the psychic importance of diverse physiological functions, previously unknown and even [p. 184] now but little investigated. The psychic life is connected not with the brain only, but with the entire body, all its organs, all its tissues. The study of the activity of glands, and of many other things with which science is now concerning itself, shows that the brain is by no means the only conductor of the psychic activity of man.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 198]

  

CHAPTER XVII

          A   living and rational universe. Different forms and lines of rationality.   Animated nature. The souls of stones and the souls of trees. The soul of a forest.   The human "I" as a collective rationality. Man as a complex being.   "Humanity" as a being. The world's soul. The face of Mahadeva. Prof. James on the   consciousness of the universe. Fechner's ideas. Zendavesta. A living Earth.

     
   IF rationality exists in the world, then it must permeate everything, although manifesting itself variously. We have accustomed ourselves to ascribe animism and rationality in this or that form to those things only which we designate as "beings," i.e., to those whom we find analogous to ourselves in the functions which define ANIMISM in our eyes.

Inanimate objects and mechanical phenomena are to us lifeless and irrational.

But this cannot be so.

It is only for our limited mind, for our limited power of communion with other minds, for our limited skill in analogy that rationality and psychic life in general manifest only in certain classes of living creatures, alongside of which a long series of dead things and mechanical phenomena exist.

But if we could not converse among ourselves, if every one of us could not infer the existence of rationality and of psychic life in another by analogy with himself, then everyone would consider himself alone to be alive and animated, and he would relegate all the rest of humankind to mechanical, "dead" nature.

In other words, we recognize as animated only those beings which have psychic life accessible to our observation in three-dimensional sections of the world, i.e., beings whose psyche is analogous to ours. About other consciousness we do not know and cannot know. All "beings" whose psychic does not manifest itself in the three-dimensional section of the world are inaccessible to us. If they contact our life at all, then we necessarily regard their manifestations as those of dead and unconscious nature. Our power of analogy

[p. 199]

is limited to this section. We cannot think logically outside of the conditions of the three-dimensional section. Therefore everything that lives, thinks and feels in a manner not analogous to us must appear dead and mechanical.

But sometimes we vaguely feel an intense life manifesting in the phenomena of nature, and sense a vivid emotionality the manifestations of which constitute the phenomena of (to us) inanimate nature. What I wish to convey is that behind the phenomena of visible manifestations is felt the noumenon of emotion.

In electrical discharges, in thunder and lightning, in the rush and howling of the wind, are seen flashes of the sensuous-nervous shudderings of some gigantic organism.

A strange individuality which is all their own is sensed in certain days. There are days brimming with the marvelous and the mystic, days having each its own individual and unique consciousness, its own emotions, its own thoughts. One may almost commune with these days. And they will tell you that they live a long, long time, perhaps eternally, and that they have known and seen many, many things.

In the processional of the year; in the iridescent leaves of autumn, with their memory-laden smell; in the first snow, frosting the fields and communicating a strange freshness and sensitiveness to the air; in the spring freshets, in the warming sun, in the awakening but still naked branches through which gleams the turquoise sky; in the white nights of the north, and in the dark, humid, warm tropical nights spangled with stars--in all these are the thoughts, the emotions, the forms, peculiar to itself alone, of some great consciousness; or better, all this is the expression of the emotions, thoughts and forms of consciousness of a  being--Nature.

There can be nothing dead or mechanical in nature. If in general life and feeling exist, they must exist in all. Life and rationality make up the world.

If we consider nature from our side, from the side of phenomena, then it is necessary to say that each thing, each , possesses a psyche of its own.

A MOUNTAIN, A TREE, A RIVER, THE FISH WITHIN THE RIVER, DEW AND RAIN, PLANET, FIRE--each separately must possess a psyche of its own.

If we consider nature from the other side, from the side of noumena,

[p. 200]

then it is necessary to say that each thing and each phenomenon of our world is a manifestation in our section of a rationality incomprehensible to us, belonging to another section, the same having there functions incomprehensible to us. In that section of space, one rationality is such and its function is such that it manifests itself here as a mountain, some other manifests as a tree, a third as a little fish, and so forth.

The phenomena of our world are very different from one another. If they are nothing else but manifestations in our section of different rational beings, then these beings must be very different too.

Between the psyche of a mountain and the psyche of a man there must be the same difference as between a mountain and a man.

We have already admitted the possibility of different existences. We said that a house exists, and that a man exists, and that an idea exists also--but they all exist differently. If we pursue this thought, then we shall discover many kinds of different existences.

The fantasy of fairy tales, making all the world animate, ascribes to mountains, rivers, forests a psychic life similar to that of men. But this is just as untrue as the complete denial of consciousness to inanimate nature. Noumena are as distinct and various as phenomena, which are their manifestation in our three-dimensional sphere.

Each stone, each grain of sand, each planet has its noumenon, consisting of life and of psyche, binding them into certain wholes incomprehensible to us.

The activity of life of separate units may vary greatly. The degree of the activity of life can be determined from the standpoint of its power of reproducing itself. In inorganic, mineral nature, this activity is so insignificant that units of this nature accessible to our observation do not reproduce themselves, although it may only seem so to us because of the narrowness of our view in time and space. Perhaps if that view embraced hundreds of thousands of years and our entire planet simultaneously, we might then see the growth of minerals and metals.

Were we to observe, from the inside, one cubic centimeter of the human body, knowing nothing of the existence of the entire body and of the man himself, then the phenomena going on in this little cube of flesh would seem like elemental phenomena in inanimate nature.

[p. 201]

But in any case, for us phenomena are divided into living and mechanical, and visible objects are divided into organic and inorganic. The latter are partitioned without resistance, remaining as they were before. It is possible to break a stone in halves, and then there will be two stones. But if one were to cut a snail in two, then there would not be two snails. This means that the psyche of the stone is very simple, primitive--so simple that it may be fractured without change of state. But a snail consists of living cells. Each living cell is a complex being, considerably more intricate than that of a stone. The body of the snail possesses the power to move, to nourish itself, feel pleasure and pain, seek the first and avoid the last; and most important of all, it possesses the faculty to multiply, to create new forms similar to itself, to involve inorganic substance within these forms, subduing physical laws to its service. The snail is a complex centre of transmutation of some physical energies into others. This centre possesses a consciousness of its own. It is for this reason that the snail is indivisible. Its psyche is infinitely higher than that of the stone. The snail has the consciousness of form, i.e., the form of a snail is conscious of itself, as it were. The form of a stone is not conscious of itself.

In organic nature where we see life, it is easier to assume the existence of a psyche. In the snail, a living creature, we already admit without difficulty a certain kind of psyche. But life belongs not alone to separate, individual organisms--anything indivisible is a living being. Each cell in an organism is a living being and it must have a certain psychic life.

Each combination of cells having a definite function is a living being also. Another higher combination--the organ--is a living being no less, and possesses a  life of its own.

Indivisibility in our sphere is the sign of a definite function. If a given phenomenon in our plane is a manifestation of that which exists on another plane, then on our side evidently, indivisibility corresponds to individuality on that other side. Divisibility on our side shows divisibility on that side. The rationality of the divisible can express itself in a collective, non-individual reason only.

But even a complete organism is merely a section of a certain magnitude, of what we may call the life of this organism from birth to death. We may imagine this life as a body of four dimensions extended in time. The three-dimensional physical body is merely

[p. 202]

a section of the four-dimensional body, Linga-Sharira. The image of the man which we know, his "personality," is also merely a section of his true personality, which undoubtedly has its separate psychic life. Therefore we may assume in man three psychic lives: first, the psychic life of the body, which manifests itself in instincts, and in the constant work of the body; second, his personality, a complex and constantly changing I, which we know, and in which we are conscious of ourselves; third, the consciousness of all life--a greater and higher I. In our state of development these three psychic lives know one another only very imperfectly, communicating under narcosis only, in trance, in ecstacy, in sleep, in hypnotic and mediumistic states, i.e., in other states of consciousness.

In addition to our own psychic lives, with which we are indissolubly bound, but which we do not know, we are surrounded by various other psychic lives which we do not know either. These lives we often feel, they are composed of our lives. We enter into these lives as their component parts, just as into our life enter different other lives. These lives are good or evil spirits, helping us or precipitating evil. Family, clan, nation, race--any aggregate to which we belong (such an aggregate undoubtedly possesses a life of its own), any group of men having its separate function and feeling its inner connection and unity, such as a philosophical school, a "church," a sect, a masonic order, a society, a party, etc., etc., is undoubtedly a living being possessing a certain rationality. A nation, a people, is a living being; humanity is a living being also. This is the Grand Man, ADAM KADMON of the Kabalists. ADAM KADMON is a being living in men, uniting in himself the lives of all men. Upon this subject, H. P. Blavatsky, in her great work, The Secret Doctrine (Vol. III, p. 146), has this to say:

. . . "It is not the Adam of dust (of Chapter II) who is thus made in the divine image, but the Divine Androgyne (of Chapter I), or Adam Kadmon."

ADAM KADMON is HUMANITY, or humankind--Homo Sapiens--the SPHYNX, i.e., "the being with the body of an animal and the face of a superman."

Entering as a component part into different great and little lives man himself consists of an innumerable number of great and little I's. Many of the I's living in him do not even know one another, just as men who live in the same house may not know one another.

[p. 203]

Expressed in terms of this analogy, it may be said that "man" has much in common with a house filled with inhabitants the most diverse. Or better, he is like a great ocean liner on which are many transient passengers, each going to his own place for his own purpose, each uniting in himself elements the most diverse. And each separate unit in the population of this steamer orientates himself, involuntarily and unconsciously regards himself as the very centre of the steamer. This is a fairly true presentment of a human being.

Perhaps it would be more correct to compare a man with some little separate place on earth, living a life of its own; with a forest lake, full of the most diverse life, reflecting the sun and stars, and hiding in its depths some incomprehensible phantasm, perhaps an undine, or a water-sprite.

If we abandon analogies and return to facts, so far as these are accessible to our observation, it then becomes necessary to begin with several somewhat artificial divisions of the human being. The old division into body, soul and spirit, has in itself a certain authenticity, but leads often to confusion, because when such a division is attempted disagreements immediately arise as to where the body ends and where the soul begins, where the soul ends and the spirit begins, and so forth. There are no strict limits at all, nor can there be. In addition to this, confusion enters in by reason of the opposition of body, soul and spirit, which are recognized in this case as inimical principles. This is entirely erroneous also, because the body is the expression of the soul, and the soul of the spirit.

The very terms, body, soul and spirit need explanation. The "body" is the physical body with its (to us)little understood mind; the soul--the psyche studied by scientific psychology--is the reflected activity which is guided by impressions received from the external world and from the body. The "spirit" comprises those higher principles which guide, or under certain conditions may guide, the soul-life.

Thus a human being contains in itself the following three categories.

First: the body--the region of instincts, and the inner "instinctive" consciousnesses of the different organs, parts of the body, and the entire organism.

Second: the soul--consisting of sensations, perceptions, conceptions, thoughts, emotions and desires.

[p. 204]

Third: the region of the unknown--consciousness, will, and the one I, i.e., those things which in ordinary man are in potentiality only.

Under the usual conditions of the average man the extremely misty focus of his consciousness is confined to the psyche perpetually going from one object to another.

I wish to eat.

I read a newspaper.

I wait for a letter.

Only rarely does it touch the regions which give access to the religious, esthetic and moral emotions, and to the higher intellect, which expresses itself in abstract thinking, united with the moral and esthetic sense, i.e., the sense of the necessity of the co-ordination of thought, feeling, word and action.

"In saying "I," a man means, of course, not the total complex of all these regions, but that which in a given moment is in the focus of his consciousness. "I wish" (or more correctly, simply "wish," because man very seldom says I wish): these words (or this word), playing the most important role in the life of man, usually refer not at all to every side of his being simultaneously, but merely to some small and insignificant facet, which at a given moment holds the focus of consciousness and subjects to itself all the rest, until it in turn is forced out by another equally insignificant facet.

In the psyche of man there occurs a continual shifting of view from one subject to another. Through the focus of receptivity runs a continuous cinematographical film of feelings and impressions, and each separate impression defines the I of a given moment.

From this point of view the psyche of man has often been compared to a dark, sleeping town in the midst of which night-guards with lanterns slowly move about, each lighting up a little circle around himself. This is a perfectly true analogy. In each given moment there are several such unsteadily lighted circles in the focus, and all the rest is enveloped in darkness.

Each such little lighted circle represents an I, living its own life,

[p. 205]

sometimes very short. And there is continuous movement, either fast or slow, moving out into the light more of new and still new objects, or else old ones from the region of memory, or tormentingly revolving in a circle of the same fixed ideas.

This continuous motion going on in our psyche, this uninterrupted running over of the light from one I to another, perhaps explains the phenomenon of motion in the outer visible world.

We know already by our intellect, that there is no such motion. We know that everything exists in infinite spaces of time, nothing is made, nothing becomes, all is. But we do not see everything at once, and therefore it seems to us that everything moves, grows, is becoming. We do not see everything at once, either in the outer world, or in the inner world; thence arises the illusion of motion. For example, as we ride past a house the house turns behind us; but if we could see it, not with our eyes, not in perspective, but by some sort of vision, simultaneously from all sides, from below and from above and from the inside, we should no longer see that illusory motion, but would see the house entirely immobile, just as it is in reality. Mentally, we know that the house did not move.

It is just the same with everything else. The motion, growth, "becoming," which is going on all around us in the world is no more real than the motion of a house which we are riding by, or the motion of trees and fields relative to the windows of a rapidly moving railway car.

Motion goes on inside of us, and it creates the illusion of motion round about us. The lighted circle runs quickly from one I to another--from one object, from one idea, from one perception or image to another: within the focus of consciousness rapidly changing I's succeed one another, a little of the light of consciousness going over from one I to another. This is the true motion which alone exists in the world. Should this motion stop, should all I's simultaneously enter the focus of receptivity, should the light so expand as to illumine all at once that which is usually lighted bit by bit and gradually, and could a man grasp simultaneously by his reason all that ever entered or will enter his receptivity and all that which is never clearly illumined by thought (producing its action on the psyche nevertheless)--then would a man behold himself in the midst of an immobile universe, in which there would exist simultaneously

[p. 206]

everything that lies usually in the remote depths of memory, in the past; all that lies at a remote distance from him; all that lies in the future.

C. H. Hinton very well says, in regard to beings of other sections of the world:

By the same process by which we know about the existence of other men around us, we may know of the high intelligences by whom we are surrounded. We feel them but we do not realize them.

To realize them it will be necessary to develop our power of .

The power of seeing with our bodily eye is limited to the three-dimensional section. But the inner eye is not thus limited; we can organize our power of seeing in higher space, and we can form conceptions of realities in this higher space.

And this affords the groundwork for the perception and study of these other beings than man.

We are, with reference to the higher things of life, like blind and puzzled children. We know that we are members of one body, limbs of one vine; but we cannot discern, except by instinct and feeling, what that body is, what the vine is.

Our problem consists in the diminution of the limitations of our perception.

Nature consists of many entities toward the apprehension of which we strive.

For this purpose new conceptions have to be formed first, and vast fields of observation shall be unified under one common law. The real history of progress lies in the growth of new conceptions.

When the new conception is formed it is found to be quite simple and natural. We ask ourselves what we have gained; and we answer: Nothing; we have simply removed an obvious limitation.

The question may be put: In what way do we come into contact with these higher beings at present? And evidently the answer is: In those ways in which we tend to form organic unions--unions in which the activities of individuals coalesce in a living way.

The coherence of a military empire or of a subjugated population, presenting no natural nucleus of growth, is not one through which we should hope to grow into direct contact with our higher destinies. But in friend-ship, in voluntary associations and above all in the family, we tend towards our greater life.

Just as, to explore the distant stars of the heavens, a particular material arrangement is necessary which we call a telescope, so to explore the nature of the beings who are higher than we, a mental arrangement is necessary. We must prepare a more extended power of looking. We

[p. 207]

want a structure developed inside the skull for the one purpose which an exterior telescope will do for the other.

______

This animism of nature takes the most diverse directions. This tree is a living being. The birch tree in general--the species is a living being. A birch tree forest is a living being also. A forest in which there are trees of different kinds, grass, flowers, ants, beetles, birds, beasts--this is a living being too, living by the life of everything composing it, thinking and feeling for all of which it consists.

This idea is very interestingly expressed in the essay of P. Florensky, The Humanitarian Roots of Idealism. (The Theological Messenger, 1909, II, p. 288. In Russian.)

Are there many people who regard a forest not merely as a collective proper noun and rhetorical embodiment, i.e., as a pure fiction, but as something unique, living? . . . The real unity is a unity of self-consciousness. . . . Are there many who recognize unity in a forest, i.e., the living soul of a forest taken as a whole--voodoo, wood-demon, Old Nick? Do you consent to recognize undines and water-sprites--those souls of the aquatic element?

The activity of the life of such a composite being as a forest is not the same as the activity of different species of plants and animals, and the activity of the life of a species is again different from the life of separate individuals.

Moreover, the diversity of the functions expressed in different life-activities reveals the differences existing between the psychic lives of different "organisms." The life-activity of a single leaf of a birch tree, is of course an infinitely lower form of activity than the life of the tree. The activity of the life of the tree is not such as the activity of the life of the species, and the life of the species is not such as the life of the forest.

The functions of these four "lives" are entirely different, and their rationality must be correspondingly different also.

The rationality of a single cell of the human body must be as much lower in comparison with the rationality of the body--i.e., with the "physical consciousness of man"--as its life-activity is lower in comparison with the life-activity of the entire organism.

[p. 208]

Therefore, from a certain standpoint, we may regard the noumenon of a phenomenon as the soul of that phenomenon, i.e., we may say that the hidden soul of a phenomenon is its noumenon. The concept of the soul of a phenomenon or the noumenon of a phenomenon includes within itself both life and rationality together with their functions in sections of the world incomprehensible to us; and the manifestation of those in our sphere constitutes a phenomenon.

The idea of an animistic universe leads inevitably to the idea of a "World-Soul"--a "Being" whose manifestation is this visible universe.

The idea of the "World-Soul" was very picturesquely understood in the ancient religions of India. The mystical poem, The Bhagavad Gita gives a remarkable presentment of Mahadeva, i.e., the great Deva whose life is this world.

Thus Krishna propounded his teaching to his disciples. . . . preparing them for an apprehension of those high spiritual truths which unfold before his inner sight in a moment of illumination.

When he spoke of Mahadeva his voice became very deep, and his face was illuminated by an inner light.

Once Arjuna, in an impulse of boldness, said to him:

Let us see Mahadeva in his divine form. May we behold him?

And then Krishna . . . began to speak of a being who breathes in every creature, has an hundred-fold and a thousand-fold forms, many-faced, many-eyed, facing everywhere, and who surpasses everything created by infinity, who envelops in his body the whole world, things still and animate. If the radiance of a thousand suns should burst forth suddenly in the sky, it would not compare with the radiance of that Mighty Spirit.

When Krishna spoke thus of Mahadeva, a beam of light of such tremendous force shone in his eyes, that his disciples could not endure the radiance of that light, and fell at Krishna's feet. From very fear the hair rose on Arjuna's head, and bowing low he said: Thy words are terrible, we cannot look upon such a being as Thou evokest before our eyes. His form makes us tremble. [*1]

In an interesting book of lectures by Prof. William. James, A Pluralistic Universe, there is a lecture on Fechner, devoted to "a conscious universe."

Ordinary monistic idealism leaves everything intermediary out. It recognizes only extremes, as if, after the first rude face of the phenomenal

[p. 209]

world in all its particularity, nothing but the supreme in all its perfection could be found. First, you and I, just as we are in this room; and the moment we get below that surface, the unutterable itself! Doesn't this show a singularly indigent imagination? Isn't this brave universe made on a richer pattern, with room in it for a long hierarchy of beings? Materialistic science makes it infinitely richer in terms, with its molecules, and ether, and electrons and what not. Absolute idealism, thinking of reality only under intellectual forms, knows not what to do with bodies of any grade, and can make no use of any psycho-physical analogy or correspondence.

Fechner, from whose writings Prof. James makes copious quotations, upheld quite a different view-point. Fechner's ideas are so near to those which have been presented in the previous chapters that we shall dwell upon them more extensively. I use the words of Prof. James:

The original sin, according to Fechner, of both our popular and scientific thinking, is our inveterate habit of regarding the spiritual not as the rule but as an exception in the midst of nature. Instead of believing our life to be fed at the breasts of the greater life, our individuality to be sustained by the greater individuality, which must necessarily have more consciousness and more independence than all that it brings forth, we habitually treat whatever lies outside of our life as so much slag and ashes of life only.

Or if we believe in Divine Spirit, we fancy it on the one side as bodiless, and nature as soulless on the other.

What comfort, or peace, Fechner asks, can come from such a doctrine? The flowers wither at its breath, the stars turn into stone; our own body grows unworthy of our spirit and sinks to a tenement for carnal senses only. The book of nature turns into a volume on mechanics, in which whatever has life is treated as a sort of anomaly; a great chasm of separation yawns between us and all that is higher than ourselves; and God becomes a thinnest of abstractions.

Fechner's great instrument for verifying the daylight view is analogy, . . .

Bain defines genius as the power of seeing analogies.

The number that Fechner could perceive was prodigious; but he insisted on the differences as well. Neglect to make allowance for these, he said, is the common fallacy in analogical reasoning.

Most of us, for example, reasoning justly that, since all the minds we know are connected with bodies, therefore God's mind should be connected with a body, proceed to suppose that that body must be just an animal body over again, and paint an altogether human picture of God.

[p. 210]

[paragraph continues] But all that the analogy comports is a body--the particular features of our body are adaptations to a habitat so different from God's that if God have a physical body at all, it must be utterly different from ours in structure.

The vaster orders of mind go with the vaster orders of body. The entire earth on which we live must have, according to Fechner, its own collective consciousness. So must each sun, moon, planet; so must the whole solar system have its own wider consciousness, on which the consciousness of our earth plays one part. So has the entire starry system as such its consciousness; and if that starry system be not the sum of all that IS, materially considered, then that whole system, along with whatever else may be, is the body of that absolutely totalized consciousness of the universe to which men give the name of God. Speculatively Fechner is thus a monist in his theology; but there is room in his universe for every grade of spiritual being between man and the final all-inclusive God.

The earth-soul he passionately believes in; he treats the earth as our special human guardian angel; we can pray to the earth as men pray to their saints.

His most important conclusion is, that the constitution of the world is identical throughout. In ourselves, visual consciousness goes with our eyes, tactile consciousness with our skin. But although neither skin nor eye knows aught of the sensations of the other, they come together and figure in some sort of relation and combination in the more inclusive consciousness which each of us names his self. Quite similarly, then, says Fechner, we must suppose that my consciousness of myself and yours of yourself, although in their immediacy they keep separate and know nothing of each other, are yet known and used together in a higher consciousness, that of the human race, say, into which they enter as constituent parts.

Similarly, the whole human and animal kingdoms come together as conditions of a consciousness of still wider scope. This combines in the soul of the earth with the consciousness of the vegetable kingdom, which in turn contributes its share of experience to that of the whole solar system, etc.

The supposition of an earth-consciousness meets a strong instinctive prejudice. All the consciousness we directly know seems told to brains. But our brain, which primarily serves to correlate our muscular reactions with the external objects on which we depend, performs a function which the earth performs in an entirely different way. She has no proper muscles or limbs of her own, and the only objects external to her are the other stars. To these her whole mass reacts by most exquisite alterations in its total gait, and by still more exquisite vibratory responses in its substance. Her ocean reflects the lights of heaven as on a mighty mirror, her atmosphere refracts them like a monstrous lens, the clouds

[p. 211]

and snow-fields combine them into white, the woods and flowers disperse them into colors. Polarization, interference, absorption awaken sensibilities in matter of which our senses are too coarse to take any note.

For these cosmic relations of hers, then, she no more needs a special brain than she needs eyes or ears. Our brains do indeed unify and correlate innumerable functions. Our eyes know nothing of sound, our ears nothing of light, but having brains, we can feel sound and light together, and compare them . . . . . Must every higher means of unification between things be a literal brain-fibre? Cannot the earth-mind know otherwise the contents of our minds together?

In a striking page Fechner relates one of his moments of direct vision of truth.

"On a certain morning I went out to walk. The fields were green, the birds sang, the dew glistened, the smoke was rising, here and there a man appeared, a light as of transfiguration lay on all things. It was only a little bit of earth; it was only one moment of her existence; and yet as my look embraced her more and more it seemed to me not only so beautiful an idea, but so true and clear a fact, that she is an angel--an angel carrying me along with her into Heaven. . . . I asked myself how the opinions of men could ever have so spun themselves away from life so far as to deem the earth only a dry clod . . . But such an experience as this passes for fantasy. The earth is a globular body, and what more she may be, one can find in mineralogical cabinets."

The special thought of Fechner's is his belief that the more inclusive forms of consciousness are in part constituted by the more limited forms. Not that they are the mere sum of the more limited forms. As our mind is not the bare sum of our sights plus our sounds, plus our pains, but in adding these terms together it also finds relations among them and weaves them into schemes and forms and objects of which no one sense in its separate estate knows anything, so the earth-soul traces relations between the contents of my mind and the contents of yours of which neither of our separate minds is conscious. It has schemes, forms, and objects proportionate to its wider field, which our mental fields are far too narrow to cognize. By ourselves we are simply out of relation with each other, for we are both of us there, and different from each other, which is a positive relation. What we are without knowing, it knows that we are. It is as if the total universe of inner life had a sort of grain or direction, a sort of valvular structure, permitting knowledge to flow in one way only, so that the wider might always have the narrower under observation, but never the narrower the wider.

Fechner likens our individual persons on the earth unto so many sense-organs of the earth-soul. We add to its perceptive life. . . . It absorbs our perceptions into its larger sphere of knowledge, and combines them with the other data there. The memories and conceptual relations that have spun themselves round the perceptions of a certain

[p. 212]

person remain in the larger earth-life as distinct as ever, and form new relations. . . ."

Fechner's ideas are expounded in his book, Zendavesta.

I have made such a lengthy quotation from Prof. James' book in order to show that the ideas of the animism and of the rationality of the world are neither new nor paradoxical. It is a natural and logical necessity, resulting from a broader view of the world than that which we usually permit ourselves to hold.

Logically we must either recognize life and rationality in everything, in all "dead nature," or deny them completely, even IN OURSELVES.

Footnotes

^208:1 "The Great Initiates," by E. Schure.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 213]

  

CHAPTER XVIII

          Rationality   and life. Life as knowledge. Intellect and emotions. Emotion as an organ of knowledge.   The evolution of emotion from the standpoint of knowledge. Pure and impure   emotions. Personal and impersonal emotions. Personal and super-personal   emotions. The elimination of self-elements as a means of approach to true   knowledge. "Be as little children. . . ." "Blessed are the   pure in heart. . . ." The value of morals from the standpoint of   knowledge. The defects of intellectualism. Dreadnaughts as the crown of   intellectual culture. The dangers of morality. Moral esthetics. Religion and   art as organized forms of emotional knowledge. The knowledge of God and the knowledge of Beauty.

     
   THE MEANING OF LIFE--this is the eternal theme of human meditation. All philosophical systems, all religious teachings strive to find and give to men the answer to this question. Some say that the meaning of life is in service, in the surrender of self, in self-sacrifice, in the sacrifice of everything, even life itself. Others declare that the meaning of life is in the delight of it, relieved against "the expectation of the final horror of death." Some say that the meaning of life is perfection, and the creation of a better future beyond the grave, or in future lives for ourselves. Others say that the meaning of life is in the approach to non-existence: still others, that the meaning of life is in the perfection of the race, in the organization of life on earth; while there are those who deny the possibility of even attempting to know its meaning.

The fault of all these explanations consists in the fact that they all attempt to discover the meaning of life outside of itself, either in the future of humanity, or in some problematical existence beyond the grave, or again in the evolution of the Ego throughout many successive incarnations--always in something outside of the present life of man. But if instead of thus speculating about it, men would simply look within themselves, then they would see that in reality the meaning of life is not after all so obscure. IT CONSISTS IN KNOWLEDGE. All life, through all its facts, events and incidents, excitements and attractions, inevitably leads us TO THE

[p. 214]

[paragraph continues] KNOWLEDGE OF SOMETHING. All life-experience is KNOWLEDGE.

The most powerful emotion in man is his yearning toward the unknown. EVEN IN LOVE, the most powerful of all attractions, to which everything is sacrificed, is this yearning toward the unknown, toward the NEW--curiosity.

The Persian poet-philosopher, Al-Ghazzali, says: "The highest function of man's soul is the perception of truth." [*1]

In the very beginning of this book PSYCHIC LIFE and THE WORLD were recognized as existing. The world is everything that exists. The function of psychic life may be defined as the realization of existence.

Man realizes his existence and the existence of the world, a part of which he is. His relation to himself and to the world is called knowledge. The expansion and deepening of his relation to himself and to the world is the expansion of knowledge.

All the soul-properties of man, all the elements of his psyche--sensations, perceptions, conceptions, ideas, judgments, reasonings, feelings, emotions, even creation--all these are the INSTRUMENTS OF KNOWLEDGE which the I possesses.

Feelings--from the simple emotions up to the most complex, such as esthetic, religious and moral emotion--and creation, from the creation of a savage making a stone hatchet for himself up to the creation of a Beethoven, indeed are means of knowledge.

Only to our narrow HUMAN view do they appear to serve other purposes--the preservation of life, the construction of something, or merely pleasure. In reality all this conduces to knowledge..

Evolutionists, followers of Darwin, say that the struggle for existence and the selection of the fittest created the mind and feeling of contemporary man--that mind and feeling SERVE LIFE, preserve the life of separate individuals and of the species--and that beyond this they have no meaning in themselves. But it is possible to answer this with the same arguments before advanced against the mechanicality of the universe; namely, that if rationality exists, then nothing exists except rationality. The struggle for existence and the survival of the fittest, if they truly play such a role in the creation of life, are also not merely accidents, but products of a mind, CONCERNING WHICH WE DO NOT KNOW; and they also conduce, like everything else, TO A KNOWLEDGE.

[p. 215]

But we do not realize, do not discern the presence of rationality in the phenomena and laws of nature. This happens because we study always not the whole but the part, and we do not divine that whole which we wish to study--by studying the little finger of a man we cannot discover his reason. It is the same way in our relation to nature: we study always the little finger of nature. When we come to realize this and shall understand that EVERY LIFE IS THE MANIFESTATION OF A PART OF SOME WHOLE, then only the possibility of knowledge of that whole opens to us.

In order to comprehend the rationality of a given whole, it is necessary to understand the character of the whole and its functions. Thus the function of man is knowledge; but without understanding "man" as a whole, it is impossible to understand his function.

To understand our psyche, the function of which is knowledge, it is necessary to clear up our relation to life.

In Chapter X an attempt was made--a very artificial one, founded upon the analogy with a world of two-dimensional beings--to define life as motion in a sphere higher in dimensionality in  with ours. From this standpoint every separate life is as it were the manifestation in our sphere of a part of one of the rational entities of another sphere. These rationalities look in upon us, as it were, in these lives which we see. When a man dies, one eye of the Universe closes, says Fechner. Every separate human life is a moment of the life of some great being, which lives in us. The life of every separate tree is a moment of the life of a being, "species" or "family." The rationalities of these higher beings do not exist independently of these lower lives. They are two sides of one and the same thing. Every single human psyche, in some other section of the world, may produce the illusion of many lives.

This is difficult to illustrate by an example. But if we take Hinton's spiral, passing through a plane, and the point running in circles on the plane (see 70), and conceive of the spiral as the psyche, then the moving point of intersection of the spiral with the plane will be life. This example illustrates a possible relation between the psyche and life.

To us, life and the psyche are different and separate from each other, because we are inept at seeing, inept at looking at things.

[p. 216]

[paragraph continues] And this in turn depends upon the fact that it is very difficult for us to step outside the frames of our divisions. We see the life of a tree, of this tree; and if we are told that the life of a tree is a manifestation of some psychic life, then we understand it in such a way that the life of this tree is the manifestation of the psychic life of this tree. But this is of course an absurdity resulting from "three-dimensional thinking"--the "Euclidian" mind. The life of this tree is a manifestation of the psychic life of the species, or family, or perhaps of the psychic life of the entire vegetable kingdom.

In exactly the same way, our separate lives are manifestations of some great rational entity. We find the proof of this in the fact that our lives have no other meaning at all aside from that process of acquiring knowledge performed by us. A thoughtful man ceases to feel painfully the absence of meaning in life only when he realizes this, and begins to strive consciously for that for which he strove unconsciously before.

This process of acquiring knowledge, representing our function in the world, is performed not by the intellect only, but by our entire organism, by all the body, by all the life, and by all the life of human society, its organizations, its institutions, by all culture and all civilization; by that which we know of humanity and, still more, by that which we do not know. And we acquire the knowledge of that which we deserve to know.

______

If we declare in regard to the intellectual side of man that its purpose is knowledge this will evoke no doubts. All agree that the human intellect together with everything subjected to its functions is for the purpose of knowledge--although often the faculty of knowledge is considered as serving only utilitarian ends. But concerning the emotions: joy, sorrow, rage, fear, love, hatred, pride, compassion, jealousy; concerning the sense of beauty, esthetic pleasure and artistic creation; concerning the moral sense; concerning all religious emotions: faith, hope, veneration, etc., etc.,--concerning all human activity--things are not so clear. We usually do not see that all emotions, and all human activity serve knowledge. How do fear, or love, or work serve knowledge? It seems

[p. 217]

to us that by emotions we feel; by work--create. Feeling and creation seem to us as something different from knowledge. Concerning work, creative power, creation, we are rather inclined to think that they demand knowledge, and if they serve it, do so only indirectly. In the same way it is incomprehensible how religious emotions serve knowledge.

Usually the emotional is opposed to the intellectual--"heart" to "mind." Some place "cold reason" or  over against feelings, emotions, esthetic pleasure; and from these they separate the moral sense, the religious sense, and "spirituality."

The misunderstanding here lies in the interpretation of the words intellect and emotion.

Between intellect and emotion there is no sharp distinction. Intellect, considered as a whole, is also emotion. But in every-day language, and in " conversational psychology" reason is contrasted with feeling; will is considered as a separate and independent faculty; moralists consider moral feeling as entirely distinct from all these; religionists consider spirituality separately from faith.

One often hears such expressions as: reason mastered feeling; will mastered desire; the sense of duty mastered passion; spirituality mastered intellectuality; faith conquered reason. But all these are merely the incorrect expressions of conversational psychology; just as incorrect as are the expressions "sunrise" and "sunset." In reality in the soul of man nothing exists save emotions. And the soul life of man is either a struggle or a harmonious adjustment between different emotions. Spinoza saw this quite clearly when he said that emotion can be mastered only by another more powerful emotion, and by nothing else. Reason, will, feeling, duty, faith, spirituality, mastering some other emotion, can conquer only by force of the emotional element contained in them. The ascetic who kills all desires and passions in himself, kills them by the desire for salvation. A man renouncing all the pleasures of the world, renounces them because of the delight of sacrifice, of renunciation. A soldier dying at his post through his sense of duty or habit of obedience, does so because the emotion of devotion, or faithfulness, is more powerful in him than all other things. A man whose moral sense prompts him to overcome passion in himself, does so because the moral sense (i.e., emotion) is more powerful than all his other feelings, other emotions. In substance

[p. 218]

all this is perfectly clear and simple, but it has become confused and confusing simply because men, calling different degrees of one and the same thing by diverse names, began to see fundamental differences where there were only differences in degree.

Will is the resultant of desires. We call that man strong-willed in whom the will proceeds on definite lines, without turning aside; and we call that man weak-willed in whom the line of the will takes a zig-zag course, turning aside here or there under the influence of every new desire. But this does not mean that will and desire are something opposite; quite the reverse, they are one and the same, because the will is composed of desires.

Reason cannot conquer feeling, because feeling can be conquered only by feeling. Reason can only give thoughts and pictures, evoking feelings which will conquer the feeling of a given moment. Spirituality is not opposed to "intellectuality" or "emotionality." It is only THEIR HIGHER FLIGHT. Reason has no limits: only the human, "Euclidian" mind, the mind devoid of emotions, is limited.

But what is "reason?"

It is the inner aspect of any given being. In the earth's animal kingdom, in all animals lower than man, we see passive reason. But with the appearance of concepts it becomes active, and part of it begins to work as intellect. The animal is conscious through his sensation and emotions. The intellect is present in the animal only in an embryonic state, as an emotion of curiosity, a pleasure of knowing.

In man the growth of consciousness consists in the growth of the intellect and the accompanying growth of the higher emotions--esthetic, religious, moral--which according to the measures of their growth become more and more intellectualized, while simultaneously with this the intellect is assimilating emotionality, ceasing to be "cold." .

Thus "spirituality" is a fusion of the intellect with the higher emotions. The intellect is spiritualized from the emotions; the emotions are spiritualized from the intellect.

The functions of the rational faculty are not limited, but not often does the human intellect rise to its highest form. At the same time it is incorrect to say that the highest form of human knowledge will not be intellectual, but of a different character; only this higher

[p. 219]

reason is entirely unrestricted by logical concepts and by Euclidian modes of thought. We are likely to hear a great deal concerning this from the standpoint of mathematics, which as a matter of fact transcended the reasoning of logic long ago. But it achieved this by the aid of the intellect. A new order of receptivity grows in the soil of the intellect and of the higher emotions, but it is not created by them. A tree grows in the earth, but it is not created by the earth. A seed is necessary. This seed may be in the soul, or absent from it. When it is there it can be cultivated or it can be choked; when it is not there it is impossible to replace it with anything else. The soul (if a soul it may be called) lacking that seed, i.e., inept to feel and reflect the world of the wondrous, will never put forth the living sprout, but will always reflect the phenomenal world, and that alone.

At the present stage of his development man comprehends many things by means of his intellect, but at the same time, he comprehends many things by means of his emotions. In no case are emotions merely organs of feeling for feeling's sake: they are all organs of knowledge. In every emotion man knows something that he could not know without its aid--something that he could know by no other emotion, by no effort of the intellect. If we consider the emotional nature of man as self-contained, as serving life and not serving knowledge we shall never understand its true content and significance. Emotions serve knowledge. There are things and relations which can be known only emotionally, and only through a given emotion.

To understand the psychology of play, it is necessary to experience the emotions of the player; to understand the psychology of the hunt, it is necessary to experience the emotions of the hunter; the psychology of a man in love is incomprehensible to him who is indifferent; the state of mind of Archimedes when he jumped out of the bath tub is incomprehensible to the staid citizen, who would look on such a performance as a sign of ; the feelings of the globe-trotter, delightedly breathing in the sea air and sweeping with his eyes the wide horizon, is incomprehensible to the sedentary stay-at-home. The feeling of a believer is incomprehensible to an unbeliever, and to a believer the feeling of an unbeliever is quite as strange. Men understand one another so imperfectly because they live always by different emotions. And when they feel similar

[p. 220]

emotions simultaneously, then and then only do they understand one another. The proverbial philosophy of the people knows this very well: "A FULL MAN DOES NOT UNDERSTAND A HUNGRY ONE," it says. "A drunkard is no comrade for a sober man." "One rogue recognizes another."

In this mutual understanding or in the illusion of mutual understanding--in this immersion in similar emotions--lies one of the principal charms of love. The French novelist, de Maupassant, has written very delightfully about this in his little story Solitude. The same illusion explains the secret power of alcohol over the human soul, for alcohol creates the illusion of a communion of souls, and induces similar fantasies simultaneously, in two or several men.

Emotions are the stained-glass windows of the soul; colored glasses through which the soul looks at the world. Each such glass assists in finding in the contemplated object the same or similar colors, but it also prevents the finding of opposite ones. Therefore it has been correctly said that a one-sided emotional illumination cannot give a correct perception of an object. Nothing gives one such a clear idea of things as the emotions, yet nothing deludes one so much.

Every emotion has a meaning for its existence, although its value from the standpoint of knowledge varies. Certain emotions are important and necessary for the life of knowledge and certain emotions hinder rather than help one to understand.

Theoretically all emotions are an aid to knowledge; all emotions arose because of the knowing of one or another thing. Let us consider one of the most elementary emotions--say THE EMOTION OF FEAR. Undoubtedly there are relations which can be known only through fear. The man who never experienced the sensation of fear will never understand many things in life and in nature; he will never understand many of the controlling motives in the life of man. (What else but the fear of hunger and cold forces the majority of men to work?) He will never understand many things in the animal world. For example, he will not understand the relation of mammals to reptiles. A snake excites a feeling of repulsion and fear in all mammals. By this repulsion and fear the mammal knows the nature of the snake and the relation of that nature to its own, and knows it correctly, but strictly personally,

[p. 221]

and only from its own standpoint. But what the snake is in itself the animal never knows by the emotion of fear. What the snake is in itself--not in the philosophical meaning of the thing-in-itself (nor from the standpoint of the man or animal whom it has bitten or may bite) but simply from the standpoint of zoology--THIS CAN BE KNOWN BY THE INTELLECT ONLY.

Emotions unite with the different I's of our psyche. Emotions apparently the same may be united with the very small I's and with the very great and lofty I's; and so the role and meaning of such emotions in life may be very different. The continual shifting of emotions, each of which calls itself I and strives to establish power over man, is the chief obstacle to the establishment of a constant I. And particularly does this interfere when the emotions are manifesting in and passing through the regions of the psyche connected with a certain kind of self-consciousness and self-assertion. These are the so-called personal emotions.

The sign of the growth of the emotions is the liberation of them from the personal element, and their sublimation on the higher planes. The liberation from personal elements augments the cognizing power of the emotions, because the more there are of pseudo-personal elements in emotion the greater the possibility of delusion. Personal emotion is always partial, always unjust, by reason of the one fact that it opposes itself to all the rest.

Thus the cognitive power of the emotions is greater in proportion as there is less of self-elements in a given emotion, i.e., more consciousness that this emotion is not the I.

We have seen before in studying space and its laws, that the evolution of knowledge consists in a gradual withdrawing from oneself. Hinton expresses this very well. He says that only by withdrawing from ourselves do we begin to comprehend the world as it is. The entire system of mental exercises with colored cubes invented by Hinton aims at the training of consciousness to look at things from other than the pseudo-personal standpoint.

When we study a block of cubes, writes Hinton, (say a cube consisting of 27 lesser cubes) we first of all learn it by starting from a particular cube and axis, and learning how 26 others come with regard to that cube. . . . We learn the block with regard to this axis, so that we can mentally conceive the disposition of every cube as it comes regarded from one point of view. Next we suppose ourselves to be in another

[p. 222]

cube at the extremity of another axis; and looking from this axis, we learn the aspect of all the cubes, and so on.

Thus we impress on the feelings what the block of cubes is like from every axis. In this way we get a knowledge of the block of cubes.

Now, to get the knowledge of humanity, we must study it from the standpoint of the individuals composing it.

The egotist may be compared with the man who knows a cube from one standpoint only.

Those who feel superficially with a great many people, are like those learners who have a slight acquaintance with a block of cubes from many points of view.

Those who have a few deep attachments are like those who know them well from only one or two points of view.

And after all, perhaps the difference between the good and the rest of us, lies rather in the former being aware. There is something outside them which draws them to it, which they see, while we do not. [*1]

Just as it is incorrect in relation to oneself to evaluate everything from the standpoint of one emotion, contrasting it with all the rest, so is it correspondingly incorrect in relation to the world and men to evaluate everything from the standpoint of one's own accidental I, contrasting oneself of a given moment with the rest.

Thus the problem of correct emotional knowledge consists in the fact that one shall feel in relation to the world and men from some standpoint other than the personal. And the broader the circle becomes for which a person feels, the deeper becomes the knowledge which his emotions yield. But not all emotions are of equal potency in liberating from self-elements. Certain emotions from their very nature are disruptive, separative, alienating, forcing man to feel himself as individualized and separate; such are hatred, fear, jealousy, pride, envy. These are emotions of a materialistic order, forcing a belief in matter. And there are emotions which are unitive, harmonizing, making man feel himself to be a part of some great whole; such are love, sympathy, friendship, compassion, love of country, love of nature, love of humanity. These emotions lead man out of the material world and show him the truth of the world of the wondrous. Emotions of this character liberate him more easily from self-elements than those of the former class. Nevertheless there can be a quite impersonal pride--the pride in an heroic deed accomplished by another man. There can even be

[p. 223]

impersonal envy, when we envy a man who has conquered himself, conquered his personal desire to live, sacrificed himself for that which everyone considers to be right and just, but which we cannot bring ourselves to do, cannot even think of doing, because of weakness, of love of life. There can be impersonal hatred--of injustice, of brute force, anger against stupidity, dullness; aversion to nastiness, to hypocrisy. These feelings undoubtedly elevate and purify the soul of man and help him to see things which he would not otherwise see.

Christ driving the money-changers out of the temple, or expressing his opinion about the Pharisees, was not entirely meek and mild; and there are cases wherein meekness and mildness are not virtues at all. Emotions of love, sympathy, pity transform themselves very readily into sentimentality, into weakness; and thus transformed they contribute of course to nescience, i.e., matter. The difficulty of dividing emotions into categories is increased by the fact that all emotions of the higher order, without exception, can also be personal and then their action partakes of the nature of this class.

______

There is a division of emotions into pure and impure. We all know this, we all use these words, but understand little of what they mean. Truly, what does "pure" or "impure" mean with reference to feeling?

Common morality divides, a priori, all emotions into pure and impure according to certain outward signs, just as Noah divided the animals in his ark. All "fleshly desires" fall into the category of the "impure." In reality indeed, "fleshly desires" are just as pure as is everything in nature. Nevertheless emotions are pure and impure. We know very well that there is truth in this classification. But where is it, and what does it mean?

Only an analysis of emotions from the standpoint of knowledge can give the key to this.

Impure emotion--this is quite the same thing as impure glass, impure water, or impure sound, i.e., emotion which is not pure, but containing sediments, deposits, or echoes of other emotions: IMPURE--MIXED. Impure emotion gives obscure, not pure knowledge,

[p. 224]

just as impure glass gives a confused image. Pure emotion gives a clear pure image of that for the knowledge of which it is intended.

This is the only possible decision of the question. The arrival at this conclusion saves us from the common mistake of moralists who divide arbitrarily all emotion into "moral" and "immoral." But if we try for a moment to separate emotions from their usual moral frames, then we see that matters are considerably simpler, that there are no in their nature pure emotions, nor impure in their nature, but that each emotion will be pure or impure according to whether or not there are admixtures of other emotions in it.

There can be a pure sensuality, the sensuality of the Song of Songs, which initiates into the sensation of cosmic life and gives the power to hear the beating pulse of nature. And there can be an impure sensuality, mixed with other emotions good or bad from a moral standpoint but equally making muddy the fundamental feeling.

There can be pure sympathy, and there can be sympathy mixed with calculation to receive something for one's sympathy. There can be pure love of knowledge, a thirst for knowledge for its own sake, and there can be an inclination to knowledge wherein considerations of utility or profit assume the chief importance.

In their outer manifestation pure and impure emotions may differ very little. Two men may be playing chess, acting outwardly very similarly, but in one will burn self-love, desire of victory, and he will be full of different unpleasant feelings toward his rival--fear, envy of a clever move, spite, jealousy, animosity, or schemes to win, while the other will simply solve a complex mathematical problem which lies before him, not thinking about his rival at all.

The emotion of the first man will be impure, if only because it contains much of the mixed. The emotion of the second will be pure. The meaning of this is of course perfectly clear.

Examples of a similar division of outwardly similar emotions may be constantly seen in the esthetic, literary, scientific, public and even the spiritual and religious activities of men. In all regions of this activity only complete victory over the pseudo-personal elements leads a man to the correct understanding of the world and of himself. All emotions colored by such SELF-ELEMENTS

[p. 225]

are like concave, convex, or otherwise curved glasses which refract rays incorrectly and distort the image of the world.

Therefore the problem of emotional knowledge consists in a corresponding preparation of the emotions which serve as organs of knowledge.

Become as little children . . . and
 Blessed are the pure in heart. . . .

In these evangelical words is expressed first of all the idea of the purification of the emotions. It is impossible to know through impure emotions. Therefore in the interests of a correct understanding of the world and of the self, man should undertake the purification and the elevation of his emotions.

This last leads to an entirely new view of morality. That morality the aim of which is to establish a system of correct relations toward the emotions, and to assist in their purification and elevation, ceases in our eyes to be some wearisome and self-limiting exercise in virtue. Morality--this is a form of esthetics.

That which is not moral is first of all not beautiful, because not concordant, not harmonious.

We see all the enormous meaning that morality may have in our life; we see the meaning morality has for knowledge, for the reason that there are emotions by which we know, and there are emotions by which we delude ourselves. If morality can actually help us to analyze these, then its value is indisputable from the standpoint of knowledge.

Current popular psychology knows very well that malice, hatred, anger, jealousy BLIND a man, DARKEN his reason; it knows that fear DRIVES ONE INSANE, etc., etc.

But we also know that every emotion may serve either knowledge or nescience.

Let us consider such an emotion--valuable and capable of high development--as the pleasure of activity. This emotion is a powerful motive force in culture, and of service in the perfection of life and in the evolution of all higher faculties of man. But it is also the cause of an infinite number of his delusions and faux pas for which he afterwards pays bitterly. In the passion of activity man is easily inclined to forget the aim that started him to act; to accept

[p. 226]

the activity itself for the aim and even to sacrifice the aim in order to preserve the activity. This is seen with especial clearness in the activity of various spiritual movements. Man, starting out in one direction, turns in the opposite one without himself noticing it, and often descends into the abyss thinking that he is scaling the heights.

There is nothing more contradictory, more paradoxical than the man who is enticed away by activity. We have become so accustomed to "man" that the strange perversions to which he is sometimes subject fail to startle us as curiosities.

Violence in the name of freedom; violence in the name of love; the Gospel of Christianity with sword in hand; the stakes of the Inquisition for the glory of a God of Mercy; the oppression of thought and speech on the part of the ministers of religion--all these are incarnated absurdities of which humanity only is capable.

A correct understanding of morality can preserve us in some degree from such perversions of thought. In our life in general there is not much morality. European culture has gone along the path of intellectual development. The intellect invented and organized without considering the moral meaning of its own activity. Out of this arose the paradox that the crown of European culture is the "dreadnaught."

Many people realize all this, and on account of it assume a negative attitude to all culture. But this is unjust. European culture created much other than dreadnaughts that is new and valuable, facilitating life. The elaboration of the principles of freedom and right; the abolition of slavery (though these are indeed nominal); the victory of man in many regions where nature presented to him a hostile front; the methods for the distribution of thought, the press; the miracles of contemporary medicine and surgery--all these are indisputably real conquests, and it is impossible not to take them into consideration. But there is no morality in them, i.e., there is no truth but too much of falsehood. We are satisfied with mere principles as such; we are content to think that eventually they will be introduced into life, and we neither marvel nor are disturbed at the thought that we ourselves (i.e., cultured humanity), developing beautiful principles, continually deny and controvert them in our lives. The man of European culture invents with equal readiness a machine gun and

[p. 227]

a new surgical apparatus. European culture began from the life of the savage, taking this life as an example as it were and starting to develop all its sides to the uttermost without thinking of their moral aspects. The savage crushed the head of his enemy with a simple club. We invented for this purpose complicated devices, making possible the crushing of hundreds and thousands of heads at once. Therefore such a thing as this happened: aerial , toward which men had looked forward for millenniums, finally achieved, is used first of all for purposes of war.

Morality should be the co-ordination and the necessity for the co-ordination of all sides of life, i.e., of the actions of man and humanity with the higher emotions and the higher comprehensions of the intellect. From this point of view the statement previously made, that morality is a form of esthetics, becomes clear. Esthetics--the sense of beauty--is the sensation of the relation of parts to a whole, and the perception of the necessity for a certain harmonious relation. And morality is the same. Those actions, thoughts and feelings are not moral which are not coordinated, which are not harmonious with the higher understanding and the higher sensations accessible to man. The introduction of morality into our life would make it less paradoxical, less contradictory, more logical and--most important--more civilized; because now our vaunted civilization is much compromised by "dreadnaughts," i.e., war and everything that goes with it, as well as many things of "peaceful" life such as the death penalty, prisons, etc.

Morality, or moral esthetics in such a sense as is here shown, is necessary to us. Without it we too easily forget that the word has after all a certain relation to the act. We are interested in many things, we enter into many things, but for some strange reason we fail to note the incongruity between our spiritual life and our life on earth. Thus we create two lives. In one we are preternaturally strict with ourselves, analyze with great care every idea before we discuss it; in the other we permit with extreme ease any compromises, and easily keep from seeing that which we do not care to see. Moreover, we reconcile ourselves to this division. We do not find it necessary seriously to introduce into our lives our higher ideals, and almost accept as a principle the division of the "real" from the "spiritual." All of the indecencies of our life have arisen as a result of this; all of those infinite falsifications

[p. 228]

of our life--falsifications of the press, art, drama, science, politics--falsifications in which we suffocate as in a fetid swamp, but which we ourselves create, because we and none other are servants and ministers of those falsifications. We have no sense of the necessity to introduce our ideals into life, to introduce them into our daily activity, and we even admit the possibility that this activity may go counter to our spiritual quests, in accordance with one of those established standards the harm of which we recognize, but for which no one holds himself responsible because he did not create them himself. We have no sense of personal responsibility, no boldness, and we are even without the consciousness of their necessity. All this would be very sad and hopeless if the concept "we" were not so dubious. In reality, the correctness of the very expression "we" is subject to grave doubt. The enormous majority of the population of this globe is engaged in effect in destroying, disfiguring, and falsifying the ideas of the minority. The majority is without ideas. It is incapable of understanding the ideas of the minority, and left to itself it must inevitably disfigure and destroy. Imagine a menagerie full of monkeys. In this menagerie a man is working. The monkeys observe his movements and try to imitate him but they can imitate only his visible movements; the meaning and aim of these movements are closed to them; therefore their actions will have quite another result. And should the monkeys escape from their cages and get hold of the man's tools, then perhaps they will destroy all his work, and inflict great damage on themselves as well. But they will never be able to create anything. Therefore a man would make a great mistake if he referred to their "work," and spoke of them as "we." Creation and destruction--or more correctly, the ability to create or the ability only to destroy--are the principal signs of the two types of men.

Morality is necessary to "man": only by regarding everything from the standpoint of morality is it possible to differentiate unmistakably the work of man from the activity of apes. But at the same time delusions are nowhere more easily created than in the region of morality. Allured by his own particular morality and moral gospel, a man forgets the aim of moral perfection, forgets that this aim consists in knowledge. He begins to see an aim in morality itself. Then occurs the a priori division of the emotions

[p. 229]

into good and bad, "moral" and "immoral." The correct understanding of the aim and meaning of the emotions is lost along with this. Man is charmed with his "niceness." He desires that everyone else should be just as nice as he, or as that remote ideal created by himself. Then appears delight in morality for morality's sake, a sort of moral sport--the exercise of morality for morality's sake. A man under these circumstances begins to be afraid of everything. Everywhere, in all manifestations of life, something "immoral" begins to appear to him, threatening to dethrone him or others from that height to which they have risen or may rise. This develops a preternaturally suspicious attitude toward the morality of others. In an ardor of proselytism, desiring to popularize his moral views, he begins quite definitely to regard everything which is not in accord with his morality as hostile to it. All this becomes "black" in his eyes. Starting with the idea of utter freedom, by arguments, by compromises, he very easily convinces himself that it is necessary to fight freedom. He already begins to admit a censure of thought. The free expression of opinions contrary to his own seems to him inadmissible. All this may be done with the best intentions, but the results of it are very well known.

There is no tyranny more ferocious than the tyranny of morality. Everything is sacrificed to it. And of course there is nothing so blind as such tyranny, as such "morality."

Nevertheless humanity needs morality, but of a different kind--such as is founded on the real data of superior knowledge. Humanity is passionately seeking for this, and perhaps will find it. Then on the basis of this new morality will occur a great division, and those few who will be able to follow it will begin to rule others, or they will disappear altogether. In any case, because of this new morality and those forces which it will engender, the contradictions of life will disappear, and those biped animals which constitute the majority of humanity will have no opportunity to pose as men any longer.

______

The organized forms of intellectual knowledge are: science, founded upon observation, calculation and experience; and philosophy,

[p. 230]

founded upon the speculative method of reasoning and drawing conclusions.

The organized forms of emotional knowledge are: religion and art. Religious teachings, taking on the character of different "cults" as they depart from the original "revelation," are founded entirely upon the emotional nature of man. Magnificent temples, the gorgeous vestments of priests and acolytes, the solemn ritual of worship, processions, sacrifices, singing, music, dances--all these have as their aim the attuning of man in a certain way, the evoking in him of certain definite feelings. The same purpose is served by religious myths, legends, stories of the lives of heroes and saints, prophecies, apocalypses--they all act upon the imagination, upon the feelings, although they fail to fulfil their original purpose, which is to transmit ideas, i.e., to serve knowledge.

The aim of it is to give God to man, to give him morality, i.e., to give him an accessible knowledge of the mysterious side of the world. Religion may deviate from its true aim, may serve earthly interests and purposes, but its foundation is the search for truth, for God.

Art serves beauty, i.e., emotional knowledge of its own kind. Art discovers beauty in everything, and compels man to feel it and therefore to know. Art is a powerful instrument of knowledge of the noumenal world: mysterious depths, each one more amazing than the last, open to the vision of man when he holds in his hands this magical key. But let him only think that this mystery is not for knowledge but for pleasure in it, and all the charm disappears at once. Just as soon as art begins to take delight in that beauty which is already found, instead of the search for new beauty an arrestment occurs and art becomes a superfluous estheticism, encompassing man's vision like a wall. The aim of art is the search for beauty, just as the aim of religion is the search for God and truth. And exactly as art stops, so religion stops also as soon as it ceases to search for God and truth, thinking it has found them. This idea is expressed in the precept: Seek . . . the kingdom of God and his righteousness. . . . It does not say, find; but merely, seek!

______

[p. 231]

Science, philosophy, religion and art are forms of knowledge. The method of science is experiment; the method of philosophy is speculation; the method of religion and art is moral or esthetic emotional inspiration. But both science and philosophy, religion and art, begin to serve true knowledge only when in them commence to manifest the sensing and finding of some inner property in things. In general it is quite possible to say--and perhaps it will be most true to fact--that the aim of even purely intellectual systems of philosophy and science consists not at all in the giving to man of certain data of knowledge, but in the raising of man to such a height of thinking and feeling as to enable him to pass to those new and higher forms of knowledge to which art and religion approach more nearly. It is necessary however to remember that these very divisions into science, philosophy, religion and art betray the poverty and incompleteness of each. A complete religion unites in itself religion, art, philosophy and science; a complete art equally unites them, while a complete science or a complete philosophy comprehends religion and art. A religion which contradicts science, and a science which contradicts religion are both equally false.

Footnotes

^214:1 Al-Ghazzali, "The Alchemy of Happiness."

^222:1 C. H. Hinton, "A New Era of Thought," pp. 77, 78.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 232]

  

CHAPTER XIX

          The   intellectual method, objective knowledge. The limits of objective knowledge.   The  of the expansion of   the application of the psychological method. New forms of knowledge. The   ideas of Plotinus. Different forms of consciousness. Sleep (the potential   state of consciousness). Dreams (consciousness enclosed in itself, reflected   from itself). Waking consciousness (dualistic sensation of the world, the   division of the I and the Not-I). Ecstasy (the liberation of the self). Turiya (the absolute consciousness of   all, as of the self). "The dewdrop slips into the shining sea." Nirvana.

     
   HAVING established the principle of the possible unification of the forms of our knowledge, let us discover if this unification is not somewhere realized; how it may be realized; and whether it will be realized in a form entirely new, or in one of the existing forms which shall include all others in itself.

For this we shall return to the fundamental principles of our knowledge, and compare the possible chances for the development of different paths, i.e., we shall try to find out as best we may that path which leads to the new knowledge, and in the shortest time.

Up to a certain point we have already established this regarding the emotional path; the growth of the emotions, their purification and their liberation from the materialistic elements of possession and fear of loss must lead to super-personal knowledge and to intuition.

But how can the intellectual path lead to the new forms of knowledge?

First of all, what is the new knowledge?

The new knowledge is direct knowledge, by an inner sense. I feel my own pain directly; the new knowledge can give me the power to sense, as mine, the pain of another man. Thus the new knowledge is the expansion of a direct experience. The question is, can the expansion of objective knowledge be founded upon this

[p. 233]

new experience? Let us analyze the nature of objective knowledge.

Our objective knowledge is contained in science and philosophy. Inner experience science has always regarded as a thing given, which cannot be changed, but as something "doubtful," standing in need of verification and affirmation by the objective method. Science has studied the world as an objective phenomenon, and it has striven to study the psyche and its properties as such another objective phenomenon.

In another quarter, the study of the psyche from the inside, so to speak, was proceeding simultaneously with this, but to this study no great significance was ever attached. The limits of inner knowledge, i.e., the limits of the psyche, were considered to be strictly definite, established, and unchangeable. Only for objective knowledge, founded upon identical inner experience, was the possibility of expansion admitted.

Let us discover if there is not some mistake here: is the expansion of objective knowledge, founded upon a limited experience, really possible, and are the possibilities of experience really limited?

_____

Developing science, i.e., objective knowledge, is encountering obstacles everywhere. Science studies phenomena; just as soon as it attempts to discover causes, it is confronted with the wall of the unknown, and to it unknowable. The question narrows itself down to this: is this unknowable absolutely unknowable, or is it so only for the methods of our science?

At the present time the situation is just this: the number of unknown facts in every region of scientific knowledge is rapidly increasing; and the unknown threatens to swallow the known--or the accepted as known. One might define the progress of science, especially latterly, as a very rapid growth of the regions of nescience.

Nescience of course existed before, and not in less degree than at present. But before, it was not so clearly recognized--at that time science did not know what it does not know. Now it knows this more and more, and more and more knows its conditionality. A little more, and in every separate branch of science that which it does not know will become greater than that which it knows.

In every department science itself is beginning to repudiate its

[p. 234]

own foundations. A little more, and science in its entirety will ask, "Where am I?"

Positive thinking--which conceived of its problem as the deducing of general conclusions from the findings of each separate science and all of them combined--will feel itself compelled to deduce conclusions from that which science does not know. Then all the world will see before it the colossus with feet of clay, or rather without any feet at all, but with a formidable misty body, hanging in the air.

For a long time philosophy has realized the lack of feet of this colossus, but the majority of cultivated mankind is still hypnotized by positivism, which sees something in place of those feet. How-ever, it will be necessary to part company with this illusion very soon. Mathematics, lying at the very foundation of positive knowledge, and to which exact science always pointed with pride, as to its subject and vassal, is in reality now denying all positivism. Mathematics was included in the cycle of positive sciences only by mistake, and soon indeed mathematics will become the principal weapon AGAINST POSITIVISM.

By positivism I mean, in this connection, that system which affirms, in contradiction to Kant, that the study of phenomena can bring us nearer to things in themselves, i.e., which affirms that by going along the path of the study of phenomena we can come to an understanding of causes, and--this is important--which regards physico-mechanical phenomena as the cause of biological and psychic phenomena.

The usual positivistic view denies the existence of the hidden side of life, i.e., it finds that the hidden side consists of electro-magnetic phenomena and opens to us only little by little--and that the progress of science consists in the gradual unveiling of the hidden.

"This is not known as yet," says the positivist, when his attention is called to something 'hidden,' "but it will be known. Science, going by the same path that it has gone up to now, will discover this also. Five hundred years ago, Europe did not know of the existence of America; seventy years ago we did not know of the existence of bacteria; twenty-five years ago we did not know of the existence of radium. But America, bacteria and radium are all discovered now. Similarly and by the same methods, and by such methods only, will be discovered everything that is to be discovered.

[p. 235]

[paragraph continues] The apparatuses are being perfected, the methods, processes and observations are being refined. That which we did not even suspect a hundred years ago, has now become a generally known and generally understood fact. Everything that is possible to be known will become known after this manner."

Thus do the adherents of the positivistic viewpoints speak, but at the foundation of these reasonings lies a deep delusion.

The affirmation of positivism would be quite true did positivism move uniformly in all directions of the unknown; if sealed doors did not exist for it; if in the multitude of questions the principal questions did not remain just as obscure as in those times when science did not exist at all. We see that enormous regions are closed utterly to science, that it never penetrated into them, and worst of all it made not a single step in the direction of these regions.

There are multitudes of problems the solving of which science has not even attempted; problems in the presence of which the contemporary scientist, armed with all his science, is as helpless as a savage or a four-year-old child.

Such are the problems of life and death, the problems of space and time, the mystery of consciousness, etc., etc.

We all know this, and the only thing we can do is to try not to think about the existence of these problems, to forget about them. We do so as a rule, but this does not annihilate them. They continue to exist, and at any given moment we may turn to them and try on them the rigidity and force of our scientific method. And every time, at such an attempt, we find that our scientific method is not equal to these problems. By its aid we can discover the chemical composition of remote stars; can photograph the skeleton within the human body, invisible to the human eye; can invent a floating mine which can be controlled from a distance by means of electrical waves, and can in this way annihilate in a moment hundreds of lives; but by the aid of this method we cannot tell what the man standing beside us is thinking about. No matter how much we may weigh, sound or photograph a man, we shall never know his thoughts unless he himself tells them to us. BUT THIS IS TRULY QUITE A DIFFERENT METHOD.

The sphere of action of the method of exact science is strictly

[p. 236]

limited. This sphere is the world of the immediate experience accessible for man. In the world lying beyond the domain of usual experience exact science with its methods has never penetrated and will never penetrate.

The expansion of objective knowledge is possible only in case direct experience is expanded. But in spite of all the growth of objective knowledge science has made not one step in this direction and the border-line of experience remains in the same place. Could science take a single step in this direction, were we able to feel or sense differently, then we might admit that science might move and take two, three, ten, and ten thousand steps. But it has taken not even one, and it is therefore reasonable to believe that it will never take it. The world outside the experience of the five senses is closed to objective investigation, and for this quite definite causes exist.

By no means everything that exists can be detected by any of five senses.

Objective existence is a very narrowly defined form of existence, and does not by any means exhaust or comprehend existence as a whole. The mistake of positivism consists in the fact that it has recognized as really existing only that which exists objectively, and it has even begun to deny the very existence of all the rest.

But what is objectivity?

We can define it in this way: because of the properties of our receptivity, or because of the conditions under which our psyche works, we segregate a small number of facts into a definite group. This group of facts represents in itself the objective world, and is accessible to the investigation of science. But in no case does this group represent in itself EVERYTHING THAT IS EXISTING. Extension in space and existence in time constitute the first condition of objective existence. And yet the forms of the extension of a thing in space, and those of its existence in time are created by the cognizing subject, and do not belong to the thing itself. Matter is first of all three-dimensional. This three-dimensionality is the form of our receptivity. Matter of four dimensions would imply a change in the form of our receptivity.

Materiality is the condition of existence in space and time, i.e., a condition of existence under which "at one time, and in one place, two similar phenomena cannot occur." This is an exhaustive definition

[p. 237]

of materiality. It is clear that under the conditions known to us, two similar phenomena, occurring simultaneously in one place, will compose one phenomenon. But this is obligatory for those conditions of existence which we know, i.e., for such matter as we perceive. For the universe it is absolutely not obligatory. We constantly observe the conditions of materiality in those cases in which we must create in our life a sequence of phenomena or are obliged to select, because our matter does not permit us to juxtapose in a definite interval of time more than a certain number of phenomena. The necessity for selection is perhaps the chief visible sign of materiality. Outside of matter, the necessity for. selection is done away with, and if we imagine the life of a feeling being, independent of the conditions of materiality, such a being will be capable of possessing simultaneously such faculties as from our standpoint are incompatible, opposite, and eliminative of one another: the power of being in several places at the same time; to command different views; to perform opposite and mutually exclusive actions simultaneously.

In speaking of matter it is necessary always to remember that matter is not a substance, but a condition. Suppose for example, that a man is blind. It is impossible to regard this blindness as a substance; it is a condition of the existence of a given man. Matter is some sort of blindness.

Objective knowledge can grow infinitely, its progress depending on the perfection of its instruments and the refinement of its methods of observation and experiment. One thing only it cannot transcend--the limits of the three-dimensional sphere, i.e., the conditions of space and time, for the reason that objective knowledge is created under these conditions, and the conditions of the existence of the three-dimensional world are the conditions of its existence. Objective knowledge will always be subject to these conditions, for otherwise it would cease to exist. No apparatus, no instrument, will ever conquer these conditions, for should they conquer they would destroy themselves first of all. Perpetual motion, i.e., the violation of the fundamental laws of the three-dimensional world as we know it, would be the only victory over the three-dimensional world in the three-dimensional world itself.

But it is necessary to remember that objective knowledge does not study facts, but only the perception of facts.

[p. 238]

IN ORDER THAT OBJECTIVE KNOWLEDGE SHALL TRANSCEND THE LIMITS OF THE THREE-DIMENSIONAL SPHERE, IT IS NECESSARY THAT THE CONDITIONS OF PERCEPTION SHALL CHANGE.

As long as this does not happen, our objective knowledge is confined within the limits of an infinite three-dimensional sphere. It can proceed infinitely upon the radii of that sphere, but it will never penetrate into that region a section of which constitutes our three-dimensional world. Moreover we know, from the preceding, that should our receptivity become more limited, then objective knowledge would be correspondingly limited also. It is impossible to convey to a dog the idea of the sphericality of the earth; to make it remember the weight of the sun and the distances between the planets is equally impossible. Its objective knowledge is vastly more personal than ours; and the cause of it lies in the dog's more limited psyche.

Thus we see that objective knowledge depends upon the properties of the psyche.

Indeed, between the objective knowledge of a savage and that of Herbert Spencer there is an enormous difference; but that of neither the one nor the other transcends the limit of the three-dimensional sphere, i.e., the limits of the "conditional," the unreal. In order to transcend the three-dimensional sphere it is necessary to expand or change the forms of receptivity.

Is the expansion of the limits of receptivity possible?

The study of complex forms of consciousness assures us that it is possible.

Plotinus, the famous Alexandrian philosopher (third century) affirmed that for perfect knowledge the subject and object must be united that the rational agent and the thing being comprehended must not be separate.

For that which sees is itself the thing, which IS SEEN. [Select Works of Plotinus. Bohn's Library, p. 271.]

Here it is indeed necessary to understand, "to see" other than in a literal sense. The "seeing" changes with the changes of the state of consciousness in which it is proceeding.

But what forms of consciousness exist?

[p. 239]

Hindu philosophy makes the division into four states of consciousness: sleep, dream, waking, and the state of absolute consciousness--turiya. [*1] (The Ancient Wisdom, Annie Besant.)

G. R. S. Mead, in the preface to Taylor's translation of Plotinus (Bohn's Library) correlates the terminology of Shankaracharya--the leader of the Advaita-Vedanta school of ancient India--with that of Plotinus.

The first or spiritual state was ecstasy; from ecstasy it forgot itself into deep sleep; from profound sleep it awoke out of unconsciousness, but still within itself, into the internal world of dreams; from dreaming it passes finally into the thoroughly waking state, and the outer world of sense.

Ecstasy is the term used by Plotinus; it is entirely identical with the term turiya of Hindu psychology.

The consciousness, which is in a waking condition, is surrounded by what constitutes its sense-organs and receptive apparatus in the phenomenal world; it differentiates the "subjective" from the "objective," and differentiates its forms of perception from "reality." It recognizes the phenomenal objective world as reality, and dreams as unreality, and includes along with it, as being unreal, the entire subjective world. Its vague sensation of real things, lying beyond that which is apprehended by the organs of sense, i.e., sensations of noumena, consciousness identifies as it were with dreams--with the unreal, imaginary, abstract, subjective--and regards phenomena as the only reality.

Gradually convinced by reason of the unreality of phenomena, or inwardly sensing this unreality and the reality which lies behind, we free ourselves from the mirage of phenomena, we begin to understand that all the phenomenal world is in substance subjective also, that the great realities lie deeper down. Then a complete change takes place in consciousness in all its concepts about reality. That

[p. 240]

which before was regarded as real becomes unreal, and that which was regarded as unreal becomes real. [*1]

This transition into the absolute state of consciousness is "UNION WITH DIVINITY," "VISION OF GOD," EXPERIENCING THE "KINGDOM OF HEAVEN," "ENTERING NIRVANA." All these expressions of mystical religions represent the psychological fact of the expansion of consciousness, such an expansion that the consciousness absorbs  in the all.

C. W. Leadbeater, in an essay, Some Notes on the Higher Planes. Nirvana (The Theosophist. July, 1910.) writes:

Sir Edwin Arnold wrote of that beatific condition, that "the dewdrop slips into the shining sea."

Those who have passed through that most marvelous of experiences know that, paradoxical as it may seem, the sensation is exactly the reverse, and that a far closer description would be that THE OCEAN HAD SOMEHOW BEEN POURED INTO THE DROP!

The consciousness, wide as the sea, with "its centre everywhere and its circumference nowhere," is a great and glorious fact; but when a man attains it, it seems to him that his consciousness has widened to take in all that, not that he is merged into something else.

This pouring of the ocean into the drop occurs because the consciousness never loses itself, i.e., does not disappear, does not become extinguished. When it seems to us that consciousness is extinguished, in reality it is only changing its form, it ceases to be analogical to ours, and we lose the means of convincing ourselves of its existence.

We have no exact data at all to think that it is dissipated. In order to escape from the field possible to our observation, it is sufficient for consciousness TO CHANGE ONLY A LITTLE.

In the objective world, indeed, this "slipping of the dewdrop into the sea" leads to the annihilation of the drop, to the absorption of it by the sea. We have never observed another order of things in the objective world and therefore cannot imagine it. But in the real, i.e., the subjective world, of course another order must exist and operate. The DROP OF CONSCIOUSNESS merging with the SEA

[p. 241]

OF CONSCIOUSNESS knows it, but does not itself cease to exist because of that. Therefore undoubtedly, the sea is absorbed by the drop.

In the Letters to Flaccus of Plotinus, we find a wonderful description of a psychology and theory of knowledge founded exactly upon the idea of the expansion of receptivity.

External objects present us only with appearances. Concerning them, therefore, we may be said to possess opinion rather than knowledge. The distinctions in the actual world of appearance are of import only to ordinary and practical men. Our question lies with the ideal reality that exists behind appearance. How does the mind perceive these ideas? Are they without us, and is the reason, like sensation, occupied with objects external to itself? What certainty would we then have--what assurance that our perception was infallible? The object perceived would be a something different from the mind perceiving it. We should have then an image instead of reality. It would be monstrous to believe for a moment that the mind was unable to perceive ideal truth as it is, and that we had not certainty and real knowledge concerning the world of intelligence. It follows, therefore, that this region of truth is not to be investigated as a thing external to us, and so only imperfectly known. It is within us. Here the objects we contemplate and that which contemplates are identical--both are thought. The subject cannot surely know an object different from itself. The world of ideas lies within our intelligence. Truth, therefore, is not the agreement of our apprehension of an external object with the object itself. It is the agreement of the mind with itself. Consciousness, therefore, is the sole basis of certainty. The mind is its own witness. Reason sees in itself that which is above itself and its source; and again, that which is below itself as still itself once more.

Knowledge has three degrees--opinion, science, illumination. The means or instrument of the first is sense; of the second dialectic; of the third intuition. To the last I subordinate reason. It is absolute knowledge founded on the identity of the mind knowing with the object known.

There is a raying out of all orders of existence, an external emanation from the ineffable One. There is again a returning impulse, drawing all upward and inward toward the centre from whence all came. . . . The wise man recognizes the idea of the good within him. This he develops by withdrawal into the holy place of his own soul. He who does not understand how the soul contains the beautiful within itself, seeks to realize beauty without by laborious production. His aim should rather be to concentrate and simplify, and so to expand his being; instead of going out into the manifold, to forsake it for the One, and to float upwards

[p. 242]

toward the divine fount of being whose stream flows within him.

You ask, how can we know the Infinite? I, answer, not by reason. It is the office of reason to distinguish and define. The infinite, therefore, cannot be ranked among its objects. You can only apprehend the infinite by a faculty superior to reason, by entering into a state in which you are your finite self no longer--in which the divine essence is communicated to you. This is ecstasy. It is the liberation of your mind from its finite consciousness. Like can only apprehend like; when you thus cease to be finite, you become one with the infinite. In the reduction of your soul to its simplest self, its divine essence, you realize this union--this identity.

But this sublime condition is not of permanent duration. It is only now and then that we can enjoy this elevation above the limits of the body and the world. I myself have realized it but three times as yet, and Porphyry hitherto not once.

All that tends to purify and elevate the mind will assist you in this attainment, and facilitate the approach and the recurrence of these happy intervals. There are, then, different roads by which this end may be reached. The love of beauty which exalts the poet; that devotion to the One and that ascent of science which makes the ambition of the philosopher, and that love and those prayers by which some devout and ardent soul tends in its moral purity towards perfection--these are the great highways conducting to the height above the actual and the particular, where we stand in the immediate presence of the Infinite, who shines out as from the depths of the soul.

In another place in his works, Plotinus defines the ecstatic knowledge more exactly, presenting such properties of it as to reveal to us quite clearly that the infinite expansion of subjective knowledge is there meant.

When we see God [says Plotinus] we see him not by reason, but by something that is higher than reason. It is impossible however to say about him who sees that he sees, because he does not behold and discern two different things (the seer and the thing seen). He changes completely, ceases to be himself, preserves nothing of his I. Immersed in God, he constitutes one whole with Him; like the centre of a circle, which coincides with the centre of another circle.

Footnotes

^239:1 According to the interpretation of the Southern Hindu school of occultism, the four states of consciousness are understood in somewhat different order. The most remote from the True, the most illusory, is the waking state; the second--sleep--is already nearer to the True; the third--deep sleep without dreams--contact with the True; and the fourth, samadhi, or ecstasy--union with the True.

^240:1 The conceptions of the subjective and of the objective should undergo a change. The usual terminology will be incorrect for an exact understanding. Everything phenomenal will become subjective; and the truly objective will be that which under ordinary conditions is regarded as subjective or non-existent.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 243]

  

CHAPTER XX

          The   sense of infinity. The Neophyte's first ordeal. An intolerable sadness. The loss   of everything real. What would an animal feel on becoming a man? The   transition to the new logic. Our logic as founded on the observation of the   laws of the phenomenal world. Its invalidity for the study of the world of   noumena. The necessity for another logic. Analogy between the axioms of logic   and of mathematics. TWO MATHEMATICS. The mathematics of real magnitudes   (infinite and variable): and the mathematics of unreal, imaginary magnitudes   (finite and constant). Transfinite numbers--numbers lying beyond   INFINITY. The possibility of different infinities.

     
   THERE is in existence an idea which a man should always call to mind when too much subjugated by the illusions of the reality of the unreal, visible world in which everything has a beginning and an end. It is the idea of infinity, the fact of infinity.

In the book A New Era of Thought--concerning which I have had already much to say--in the chapter "Space the Scientific Basis of Altruism and Religion," Hinton says:

. . . When we come upon infinity in any mode of our thought, it is a sign that that mode of thought is dealing with a higher reality than it is adapted for, and in struggling to represent it, can only do so by an infinite  of terms (of realities of a higher order).

Truly what is infinity, as the ordinary mind represents it to itself?

It is the only reality and at the same time it is the abyss, the bottomless pit into which the mind falls, after having risen to heights to which it is not native.

Let us imagine for a moment that a man begins to feel infinity in everything: every thought, every idea leads him to the realization of infinity.

This will inevitably happen to a man approaching an understanding of a higher order of reality.

But what will he feel under such circumstances?

[p. 244]

He will sense a precipice, an abyss everywhere, no matter where he looks; and experience indeed an incredible horror, fear and sadness, until this fear and sadness shall transform themselves into the joy of the sensing of a new reality.

". . . An intolerable sadness is the very first experience of the Neophyte in occultism. . . ." says the author of Light on the Path.

We have already examined into the manner in which a two-dimensional being might approach to a comprehension of the third dimension. But we have never asked ourselves the question: what would it feel, beginning to sense the third dimension, beginning to be conscious of "a new world" environing it?

First of all, it would feel astonishment and fright--fright approaching horror; because in order to find the new world it must lose the old one.

_____

Let us imagine the predicament of an animal in which flashes of human understanding have begun to appear.

What will it sense first of all? First of all, that its old world, the world of the animal, its comfortable, habitual world, the one in which it was born, to which it has become accustomed, and which it imagines to be the only real one, is crumbling away and falling all around it. Everything that before seemed real, becomes false, delusive, fantastic, unreal. The impression of the unreality of all its environment will be very strong.

Until such a being shall learn to comprehend the reality of another, higher order, until it shall understand that behind the crumbling old world one infinitely more beautiful and new is opening up, considerable time will necessarily pass. And during all this time, a being in whom this new consciousness is in process of unfoldment must pass from one abyss of despair to another, from one negation to another. It must repudiate everything around itself. Only by the repudiation of everything will the possibility of entering into a new life be realized.

With the beginning of the gradual loss of the old world, the logic of the two-dimensional being--or that which stood for it for logic--will suffer continual violation, and its strongest impression

[p. 245]

will be that there is no logic at all, that no laws of any sort even exist.

Formerly, when it was an animal, it reasoned:

          This is this.

       This house is my own.

     
      That is that.

       That house is strange.

     
      This is not that.

       The strange house is not my own.

     
   The strange house and its own house the animal regards as different objects, having nothing in common. But now it will surprisedly understand that the strange house and its own house are EQUALLY houses.

How will it express this in its language of perceptions? Strictly speaking, it will not be able to express this at all, because it is impossible to express concepts in the language of an animal. The animal will simply mix up the sensations of the strange house and its own house. Confusedly, it will begin to feel some new properties in houses, and along with this it will feel less clearly those properties which made the strange house strange. Simultaneously with this, the animal will begin to sense new properties which it did not know before. As a result it will undoubtedly experience the necessity for a system of generalization of these new proper. ties--the necessity for a new logic expressing the relations of the new order of things. But having no concepts it will not be in a position to construe the axioms of Aristotelian logic, and will express its impression of the new order in the form of the entirely absurd but more nearly true proposition:

This is that.

Or let us imagine that to the animal with the rudimentary logic expressing its sensations,

This is this.
 That is that.
 This is not that.

somebody tries to prove that two different objects, two houses--its own and a strange one--are similar, that they represent one and 

[p. 246]

the same thing, that they are both houses. The animal will never credit this similarity. For it the two houses, its own, where it is fed, and the strange one, where it is beaten if it enters, will remain entirely different. There will be nothing in common in them for it, and the effort to prove to it the similarity of these two houses will lead to nothing until it senses this itself. Then, sensing confusedly the idea of the likeness of two different objects, and being without concepts, the animal will express this as something illogical from its own point of view. The idea, this and that are similar objects, the articulate two-dimensional being will translate into the language of its logic, in the shape of the formula: this is that; and of course will pronounce it an absurdity, and that the sensation of the new order of things leads to logical absurdities. But it will be unable to express that which it senses in any other way.

We are in exactly the same position--when we dead awaken--i.e., when we men, come to the realization of that other life, to the comprehension of higher things.

The same fright, the same loss of the real, the same impression of utter and never-ending illogicality, the same formula: "this is that," will afflict us.

In order to realize the new world, we must understand the new logical order of things.

_____

Our usual logic assists us in the investigation of the relations of the phenomenal world only. Many attempts have been made to define what logic is. But logic is just as essentially undefinable as is mathematics.

What is mathematics? The science of magnitudes.

What is logic? The science of concepts.

But these are not definitions, they are only the translation of the name. Mathematics, or the science of magnitudes, is that system which studies the quantitative relations between things; logic, or the science of concepts, is that system which studies the qualitative (categorical) relations between things.

Logic has been built up quite in the same way as mathematics. As with logic, so also with mathematics (at least the generally known mathematics of "finite" and "constant" quantities), both were deduced

[p. 247]

by us from the observation of the phenomena of our world. Generalizing our observations, we gradually discovered those relations which we called the fundamental laws of the world.

In logic, these fundamental laws are included in the axioms of Aristotle and of Bacon.

A is A.
 (That which was A will be A.)

A is not Not-A.
 (That which was Not-A will be Not-A.)

Everything is either A or Not-A.
 Everything will be either A or Not-A.

The logic of Aristotle and Bacon, developed and supplemented by their many followers, deals with concepts only.

Logos, the word, is the object of logic. An idea, in order to become the object of logical reasoning, in order to be subjected to the laws of logic, must be expressed in a word. That which cannot be expressed in a word cannot enter into a logical system. More-over a word can enter into a logical system, can be subjected to logical laws, only as a concept.

At the same time we know very well that not everything can be expressed in words. In our life and in our feelings there is much that cannot be expressed in concepts. Thus it is clear that even at the present moment, at the present stage of our development, not everything can be entirely logical for us. There are many things which in their substance are outside of logic altogether. This includes the entire region of feelings, emotions, religion. All art is just one entire illogicality; and as we shall presently see, mathematics, the most exact of sciences, is entirely illogical.

If we compare the axioms of the logic of Aristotle and of Bacon with the axioms of mathematics as it is commonly known, we find between them complete similarity.

The axioms of logic,

A is A.
 A is not Not-A. [p. 248]
 Everything is either A or Not-A.

fully correspond to the fundamental axioms of mathematics, to the axioms of identity and difference.

Every magnitude is equal to itself.
 The part is less than the whole.
 Two magnitudes, equal separately to a third, are equal to each other, etc.

The similarity between the axioms of mathematics and those of logic extends very far, and this permits us to draw a conclusion about their similar origin.

The laws of mathematics and of logic are the laws of the reflection of the phenomenal world in our receptivity and in our reasoning faculty.

Just as the axioms of logic can deal with concepts only, and are related solely to them, so the axioms of mathematics apply to finite and constant magnitudes only, and are related solely to them.

THESE AXIOMS ARE UNTRUE IN RELATION TO INFINITE AND VARIABLE MAGNITUDES, just as the axioms of logic are untrue even in relation to emotions, to symbols, to the musicality and the hidden meaning of words, to say nothing of those ideas which cannot be expressed in words.

What does this mean?

It means that the axioms of logic and of mathematics are deduced by us from the observation of phenomena, i.e., of the phenomenal world, and represent in themselves a certain conditional incorrectness, which is necessary for the knowledge of the unreal "subjective" world--in the true meaning of that word.

______

As has been said before, we have in reality two mathematics. One, the mathematics of finite and constant numbers, represents a quite artificial construction for the solution of problems based on conditional data. The chief of these conditional data consists in the fact that in problems of this mathematics there is always taken the t of the universe only, i.e., one section only of the universe is taken,

[p. 249]

which section is never taken in conjunction with another one. This mathematics of finite and constant magnitudes studies an artificial universe, and is in itself something especially created on the basis of our observation of phenomena, and serves for the simplification of these observations. Beyond phenomena the mathematics of finite and constant numbers cannot go. It is dealing with an imaginary world, with imaginary magnitudes. The practical results of those applied sciences which are built upon mathematical science should not confuse the observer, because these are merely the solutions of problems in definite artificial conditions.

The other, the mathematics of infinite and variable magnitudes, represents something entirely real, built upon the reasonings in regard to a real world.

The first is related to the world of phenomena, which represents in itself nothing other than our incorrect apprehension and perception of the world.

The second is related to the world of noumena, which represents in itself the world as it is.

The first is unreal, it exists in our consciousness, in our imagination.

The second is real, it expresses the relations of a real world.

_______

The mathematics of transfinite numbers, so called, may serve as an example of "real mathematics," violating the fundamental axioms of our mathematics (and logic).

By transfinite numbers, as their name implies, is meant numbers beyond infinity.

Infinity, as represented by the sign ###8734### is the mathematical expression with which, as such, it is possible to perform all operations: divide, multiply, raise to powers. It is possible to raise infinity to the power of infinity--it will be ###8734######8734###. This magnitude is an infinite number of times greater than simple infinity. And at the same time they are both equal: ###8734### = ###8734######8734###. And this is the most remarkable property of transfinite numbers. You may perform with them any operations whatsoever, they will change in a corresponding manner, remaining at the same time equal. This violates the fundamental laws of mathematics accepted for finite numbers. After a

[p. 250]

change, the finite number cannot be equal to itself. But here we see how, changing, the transfinite number remains equal to itself.

After all, transfinite numbers are entirely real. We can find examples corresponding to the expression ###8734### and even ###8734######8734### and ###8734######8734######8734### in our world.

Let us take a line--any segment of a line. We know that the number of points on this line is equal to infinity, for a point has no dimension. If our segment is equal to one inch, and beside it we shall imagine a segment a mile long, then in the little segment each point will correspond to a point in the large one. The number of points in a segment one inch long is infinite. The number of points in a segment one mile long is also infinite. We get ###8734### = ###8734###.

Let us now imagine a square, one side of which is a given segment, a. The number of lines in a square is infinite. The number of points in each line is infinite. Consequently, the number of points in a square is equal to infinity multiplied by itself an infinite number of times ###8734######8734###. This magnitude is undoubtedly infinitely greater than the first one: ###8734###, and at the same time they are equal, as all infinite magnitudes are equal, because, if there be an infinity, then it is one, and cannot change.

Upon the square a2, let us construct a cube. This cube consists of an infinite number of squares, just as a square consists of an infinite number of lines, and a line of an infinite number of points. Consequently, the number of points in the cube, a3 is equal to ###8734######8734######8734###, this expression is equal to the expression ###8734######8734### and ###8734###, i.e., this means that an infinity continues to grow, remaining at the same time unchanged.

______

Thus in transfinite numbers, we see that two magnitudes equal separately to a third, can be not equal to each other. Generally speaking, we see that the fundamental axioms of our mathematics do not work there, are not there valid. We have therefore a full right to establish the law, that the fundamental axioms of mathematics enumerated above are not applicable to transfinite numbers, but are applicable and valid only for finite numbers.

We may also say that the fundamental axioms of our mathematics

[p. 251]

are valid for constant magnitudes only. Or in other words they demand unity of time and unity of place. That is, each magnitude is equal to itself at a given moment. But if we take a magnitude which varies, and take it in different moments, then it will not be equal to itself. Of course, we may say that changing, it becomes another magnitude, that it is a given magnitude only so long as it does not change. But this is precisely the thing that I am talking about.

The axioms of our usual mathematics are applicable to finite and constant magnitudes only.

Thus quite in opposition to the usual view, we must admit that the mathematics of finite and constant magnitudes is unreal, i.e., that it deals with the unreal relations of unreal magnitudes; while the mathematics of infinite and fluent magnitudes is real, i.e., that it deals with the real relations of real magnitudes.

Truly the greatest magnitudes of the first mathematics has no dimension whatever, it is equal to zero, or a point, in comparison with any magnitude of the second mathematics, ALL MAGNITUDES OF WHICH, DESPITE THEIR DIVERSITY, ARE EQUAL AMONG THEMSELVES.

Thus both here, as in logic, the axioms of the new mathematics appear as absurdities:

A magnitude can be not equal to itself.
 A part can be equal to the whole, or it can be greater than the whole.
 One of two equal magnitudes can be infinitely greater than another.
 All DIFFERENT magnitudes are equal among themselves.

A complete analogy is observed between the axioms of mathematics and those of logic. The logical unit--a concept--possesses all the properties of a finite and constant magnitude. The fundamental axioms of mathematics and logic are essentially one and the same. They are correct under the same conditions, and under the same conditions they cease to be correct.

Without any exaggeration we may say that the fundamental axioms of mathematics and of logic are correct only just as long as mathematics and logic deal with magnitudes which are artificial, conditional, and which do not exist in nature.

[p. 252]

The truth is that in nature there are no finite, constant magnitudes, just as also there are no concepts. The finite, constant magnitude, and the concept are conditional abstractions, not reality, but merely the sections of reality, so to speak.

How shall we reconcile the idea of the absence of constant magnitudes with the idea of an immobile universe? At first sight one appears to contradict the other. But in reality this contradiction does not exist. Not this universe is immobile, but the greater universe, the world of many dimensions, of which we know that perpetually moving section called the three-dimensional infinite sphere. Moreover, the very concepts of motion and immobility need revision, because, as we usually understand them with the aid of our reason, they do not correspond to reality.

Already we have analyzed in detail how the idea of motion follows from our time-sense, i.e., from the imperfection of our space-sense.

Were our space-sense more perfect in relation to any given object, say to the body of a given man, we could embrace all his life in time, from birth to death. Then within the limits of this embrace that life would be for us a constant magnitude. But now, at every given moment of it, it is for us not a constant but a variable magnitude. That which we call a body does not exist in reality. It is only the section of that four-dimensional body that we never see. We ought always to remember that our entire three-dimensional world does not exist in reality. It is a creation of our imperfect senses, the result of their imperfection. This is not the world but merely that which we see of the world. The three-dimensional world--this is the four-dimensional world observed through the narrow slit of our senses. Therefore all magnitudes which we regard as such in the three-dimensional world are not real magnitudes, but merely artificially assumed.

They do not exist really, in the same way as the present does not exist really. This has been dwelt upon before. By the present we designate the transition from the future into the past. But this transition has no extension. Therefore the present does not exist. Only the future and the past exist.

Thus constant magnitudes in the three-dimensional world are only abstractions, just as motion in the three-dimensional world is, in substance, an abstraction. In the three-dimensional world 

[p. 253]

there is no change, no motion. In order to think motion, we already need the four-dimensional world. The three-dimensional world does not exist in reality, or it exists only during one ideal moment. In the next ideal moment there already exists another three-dimensional world. Therefore the magnitude A in the following moment is already not A, but B, in the next C, and so forth to infinity. It is equal to itself in one ideal moment only. In other words, within the limits of each ideal moment the axioms of mathematics are true; for the comparison of two ideal moments they are merely conditional, as the logic of Bacon is conditional in comparison with the logic of Aristotle. In time, i.e., in relation to variable magnitudes, from the standpoint of the ideal moment, they are untrue.

The idea of constancy or variability emanates from the impotence of our limited reason to comprehend a thing otherwise than by its section. If we would comprehend a thing in four dimensions, let us say a human body from birth to death, then it will be the whole and constant body, the section of which we call a-changing-in-time human body. A moment of life, i.e., a body as we know it in the three-dimensional world, is a point on an infinite line. Could we comprehend this body as a whole, then we should know it as an absolutely constant magnitude, with all its multifariousness of forms, states and positions; but then to this constant magnitude the axioms of our mathematics and logic would be inapplicable, because it would be an infinite magnitude.

We cannot comprehend this infinite magnitude. We comprehend always its sections only. And our mathematics and logic are related to this imaginary section of the universe.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 254]

  

CHAPTER XXI

          Man's   transition to a higher logic. The necessity for rejecting everything   "real." "Poverty of the spirit." The recognition of the   infinite alone as real. Laws of the infinite. Logic of the finite--the Organon of Aristotle and the Novum Organum of Bacon. Logic of the   infinite--Tertium Organum. The   higher logic as an instrument of thought, as a key to the mysteries of   nature, to the hidden side of life, to the world of noumena. A definition of   the world of noumena on the basis of all the foregoing. The impression of the   noumenal world on an unprepared consciousness. "The thrice unknown   darkness in the contemplation of which all knowledge is re-solved into   ignorance."

     
   EVERYTHING that has been said about mathematical magnitudes is true also with regard to logical concepts. Finite mathematical magnitudes and logical concepts are subject to the same laws.

We have now established that the laws discovered by us in a space of three dimensions, and operating in that space, are inapplicable, incorrect and untrue in a space of a greater number of dimensions.

And as this is true of mathematics, so is it true of logic.

As soon as we begin to consider infinite and variable magnitudes instead of those which are finite and constant, we perceive that the fundamental axioms of our mathematics cannot be applied to the former class.

And as soon as we begin to think in other terms than those of concepts, we must be prepared to encounter an enormous number of absurdities from the standpoint of existing logic.

These absurdities seem to us such, because we approach the world of many dimensions with the logic of the three-dimensional world.

It has been proven already that to an animal, i.e., to a two-dimensional being, thinking not by concepts, but by perceptions, our logical ideas must seem absurd.

[p. 255]

The logical relations in the world of many dimensions seem equally absurd to us. We have no reason whatsoever to hope that the relations of the world of causes can be logical from our point of view. On the contrary, it may be said that EVERYTHING LOGICAL is phenomenal. Nothing can be logical, from our standpoint, there. All that is there must seem to us a logical absurdity, nonsense. We must remember that it is impossible to penetrate there with our logic.

The relation of the general trend of the thought of humanity toward the "other world" has always been highly incorrect.

In "positivism" men have denied that other world altogether. This was because, not admitting the possibility of relations other than those formulated by Aristotle and Bacon, men denied the very existence of that which seemed absurd and impossible from the standpoint of those formula. Also, in spiritism they attempted to construct the noumenal world on the model of the phenomenal, that is, against reason, against nature, they wanted at all costs to prove that the other world is logical from our standpoint, that the same laws of causality operate just as in our world, and that the other world is nothing more than the extension of ours. The "other world" of spiritists or spiritualists in all existing descriptions of it is a naive and barbaric concept of the unknown.

Positive philosophy perceived the absurdity of all dualistic theses, but having no power to expand the field of its activity, limited by logic and "the infinite sphere," it could think of nothing better than to DENY.

Mystical philosophy alone felt the possibility of relations other than those of the phenomenal world. But it was arrested by hazy and unclear sensations, finding it impossible to define and classify them.

Nevertheless, science must come to mysticism, because in mysticism there is a new method--and then to the study of different forms of consciousness, i.e., of forms of receptivity different from our own. Science should throw off almost everything old and should start afresh with a new theory of knowledge.

Science cannot deny the fact that mathematics grows, expands, and escapes from the limits of the visible and measurable world. Entire departments of mathematics take into consideration quantitative relations which did not and do not exist in the real world of

[p. 256]

positivism, i.e., relations which have no correspondence to any realities in the visible, three-dimensional world.

But there cannot be any mathematical relations to which the relation of some realities would not correspond. Therefore mathematics transcends the limits of our world, and penetrates into a world unknown. This is the telescope, by the aid of which we begin to investigate the space of many dimensions with its worlds. Mathematics goes ahead of our thought, ahead of our power of imagination and perception. Even now it is engaged in  relations which we cannot imagine or comprehend.

It is impossible to deny all this, even from the strictly "positivistic," i.e., positive standpoint. Thus science, having admitted the possibility of the expansion of mathematics beyond the limits of the sensuously perceived world--that is beyond the limits of a world accessible (though theoretically) to the organs of sense and their mechanical aids--must thereby recognize the expansion of the real world far beyond the limits of any "infinite sphere" or of our logic, i.e., must recognize the reality of "the world of many dimensions."

The recognition of the reality of the world of many dimensions is the already accomplished transition to, and understanding of, the world of the wondrous. And this transition to the wondrous is impossible without the recognition of the reality of new logical relations which are absurd and impossible from the standpoint of our logic.

What are the laws of our logic?

They are the laws of our receptivity of the three-dimensional world, or the laws of our three-dimensional receptivity of the world.

If we desire to escape from the three-dimensional world and go farther, we must first of all work out the fundamental logical principles which would permit us to observe the relations of things in a world of many dimensions--seeing in them a certain reasonableness, and not complete absurdity. If we enter there armed only with the principles of the logic of the three-dimensional world, these principles will drag us back, will not give us a chance to rise from the earth.

First of all we must throw off the chains of our logic. This is the first, the great, the chief liberation toward which humanity

[p. 257]

must strive. Man, throwing off the chains of "three-dimensional" logic, has already penetrated, in thought, into another world. And not only is this transition possible, but it is accomplished constantly. Although unhappily we are not entirely conscious of our rights in "another world," and often sacrifice these rights, regarding ourselves as limited to this earthly world, paths nevertheless exist. Poetry, mysticism, the idealistic philosophy of all ages and peoples, preserve the traces of such transitions. Following these traces, we ourselves can find the path. Ancient and modern thinkers have given us many keys with which we may open mysterious doors; many magical formulae, before which these doors open of themselves. But we have not understood either the purpose of these keys or the meaning of the formulae. We have also lost the understanding of magical ceremonies and rites of initiation into mysteries which had a single purpose: to help this transformation in the soul of man.

Therefore the doors remained closed, and we even denied that there was anything whatever behind them; or, suspecting the existence of another world, we regarded it as similar to ours, and separate from ours, and tried to penetrate there unconscious of the fact that the chief obstacle in our path was our own division of the world into this world and that.

The world is one, only the ways of knowing it are different; and with imperfect methods of knowledge it is impossible to penetrate into that which is accessible to perfect methods only.

All attempts to penetrate mentally into that higher, noumenal world, or world of causes, by means of the logic of the phenomenal world, if they did not fail altogether, or did not lead to castles in the air, gave only one result: in becoming conscious of a new order of things, a man lost the sense of the reality of the old order. The visible world began to seem to him fantastic and unreal, everything all about him was disappearing, was vanishing like smoke, leaving a dreadful feeling of illusion. In everything he felt the abyss of infinity, and everything was plunging into the abyss.

This sense of the infinite is the first and most terrible trial before initiation. Nothing exists! A little miserable soul feels itself suspended in an infinite void. Then even this void disappears! Nothing exists. There is only infinity, a constant and continuous division and dissolution of everything. The mystical literature of

[p. 258]

all peoples abounds in references to this sensation of darkness and emptiness.

Such was that mysterious deity of the ancient Egyptians, about which there exists a story in the Orpheus myth, in which it is de-scribed as a "Thrice-unknown darkness in contemplation of which all knowledge is resolved into ignorance." [*1]

This means that man must have felt horror transcending all limits as he approached the world of causes with the knowledge of the world of phenomena only, his instrument of logic having proved useless, because all the new eluded him. In the new as yet he sensed chaos only, the old had disappeared, gone away and become unreal. Horror and regret for the loss of the old mingled with horror of the new--unknown and terrible by its infinitude.

At this stage man experiences the same thing that an animal, becoming a man, would feel. Having looked into a new world for an instant, it is attracted by the life left behind. The world which it saw only for an instant seems but a dream, a vision, the creation of imagination, but the familiar old world, too, is never thereafter the same, it is too narrow, in it there is not sufficient room. The awakening consciousness can no longer live the free life of the beast. Already it knows something different, it hears some voices, even though the body holds it. And the animal does not know where or how it can escape from the body or from itself.

A man on the threshold of a new world experiences literally the same thing. He has heard celestial harmonies, and the wearisome songs of earth touch him no longer, nor do they move him--or if they touch and move him it is because they remind him of celestial harmonies, of the inaccessible, of the unknown. He has experienced the sensation of an unusual EXPANSION of consciousness, when everything was clear to him for a moment, and he cannot reconcile himself to the sluggish earthly work of the brain.

These moments of the "sensation of infinity" are accompanied by unusual emotions.

In theosophical literature, and in books on occultism, it is often asserted that on entering into the "astral" world, man begins to see new colors, colors which are not in the solar spectrum. [*2] In

[p. 259]

this symbolism of the new colors of the "astral sphere" is conveyed the idea of those new emotions which man begins to feel along with the sensation of the expansion of consciousness--"of the sea pouring into the drop." This is the "strange bliss" of which mystics speak, the "heavenly light" which saints "see," the "new" sensations experienced by poets. Even conversational psychology  "ecstasy" with entirely unusual sensations, inaccessible and unknown to man in the life of every day.

This sensation of light and of unlimited joy is experienced at the moment of the expansion of consciousness (the unfoldment of the mystical lotus of the Hindu yogi), at the moment of the sensation of infinity, and it yields also the sensation of darkness and of unlimited horror.

What does this mean?

Now shall we reconcile the sensation of light with the sensation of darkness, the sensation of joy with that of horror? Can these exist simultaneously? Do they occur simultaneously?

They do so occur, and must be exactly thus. Mystical literature gives us examples of it. The simultaneous sensations of light and darkness, joy and horror, symbolize as it were the strange duality and contradiction of human life. It may happen to a man of dual nature, who following one side of his nature has been led far into "spirit," and on the other side is deeply immersed in "matter," i.e., in illusion, in unreality--to one who believes too much in the reality of the unreal.

Generally speaking the sensation of light, of life, of consciousness penetrating all, of happiness, gives a new world. But the same world to the unprepared mind will give the sensation of infinite darkness and horror. In this case the sensation of horror will arise from the loss of everything real, from the disappearance of this world.

In order not to experience the horror of the new world, it is necessary to know it beforehand, either emotionally--by faith or love--or intellectually, by reason.

And in order not to experience horror from the loss of the old world, it is necessary to have renounced it voluntarily either through faith or reason.

One must renounce all the beautiful, bright world in which we are living; one must admit that it is ghostly, phantasmal, unreal,

[p. 260]

deceitful, illusory, mayavic. One must reconcile oneself to this unreality, not be afraid of it, but rejoice at it. One must give up everything. One must become POOR IN SPIRIT, i.e., make oneself poor by the effort of one's spirit.

This most profound philosophical truth is expressed in the beautiful evangelical symbol:

Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

These words become clear in the sense of a renouncement of the material world only. "Poor in spirit" does not mean poor materially, in the worldly meaning of the word, and still less does it signify poverty of spirit. Spiritual poverty is the renouncement of matter; such "poverty" is his when a man has no earth under his feet, no sky above his head.

Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.

This is the poverty of the man who is entirely alone, because father, mother, other men, even the nearest here on earth he begins to regard differently, not as he regarded them before; and renounces them because he discerns the true substances that he is striving toward; just as, renouncing the phenomenal illusions of the world, he approaches the truly real.

The moment of transition--that terrible moment of the loss of the old and the unfoldment of the new--has been represented in innumerable allegories in ancient literature. To make this transition easy was the purpose of the mysteries. In India, in Egypt, in Greece, special preparatory rituals existed, sometimes merely symbolical, sometimes real, which actually brought a soul to the very portals of the new world, and opened these portals at the moment of initiation. But no outward rituals and ceremonies could take the place of self-initiation. The great work must have been going on inside the soul and mind of man.

______

But how can logic help a man to pass to the consciousness of a new and higher world?

[p. 261]

We have seen that MATHEMATICS has already found the path into that higher order of things. Penetrating there, it first of all renounces its fundamental axioms of identity and difference.

In the world of infinite and fluent magnitudes, a magnitude may be not equal to itself; a part may be equal to the whole; and of two equal magnitudes one may be infinitely greater than the other.

All this sounds like an absurdity from the standpoint of the mathematics of finite and constant numbers. But the mathematics of finite and constant numbers is itself the calculation of relations between non-existent magnitudes, i.e., an absurdity. And therefore only that which from the standpoint of this mathematics seems an absurdity, can be the truth.

Logic now goes along the same path. It must renounce itself, come to perceive the necessity for its own annihilation--then out of it a new and higher logic can arise.

In his Critique of Pare Reason Kant proved the possibility of transcendental logic.

Before Bacon and earlier than Aristotle, in the ancient Hindu scriptures, the formulae of this higher logic were given, opening the doors of mystery. But the meaning of these formula was rapidly lost. They were preserved in ancient books, but remained there as some strange mummeries of extinguished thought, the words without real content.

New thinkers again discovered these principles, and expressed them in new words, but again they remained incomprehensible, again they suffered transformation into some unnecessary ornamental form of words. But the idea persisted. A consciousness of the possibility of finding and establishing the laws of the higher world was never lost. Mystical philosophy never regarded the logic of Aristotle as all-embracing and all-powerful. It built its system outside of logic or above logic, unconsciously going along those paths of thought paved in remote antiquity.

The higher logic existed before deductive and inductive logic was formulated. This higher logic may be called intuitive logic--the logic of infinity, the logic of ecstasy.

Not only is this logic possible, but it exists, and has existed from time immemorial; it has been formulated many times; it has entered into philosophical systems as their key--but for some strange reason has not been recognized as logic.

[p. 262]

It is possible to deduce the system of this logic from many philosophical systems. The most precise and complete formulation of the law of higher logic I find in the writing of Plotinus, in his On Intelligible Beauty. I shall quote this passage in the succeeding chapter.

I have called this system of higher logic Tertium Organum because for us it is the third canon--third instrument--of thought after those of Aristotle and Bacon. The first was the Organon, the second, Novum Organum. But the third existed earlier than the first.

Man, master of this instrument, of this key, may open the door of the world of causes without fear.

The axioms which Tertium Organum embraces cannot be formulated in our language. If we attempt to formulate them in spite of this, they will produce the impression of absurdities. Taking the axioms of Aristotle as a model, we may express the principal axiom of the new logic in our poor earthly language in the following manner:

A is both A and Not-A.

or

Everything is both A and Not-A.

or,

Everything is All.

But these axioms are in effect absolutely impossible. They are not the axioms of higher logic, they are merely attempts to express the axioms of this logic in concepts. In reality the ideas of higher logic are inexpressible in concepts. When we encounter such an inexpressibility it means that we have touched the world of causes.

The logical formula: A is both A and Not-A, corresponds to the mathematical formula: A magnitude can be greater or less than itself.

The  of both these propositions shows that they cannot refer to our world. Of course absurdity, as such, is indeed not an index of the attributes of noumena, but the attributes of noumena will certainly be expressed in what are absurdities to us. To hope to find in the world of causes anything logical from our standpoint is just as useless as to think that the world of things can exist in

[p. 263]

accordance with the laws of a world of shadows or stereometry according to the laws of planimetry.

To master the fundamental principles of higher logic means to master the fundamentals of the understanding of a space of higher dimensions, or of the world of the wondrous.

In order to approach to a clear understanding of the relations of the multi-dimensional world, we must free ourselves from all the "idols" of our world, as Bacon calls them, i.e., from all obstacles to correct receptivity and reasoning. Then we shall have taken the most important step toward an inner affinity with the world of the wondrous.

A two-dimensional being, in order to approach to an understanding of the three-dimensional world, already should have become a three-dimensional being before it can rid itself of its "idols," i.e., of its conventional--converted into axiomatic--ways of feeling and thinking, which create for it the illusion of two-dimensionality.

What is it exactly from which the two-dimensional being must liberate itself?

First of all--and most important--from the assurance that that which it sees and senses really exists; from this will come the consciousness of the  of its perception of the world, and then the idea that the real, new world must exist in quite other forms--new, incomparable, incommensurable with relation to the old ones. Then the two-dimensional being must overcome its sureness of the correctness of its categories. It must understand that things which seem to it different and separate from one another may be parts of some to it incomprehensible whole, or that they have much in common which it does not perceive; and that things which seem to it one and indivisible are in reality infinitely complex and multifarious.

The mental growth of the two-dimensional being must proceed along the path of the recognition of those common properties of objects, unknown to it before, which are the result of their similar origin or similar functions, incomprehensible from the point of view of a plane.

When once the two-dimensional being has admitted the possibility of the existence of hitherto unknown common properties of objects, which before seemed different, then it has already approached to our own understanding of the world. It has approached to our

[p. 264]

logic, has begun to understand the collective name, i.e., a word used not as a proper noun, but as an appellate noun--a word expressing a concept.

The "idols" of the two-dimensional being, hindering the development of its consciousness, are those proper nouns, which it has itself given to all the objects surrounding it. For such a being each object has its own proper noun, corresponding to its perception of the object; common names, corresponding to concepts, it knows not of. Only by getting rid of these idols, by understanding that the names of things can be not only proper, but common ones as well, will it be possible for it to advance farther, to develop mentally, to approach the human understanding of the world. Take the most simple sentence:

John and Peter are both men.

[paragraph continues] For the two-dimensional being this will be an absurdity, and it will represent the idea to itself after this fashion:

John and Peter are both Johns and Peters.

In other words, every one of our logical propositions will be an absurdity to it. Why this is so is clear. Such a being has no concepts; the proper nouns which constitute the speech of such a being have no plurals. It is easy to understand that any plural of our speech will seem to it an absurdity.

_______

Where are our "idols?" From what shall we liberate ourselves in order to pass to an understanding of the multi-dimensional world?

First of all we must get rid of our assurance that we see and sense that which exists in reality, and that the real world is like the world which we see--i.e., we must rid ourselves of the illusion of the material world. We must understand mentally all the illusoriness of the world perceived by us in space and time, and know that the real world cannot have anything in common with it; to understand that it is impossible to imagine the real world in terms of form; and finally we must perceive the conditionality of the axioms

[p. 265]

of our mathematics and logic, related as they are to the unreal phenomenal world.

In mathematics the idea of infinity will help us to do this. The unreality of finite magnitudes in comparison with infinite ones is obvious. In logic let us dwell upon the idea of monism, i.e., the fundamental unity of everything which exists, and consequently recognize the impossibility of constructing any axioms, which involve the idea of opposites--of theses and antitheses--upon which our logic is built.

The logic of Aristotle and of Bacon is at bottom dualistic. If we really deeply assimilate the idea of monism, we shall dethrone the "idol" of this logic.

The fundamental axioms of our logic reduce themselves to identity and contradiction, just as do the axioms of mathematics. At the bottom of them all lies the admission of our general axiom, namely, that every given something has something opposite to it; therefore every proposition has its anti-proposition, every thesis has its anti-thesis. To the existence of any thing is opposed the non-existence of that thing. To the existence of the world is opposed the non-existence of the world. Object is opposed to subject; the objective world to the subjective; the I is opposed to the Not-I; to motion--immobility; to variability--constancy; to unity--heterogeneity; to truth--falsehood; to good--evil. And in conclusion, to every A in general is opposed Not-A.

The recognition of the reality of these divisions is necessary for the acceptance of the fundamental axioms of the logic of Aristotle and Bacon, i.e., the absolute and incontestable recognition of the duality of the world--of dualism. The recognition of the unreality of these divisions and that of the unity of all opposites is necessary for the comprehension of higher logic.

______

At the very beginning of this book the existence of THE WORLD and of THE PSYCHE was admitted, i.e., the reality of the dual division of everything existent, because all other opposites are derived from this opposition.

Duality is the condition of our knowledge of the phenomenal (three-dimensional) world; this is the instrument of our knowledge

[p. 266]

of phenomena. But when we come to the knowledge of the noumenal world (or the world of many dimensions), this duality begins to hinder us, appears as an obstacle to knowledge.

Dualism is the chief "idol"; let us free ourselves from it.

The two-dimensional being, in order to comprehend the relations of things in three dimensions and our logic, must renounce its "idol"--the absolute singularity of objects which permits it to call them solely by their proper names.

We, in order to comprehend the world of many dimensions, must renounce the idol of duality.

But the application of monism to practical thought meets the in-surmountable obstacle of our language. Our language is incapable of expressing the unity of opposites, just as it cannot express spatially the relation of cause to effect. Therefore we must reconcile ourselves to the fact that all attempts to express super-logical relations in our language will seem absurdities, and really can only give hints at that which we wish to express.

Thus the formula,

A is both A and Not-A,

or,

Everything is both A and Not-A,

representing the principal axioms of higher logic, expressed in our language of concepts, sounds absurd from the standpoint of our usual logic, and is not essentially true.

Let us therefore reconcile ourselves to the fact that it is impossible to express super-logical relations in our language as it is at present constituted.

The formula, "A is both A and Not-A" is untrue because in the world of causes there exists no opposition between "A" and "Not-A." But we cannot express their real relation. It would be more correct to say:

A is all.

But this also would be untrue, because "A" is not only all, but also an arbitrary part of all, and at the same time a given part.

This is exactly the thing which our language cannot express. It

[p. 267]

is to this that we must accustom our thought, and train it along these lines.

______

We must train our thought to the idea that separateness and inclusiveness are not opposed in the real world, but exist together and simultaneously without contradicting one another. Let us understand that in the real world one and the same thing can be both a part and the whole, i.e., that the whole, without changing, can be its own part; understand that there are no opposites in general, that everything is a certain image of all.

And then, beginning to understand all this, we shall grasp the separate ideas concerning the essentials of the "noumenal world," or the world of many dimensions in which we really live.

In such case the higher logic, even with its imperfect formulae, as they appear in our rough language of concepts, represents in spite of this a powerful instrument of knowledge of the world, our only means of preservation from deceptions.

The application of this instrument of thought gives the key to the mysteries of nature, to the world as it is.

______

Let us endeavor to enumerate those properties of THE WORLD OF CAUSES which result from all the foregoing.

It is first of all necessary to reiterate that it is impossible to express in words the properties of the world of causes. Every thought expressed about them in our ordinary language will be false. That is, we may say in relation to the "real" world that "every spoken thought is a lie." It is possible to speak about it only conditionally. by hints, by symbols. And if one interprets literally anything said about it, nothing but absurdity results. Generally speaking, everything said in words regarding the world of causes is likely to seem absurd, and is in reality its mutilation. The truth it is impossible to express; it is possible only to give a hint at it, to give an impulse to thought. But everyone must discover the truth for himself. "Another's truth" is worse than a lie, because it is two lies. This explains why truth very often can be expressed only by means of

[p. 268]

paradox, or even in the form of a lie. Because, in order to speak of truth without a lie, we should know some other language--ours is unsuitable.

What then are we able to say about the world of many dimensions, about the world of noumena, or world of causes?

1. In that world "TIME" must exist spatially, i.e. temporal events must exist and not happen--exist before and after their manifestation, and be located in one section, as it were. Effects must exist simultaneously with causes. That which we name the law of causality cannot exist there, because time is a necessary condition for it. There cannot be anything which is measured by years, days, hours--there cannot be before, now, after. Moments of different epochs, divided by great intervals of time, exist simultaneously, and may touch one another. Along with this, all the possibilities of a given moment, even those opposite to one another, and all their results up to infinity, must be actualized simultaneously with a given moment, but the length of a moment can be different on different planes.

2. There is nothing measurable by our measures, nothing commensurable with our objects, nothing greater or less than our objects. There is nothing situated on the right or left side, above or below one of our objects. There can be nothing similar to our objects, lines or figures and at the same time exist. Different points in our space, divided for us by enormous distances, may meet there. "Distance" or "proximity" are there defined by inner "affinity" or "remoteness," by sympathy or antipathy, i.e., by properties which seem to us to be subjective.

3. There is neither matter nor motion. There is nothing that could possibly be weighed or photographed, or expressed in the formulae of physical energy. There is nothing which has form, color or odor--nothing possessing the properties of physical bodies. Nevertheless, the properties of the world of causes, granted an understanding of certain laws, can be considered in enumerated categories.

4. There is nothing dead or unconscious. Everything lives, everything breathes, thinks, feels; everything is conscious, and everything speaks.

5. In that world the axioms of our mathematics cannot be applied,

[p. 269]

because there is nothing finite. Everything there is infinite and, from our standpoint, variable.

6. The laws of our logic cannot act there. From the standpoint of our logic, that world is illogical. This is the realm the laws of which are expressed in Tertium Organum.

7. The separateness of our world does not exist there. Everything is the whole. And each particle of dust, without mentioning of course every life and every conscious being, lives a life which is one with the whole and includes the whole within itself.

8. In that world the duality of our world cannot exist. There being is not opposed to non-being. Life is not opposed to death. On the contrary, the one includes the other within itself. The unity and multiplicity of the I; the I and the Not-I; motion and immobility; union and separateness; good and evil; truth and falsehood--all these divisions are impossible there. Everything subjective is objective, and everything objective is subjective. That world is the world of the unity of opposites.

9. The sensation of the reality of that world must be accompanied by the sensation of the unreality of this one. At the same time the difference between real and unreal cannot exist there, just as the difference between subjective and objective cannot exist.

10. That world and our world are not two different worlds. The world is one. That which we call our world is merely our incorrect perception of the world: the world seen by us through a narrow slit. That world begins to be sensed by us as the wondrous, i.e., as something opposite to the reality of this world, and at the same time this, our earthly world, begins to seem unreal. The sense of the wondrous is the key to that world.

11. But everything that can be said about it will not define our relation to that world until we come to understand that even comprehending it we will not be able to grasp it as a whole, i.e., in all its variety of relations, but can think of it only in this or that aspect.

12. Everything that is said about the world of causes refers also to the All. But between our world and the All there may be many transitions.

Footnotes

^258:1 "The Ancient Wisdom," by Annie Besant, Introd. p. 23, Theosophical Publishing Society, London.

^258:2 Although it should be remembered that we see only three out of seven colors of the solar spectrum.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 270]

  

CHAPTER XXII

          Theosophy   of Max Muller. Ancient India. Philosophy of the Vedanta. Tat twam asi. Knowledge by means of   the expansion of consciousness as a reality. Mysticism of different ages and   peoples. Unity of experiences. Tertium   Organum as a key to mysticism. Signs of the noumenal world. Treatise of   Plotinus On Intelligible Beauty as   a misunderstood system of higher logic. Illumination in Jacob Boehme. "A   harp of many strings, of which each string is a separate instrument, while   the whole is only one harp." Mysticism of The Love of the Good. St. Avva Dorotheus and others. Clement of   Alexandria. Lao-Tzu and Chuang-Tzu. Light   on the Path. The Voice of the   Silence. Mohammedan mystics. Poetry of the Sufis. Mystical states under   narcotics. The Anaesthetic   Revelation. Experiments of Prof. James. Dostoyevsky on "time" (The Idiot). Influence of nature on the   soul of man.

     
   TO trace historically the process of the development of those ideas and systems founded upon higher logic or proceeding from it, would indeed be a matter of great interest and importance. But this would be difficult and almost impossible of accomplishment because we lack definite knowledge of the time and origin, the means of transmitting, and the sequence of ideas in ancient philosophical systems and religious teachings. There are innumerable guesses and speculations concerning the manner of this succession. Many of these guesses and speculations are accepted as unquestioned until new ones appear which controvert them. The opinions of different investigators in regard to these questions are very divergent, and the truth is often difficult to determine--it would be more accurate to say "impossible" if conclusions had to be based upon the material accessible to logical investigation.

I shall not dwell at all on the question of the succession of ideas, either from the historical or any other point of view.

The proposed outline of systems which refer to the world of noumena is not intended to be complete. This is not "the history of

[p. 271]

thought," but merely examples of movements of thought which have led to similar conclusions.

______

In the book Theosophy (or Psychological Religion) the noted scholar Max Muller gives an interesting analysis of mystical religions and mystical philosophical systems. He dwells much on India and her teachings.

That which we can study nowhere but in India is the all-absorbing influence which religion and philosophy may exercise on the human mind. So far as we can judge a large class of people in India, not only the priestly class, but the nobility also, not men only but women, never looked upon their life on earth as something real. What was real to them was the invisible, the life to come. What formed the theme of their conversations, whet formed the subject of their meditations, was the real that alone lent some kind of reality to this unreal phenomenal world. Whoever was supposed to have caught a new ray of truth was visited by young and old, was honored by princes and by kings, was looked upon indeed as holding a position far above that of kings and princes. This is the side of life of ancient India which deserves our study, because there has been nothing like it in the whole world, not even in Greece or Palestine.

I know quite well, [says Muller] that there never can be a whole nation of philosophers or metaphysical dreamers . . . and we must never forget that all through history, it is the few, not the many, who impress their character on a nation, and have a right to represent it as a whole. What do we know of Greece at the time of the Ionian and Eleatic philosophers, except the utterances of Seven Sages? What do we know of the Jews at the time of Moses, except the traditions preserved in the Laws and the Prophets? It is the prophets, the poets, the lawgivers and teachers, however small their number, who speak in the name of the people, and who alone stand out to represent the nondescript multitude behind them, to speak their thoughts and to express their sentiments.

Real Indian philosophy, even in that embryonic form in which we find it in the Upanishads, stands completely by itself. And if we ask what was the highest purpose of the teachings of the Upanishads we can state it in three words, as it has been stated by the greatest Vedanta [*1] teachers themselves, namely Tat twam asi. This means Thou art That. That stands for that which is known to us under different names in different systems of ancient and modern philosophy. It is Zeus or the Eis Theos or To On in Greece; it is what Plato meant by the Eternal Idea, what Agnostics call the

[p. 272]

[paragraph continues] Unknowable, what I call the Infinite in Nature. This is what in India is called Brahman, the being behind all beings, the power that emits the universe, sustains it and draws it back again to itself. The Thou is what I called the Infinite in man, the Soul, the Self, the being behind every human Ego, free from all bodily fetters, free from passions, free from all attachments (Atman). The expression: Thou art That--means: thy soul is the Brahman; or in other words, the subject and the object of all being and of all knowing are one and the same.

This is the gist of what I call Psychological Religion or Theosophy, the highest summit of thought which the human mind has reached, which has found different expressions in different religions and philosophies, but nowhere such a clear and powerful realization as in the ancient Upanishads of India.

______

For as long as the individual soul does not free itself from Nescience, or a belief in duality, it takes something else for itself. True knowledge of the Self or true self-knowledge, expresses itself in the words, "Thou art That" or "I am Brahman," the nature of Brahman being unchangeable eternal cognition. Until that stage has been reached, the individual soul is fettered by the body, by the organs of sense, nay even by the mind and its various functions.

The Soul (The Self) says the Vedanta philosopher, cannot be different from the Brahman, because Brahman comprehends all reality and nothing that really is can therefore be different from Brahman. Secondly, the individual self cannot be conceived as a modification of Brahman, because Brahman by itself cannot be changed, whether by itself, because it is one and perfect in itself, or by anything outside of it (because there exists nothing outside of it). Here we see [says Muller], the Vedantist moving on exactly the same stratum of thought in which Eleatic philosophers moved in Greece. "If there is one Infinite," they said, "there cannot be another, for the other would limit the one, and thus render it finite, so, as applied to God, the Eleatics argued: "If God is to be the mightiest and the best, he must be one, for if there were two or more, he would not be the mightiest and best." The Eleatics continued their monistic argument by showing that this One Infinite Being cannot be divided, so that anything could be called a portion of it, because there is no power that could separate anything from it. Nay, it cannot even have parts, for, as it has no beginning and no end, it can have no parts, for a part has a beginning and an end.

These Eleatic ideas--namely that there is and there can be only One Absolute Being, infinite., unchangeable, without a second, without parts and passions--are the same ideas which underlie the Upanishads and have been fully worked out in the Vedanta-Sutras.

______

[p. 273]

In most of the religions of the ancient world [says Muller] the relation between the soul and God has been represented as a return of the soul to God. A yearning for God, a kind of divine home-sickness, finds expression in most religions, but the road that is to lead us home, and the reception which the soul may expect in the Father's house have been represented in very different ways in different religions.

According to some religious teachers, a return of the soul to God is possible after death only. . . .

According to other religious teachers, the final beatitude of the soul can be achieved in this life. . . . That beatitude requires knowledge only, knowledge of the necessary unity of what is divine in man with what is divine in God. The Brahmins call it self-knowledge, that is to say, the knowledge that our true self, if it is anything, can only be that Self which is All in All, and beside which there is nothing else. Sometimes this conception of the intimate relation between the human and the divine natures comes suddenly, as the result of an unexplained intuition or self-recollection. Sometimes, however, it seems as if the force of logic had driven the human mind to the same result. If God had once been recognized as the Infinite in nature and the soul as the Infinite in man, it seemed to follow that there could not be two Infinites. The Eleatics had clearly passed through a similar phase of thought in their own philosophy. If there is an Infinite, they said, it is one, for if there were two they could not be In-finite, but would be finite one toward the other. But that which exists is infinite, and there cannot be more such. Therefore that which exists is one.

Nothing can be more definite than this Eleatic Monism, and with it the admission of a soul, the Infinite in man, as different from God, the Infinite in nature, would have been inconceivable.

In India it was so expressed that Brahman and Atman (the spirit) were in their nature one.

The early Christians also, at least those who had been brought up in the schools of Neo-platonist philosophy, had a clear perception that if the soul is infinite and immortal in its nature, it cannot be anything beside God, but that it must be of God and in God. St. Paul gave but his own bold expression to the same faith or knowledge, when he uttered the words which have startled so many theologians: In Him we live and move and have our being. If anyone else had uttered these words they would at once have been condemned as pantheism. No doubt they are pantheism, and yet they express the very key-note of Christianity. The divine sonship of man is only a metaphorical expression but it was meant originally to embody the same idea. . . . And when the question was asked how the consciousness of this divine sonship could ever have been lost, the answer given by Christianity was, by sin, the answer given by the Upanishads was, by avidya, nescience. This marks the similarity, and at the same time the characteristic difference between these two religions. The question how nescience laid hold on the human soul, and made it imagine that it could live or move or have its true

[p. 274]

being anywhere but in Brahman, remains as unanswerable in Hindu philosophy as in Christianity the question how sin first came into the world.

Both philosophies, that of the East and that of the West [says Muller] start from a common point, namely from the conviction that our ordinary knowledge is uncertain, if not altogether wrong. This revolt of the human mind against itself is the first step in all philosophy.

In our own philosophical language we may put the question thus: how did the real become phenomenal, and how can the phenomenal become real again? Or, in other words, how was the infinite changed into the finite, how was the eternal changed into the temporal, and how can the temporal regain its eternal nature? Or, to put it into more familiar language, how was this world created, and how can it be untreated again?

Nescience or avidya is regarded as the cause of the phenomenal semblance.

In the Upanishads the meaning of Brahman changes. Sometimes it is almost an objective God, existing separately from the world. But then we see Brahman as the essence of all things . . . and the soul, knowing that it is no longer separated from that essence, learns the highest lesson of the whole Vedanta doctrine: Tat twam asi; "Thou art That," that is to say, "Thou who for a time didst seem to be something by thyself, art that, art really nothing apart from the divine essence." To know Brahman is to be Brahman. . . .

Almost in the same words as the Eleatic philosophers and the German mystics of the fourteenth century, the  argue that it would be self-contradictory to admit that there could be anything besides the Infinite or Brahman, which is All in All, and that therefore the soul also cannot be anything different from it, can never claim a separate and independent existence.

Brahman has to be conceived as perfect, and therefore unchangeable, the soul cannot be conceived as a real modification or deterioration of Brahman.

And as Brahman has neither beginning nor end, neither can it have any parts; therefore the soul cannot be a part of Brahman, but the whole of Brahman must be present in every individual soul. This is the same as the teaching of Plotinus, who held with equal consistency, that the True Being is totally present in every part of the Universe.

The Vedanta philosophy rests on the foundation thesis that the soul or the Absolute Being or Brahman, are one in their essence. . . .

The fundamental principle of the Vedanta-philosophy is that in reality there exists and there can exist nothing but Brahman, that Brahman is everything. Idealistic philosophy has swept away this world-old prejudice more thoroughly in India than anywhere else.

The nescience (which creates the separation between the individual soul and Brahman) can be removed by science or knowledge only. And this knowledge or vidya is imparted by the Vedanta, which shows that all our

[p. 275]

ordinary knowledge is simply the result of ignorance or nescience, is uncertain, deceitful, and perishable, or as we should say, is phenomenal, relative, and conditioned. The true knowledge or complete insight cannot be gained by sensuous perception nor by inference. According to the orthodox , Sruti alone, or what is called revelation, can impart that knowledge and remove that nescience which is innate in human nature.

Of the Higher Brahman nothing can be predicated but that it is, and that through our nescience, it appears to be this or that.

When a great Indian sage was asked to describe Brahman, he was simply silent--that was his answer.

When it is said that Brahman is, that means at the same time that Brahman is not; that is to say, that Brahman is nothing of what is supposed to exist in our sensuous perceptions.

______

Whatever we may think of this philosophy, we cannot deny its metaphysical boldness and its logical consistency. If Brahman is all in all, the One without a second, nothing can be said to exist that is not Brahman. there is no room for anything outside the infinite and the Universal, nor is there room for two infinites, for the infinite in nature and the infinite in man. There is and there can be one infinite, one Brahman only. This is the beginning and the end of the Vedanta.

As the shortest summary of the ideas of the Vedanta two verses of Sankara, the commentator and interpreter of Vedanta are often quoted:

Brahma is true, the world is false.
 The soul is Brahma and is nothing else.

[paragraph continues] This is really a very perfect summary. What truly and really exists is Brahman, the One Absolute Being; the world is false, or rather is not what it seems to be; that is, everything which is present to us by means of sense is phenomenal and relative, and can be nothing else. The soul again, or rather every man's soul, though it may seem to be this or that, is in reality nothing but Brahma.

In relation to the question of the origin of the world two famous commentators of the , Sankara and Ramanuga differ. Ramanuga holds to the theory of evolution, Sankara--to the theory of illusion.

It is very important to observe that the Vedantist does not go so far as certain Buddhist philosophers who look upon the phenomenal world as simply nothing. No, their world is real, only it is not what it seems to be. Sankara claims for the phenomenal world a reality sufficient for all practical purposes, sufficient to determine our practical life, our moral obligations.

There is a veil. But the Vedanta-philosophy teaches us that the eternal light behind it can always be perceived more or less clearly through philosophical

[p. 276]

knowledge. It can be perceived, because in reality it is always there.

It may seem strange to find the results of the philosophy of Kant and his followers thus anticipated under varying expressions in the Upanishads and in the Vedanta-philosophy of ancient India.

______

In the chapters about the Logos and about Christian Theosophy Max Muller says that religion is the bridge between the Visible and the Invisible, between Finite and Infinite.

It may be truly said that the founders of the religions of the world have all been bridge-builders. As soon as the existence of a Beyond, of a Heaven above the earth, of Powers above us and beneath us has been recognized, a great gulf seemed to be fixed.

Among contemporary thinkers the noted psychologist, Prof. William James, approached nearer than all others to the ideas of Max Muller's theosophy.

In the last chapter of his book, The Varieties of Religious Experience, Prof. James says:

The warring gods and formulas of the various religions do indeed cancel each other, but there is a certain uniform deliverance in which religions all appear to meet--this is the liberation of the soul. . . . Man becomes conscious that if his higher part is conterminous and continuous with a MORE of the same quality, which is operative in the universe outside of him, and which he can keep in working touch with, and in a fashion get on board of, he can save himself when all his lower being has gone to pieces in the wreck.

What is the objective "Truth" of content of religious experiences? Is such a "more" merely our own notion, or does it really exist? If so, in what shape does it exist? And in what form should we conceive of that "union" with it of which religious geniuses are so convinced?

It is in answering these questions that the various theologies perform their theoretic work, and that their divergencies most come to light. They all agree that the "more" really exists; though some of them hold it to exist in the shape of a personal God or gods while others are satisfied to conceive it as a stream of ideal tendency. . . . It is when they treat of the experience of "union" with it that their speculative differences appear most clearly. Over this point pantheism and theism, nature and second birth, works and grace and Karma, immortality and reincarnation, rationalism and mysticism, carry on inveterate disputes.

At the end of my lecture on Philosophy I held out the notion that an

[p. 277]

impartial science of religions might sift out from the midst of their discrepancies a common body of doctrine which she might also formulate on terms to which physical science need not object. This, I said, she might adopt as her own reconciling hypothesis, and recommend it for general belief.

Let me then propose as an hypothesis that whatever it may be on its farther side, the "more" with which in religious experience we feel ourselves connected is on its hither side the subconscious continuation of our conscious life.

The conscious person is continuous with a wider self. . . .

The further limits of our being plunge, it seems to me, into an altogether other dimension of existence from the sensible and merely "understandable" world.

 

Name it the mystical region, or the super-natural region. . . . We be, long to it, in a more intimate sense than that in which we belong to thy, visible world, for we belong in the most intimate sense wherever our ideals belong. . . . The communion with this invisible world is a real process with real results. . . .

. . . Personal religious experience has its roots and centre in mystical states of consciousness.

______

But what, after all, is mysticism?

Returning to the terminology established in the foregoing chapters, we may say that "mystical states of consciousness" are closely bound up with knowledge received under conditions of expanded receptivity.

Until quite recently psychology did not recognize the reality of the mystical experience and regarded all mystical states as pathological ones--unhealthy conditions of the normal consciousness. Even now, many positivist-psychologists hold to this opinion, embracing in one common classification real mystical states, pseudo-mystical perversions of the usual state, purely psychopathic states and more or less conscious deceit.

This of course can be of no assistance to a correct understanding of the question. Before going further let us therefore establish certain criteria for the identification of real mystical states:

Prof. James enumerates the following: ineffability, noetic quality, transiency, passivity. But some of these characteristics belong also to simple emotional states, and he fails to define exactly how mystical states can be distinguished from emotional ones of analogous character.

[p. 278]

Considering mystical states as "knowledge by expanded conscious. ness," it is possible to give quite definite criteria for their discernment and their differentiation from the generality of psychic experiences.

1. Mystical states give knowledge WHICH NOTHING ELSE CAN GIVE.

2. Mystical states give knowledge of the real world with all its signs and characteristics.

3. The mystical states of men of different ages and different peoples exhibit an astonishing similarity, sometimes amounting to complete identity.

4. The results of the mystical experience are entirely illogical from our ordinary point of view. They are super-logical, i.e., Tertium Organum, WHICH IS THE KEY TO MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE, is applicable to them in all its entirety.

______

The last-named criterion is especially important--the illogicality of the data of mystical experience forced science to repudiate them. Now we have established that illogicality (from our standpoint) is the necessary condition of the knowledge of truth or of the real world. This does not mean that everything that is illogical is true and real, but it means absolutely, that everything true and real is illogical from our standpoint.

We have established the fact that it is impossible to approach the truth with our logic, and we have also established the possibility of penetrating into these heretofore inaccessible regions by means of the new canon of thought.

The consciousness of the necessity for such an instrument of thought undoubtedly existed from far back. For what, in substance, does the formula Tat twam asi represent if not THE FUNDAMENTAL AXIOM OF HIGHER LOGIC?

Thou art That means: thou art both thou and not thou, and corresponds to the super-logical formula, A is both A and Not-A.

If we examine ancient writings from this standpoint, then we shall understand that their authors were searching for a new logic, and were not satisfied with the logic of the things of the phenomenal world. The seeming illogicality of ancient philosophical systems,

[p. 279]

which portrayed an ideal world, as it were, instead of an existing one, will then become comprehensible, for in these portrayals of an ideal world, systems of higher logic often lie concealed.

______

One of such misunderstood attempts to construe a system of higher logic, to give a precise instrument of thought, penetrating beyond the limits of the visible world, is the treatise by Plotinus On Intelligible Beauty.

Describing HEAVEN and THE GODS, Plotinus says:

All the gods are venerable and beautiful, and their beauty is immense. What else however is it but intellect through which they are such? And because intellect energizes in them in so great a degree as to render them visible (by its light)? For it is not because their bodies are beautiful. For these gods that have bodies do not through this derive their subsistence as gods; but these also are gods through intellect. For they are not at one time wise, and at another destitute of wisdom; but they are always wise, in an impassive, stable and pure intellect. They likewise know all things, not human concerns (precedaneously) but their own, which are divine, and such as intellect sees. . . . For all things there are heaven, and there the earth is heaven, as also are the sea, animals, plants, and men. The gods likewise that it contains do not think men undeserving of their regard, nor anything else that is there (because everything there is divine). And they occupy and pervade without ceasing the whole of that (blissful) region. For the life which is there is unattended with labor, and truth (as Plato says in the "Phaedrus") is their generator, and nutriment, their essence and nurse. They likewise see all things, not those with which generation, but those with which essence is present. And they perceive themselves in others. For all things there are diaphanous; and nothing is dark and resisting, but everything is apparent to everyone internally and throughout. For light everywhere meets with light; since everything contains all things in itself and again sees all things in another. So that all things are , and all is all. Each thing likewise is everything. And the splendor there is infinite. For everything there is great, since even that which is small is great. The sun too which is there is all the stars; and again each star is the sun and all the stars. . . In each however, a different property predominates, but at the same time all things are visible in each. Motion likewise there is pure; for the motion is not confounded by a mover different from it. Permanency also suffers no change of its nature, because it is not mingled with the unstable. And the beautiful there is beautiful, because it does not subsist in beauty (as in a subject). Each thing too is there

[p. 280]

established, not as in a foreign land, but the seat of each thing is that which each thing is. . . . Nor is the thing itself different from the place in which it subsists. For the subject of it is intellect, and it is itself intellect . . . There each part always proceeds from the whole, and is at the same time each part and the whole. For it appears indeed as a part; but by him whose sight is acute, it will be seen as a whole. . . . There is likewise no weariness of the vision which is there, nor any plenitude of perception which can bring intuition to an end. For neither was there any vacuity, which when filled might cause the visive energy to cease; nor is this one thing, but that another, so as to occasion a part of one thing is not to be amicable with that of another.

And the knowledge which is possible there is insatiable. . . . For by seeing itself more abundantly it perceives both itself and the objects of its perception to be infinite, it follows its own nature (in unceasing contemplation). The life there is wisdom; a wisdom not obtained by a reasoning process, because the whole of it always was, and is not in any respect deficient, so as to be in want of investigation. But it is the first wisdom, and is not derived from another. [*1]

Closely akin to Plotinus is Jacob Boehme, who was a common shoemaker in the German town of Goerlitz (end of the XVI and the beginning of the XVII century), and has left a whole series of remarkable writings in which he describes revelations vouchsafed him in moments of illumination.

His first "illumination" occurred in 1600 A.D., when he was twenty-five years old. [*2]

Sitting one day in his room, his eyes fell upon a burnished pewter dish, which reflected the sunshine with such marvelous splendor that he fell into an inward ecstasy, and it seemed to him as if he could now look into the principles and deepest foundations of things. He believed that it was only a fancy, and in order to banish it from his mind he went out upon the green. But here he remarked that he gazed into the very heart of things, the very herbs and grass, and that actual nature harmonized with what he had inwardly seen. He said nothing of this to anyone, but praised and thanked God in silence.

Of the first illumination Boehme's biographer says: "He learned to know the innermost foundation of nature, and acquire the capacity

[p. 281]

to see henceforth with the eyes of the soul into the heart of all things, a faculty which remained with him even in his normal condition."

About the year 1600, in the twenty-fifth year of his age, he was again surrounded by the divine light and replenished with the heavenly knowledge; insomuch as going abroad in the fields to a green before Neys Gate, at Goerlitz, he there sat down and, viewing the herbs and grass of the field in his inward light, he saw into their essences, use and properties, which were discovered to him by their lineaments, figures and signatures. In like manner he beheld the whole creation, and from that foundation he afterwards wrote his book, "De Signature Rerum." In the unfolding of those mysteries before his understanding he had a great measure of joy, yet returned home and took care of his family and lived in great peace and silence, scarce intimating to any these wonderful things that had befallen him, and in the year 1610, being again taken into this light, lest the mysteries revealed to him should pass through him as a stream, and rather for a memorial than intending any publication, he wrote his first book, called "Aurora, or the Morning Redness."

The first illumination, in 1600, was not complete. Ten years later (1610) he had another remarkable inward experience. What he had previously seen only chaotically, fragmentarily, and in isolated glimpses, he now beheld as a coherent whole and in more definite outlines.

When his third illumination took place, that which in former visions had appeared to him chaotic and multifarious was now recognized by him as a unity, like a harp of many strings, of which each string is a separate instrument, while the whole is only one harp. [*1]

He now recognized the divine order of nature, and how from the trunk of the tree of life spring different branches, bearing manifold leaves and flowers and fruits, and he became impressed with the necessity of writing down what he saw and preserved the record.

He himself speaks of this final and complete illumination as follows:

The gate was opened to me that in one quarter of an hour I saw and knew more than if I had been many years at a university, at which I exceedingly admired and thereupon turned my praise to God for it. For I saw and knew the being of all beings, the byss and abyss and the eternal

[p. 282]

generation of the Holy Trinity, the descent and original of the world and of all creatures through divine wisdom. I knew and saw in myself all the three worlds, namely, (1) the divine (angelical and paradisical) (2) and the dark (the original of the nature to the fire) and (3) then the external and visible world (being a procreation or external birth from both the internal and spiritual worlds). And I saw and knew the whole working essence in the evil and the good and the original and the existence of each of them; and likewise how the fruitful--bearing--womb of eternity brought forth. So that I did not only greatly wonder at it but did also exceedingly rejoice.

Describing "illuminations" Boehme writes, in one of his books:

Suddenly . . . my spirit did break through . . . even into the inner-most birth of Geniture of the , and there I was embraced with love, as a bridegroom embraces his dearly beloved bride. But the greatness of the triumphing that was in the spirit I cannot express either in speaking or writing; neither can it be compared to anything, but that wherein the life is generated in the midst of death, and it is like the resurrection from the dead. In this light my spirit suddenly saw through all, and in and by all creatures, even in herbs and grass, it knew God, who he is, and how he is, and what his work is; and suddenly in that light my will was set on, by a mighty impulse, to describe the being of God. But because I could not presently apprehend the deepest births of God in their being and comprehend them in my reason, there passed almost twelve years before the exact understanding thereof was given me. And it was with me as with a young tree which is planted on the ground, and at first is young and tender, and flourishing to the eye, especially if it comes on lustily in its growing. But it does not bear fruit presently; and, though it blossoms, they fall off; also many a cold wind, frost and snow, puff upon it, before it comes to any growth and bearing of fruit.

Boehme's books are full of wonderment before these mysteries with which he was confronted.

I was as simple concerning the hidden mysteries as the meanest of all; but my vision of the wonders of God taught me, so that I must write of his wonders; though indeed my purpose is to write this for a memorandum for myself. . . .

Not I, the I that I am, know these things: but God knows them in me.

If you will behold your own self and the outer world, and what is taking place thereon, you will find that you, with regard to your external being, are that external world.

The Dialogues between Disciple and Master are remarkable (Disciple

[p. 283]

and Master should be understood to refer to the lower and the higher consciousness of man).

The Disciple said to his Master:

How may I come to the supersensual life, that I may see God and hear him speak?

His Master said:

When thou canst throw thyself but for a moment into that where no creature dwelleth, then thou hearest what God speaketh.

Disciple--Is that near at hand or far off?

Master--It is in thee. And if thou canst for a while but cease from all thy thinking and willing, then thou shalt hear the unspeakable words of God.

Disciple--How can I hear him speak, when Ii stand still from thinking and willing?

Master--When thou standest still from the thinking of self, and the willing of self; "When both thy intellect and will are quiet, and passive to the impressions of the Eternal Word and Spirit; And when thy soul is winged up, and above that which is temporal, the outward senses, and the imagination being locked up by holy abstraction," then the Eternal hearing, seeing, and speaking, will be revealed in thee; and so God "heareth and seeth through thee," being now the organ of his spirit; and so God speaketh in thee, and whispereth to thy spirit, and thy spirit heareth his voice. Blessed art thou therefore if that thou canst stand still from self-thinking and self-willing, and canst stop the wheel of imagination and senses; forasmuch as hereby thou mayest arrive at length to see the great salvation of God, being made capable of all manner of Divine sensations and heavenly communications. Since it is naught indeed but thine own hearing and willing that do wonder thee, so that thou dost not see and hear God.

Disciple--Loving Master, I can no more endure anything should divert me, how shall I find the nearest way to him?

Master--Where the way is hardest there walk thou, and take up what the world rejecteth; and what the world doth, that do not thou. Walk contrary to the world in all things. And then thou comest the nearest way to him.

______

Disciple--. . . Oh how may I arrive at the unity of will, and how come into the unity of vision?

Master--. . . Mark now what I, say: The Right Eye looketh in thee into Eternity. The Left Eye looketh backward in thee into time. If now thou sufferest thyself to be always looking into nature, and the things of time, it will be impossible for thee ever to arrive at the unity, which thou wishest for. Remember this; and be upon thy watch. Give not thy mind

[p. 284]

leave to enter in, nor to fill itself with, that which is without thee; neither look thou backward upon thyself . . . Let not thy Left Eye deceive thee, by making continually one representation after another, and stirring up thereby an earnest longing in the self-propriety; but let thy Right Eye command back this Left . . . And only bringing the Eye of Time into the Eye of Eternity . . . and descending through the Light of God into the Light of Nature . . . shalt thou arrive at the Unity of Vision or Uniformity of Will.

In another dialogue the Disciple and the Master converse about heaven and hell.

The Disciple asked his Master:

Whither go the souls when they leave these mortal bodies?

His Master answered:

The soul needeth no going forth anywhere.

Disciple--Does it not enter into heaven or hell?

Master--No, there is no such kind of entering. . . . The soul hath heaven and hell in itself . . . and whether of the two states--either heaven or hell--shall be manifested in the soul, in that it standeth.

The quotations given here are sufficient to indicate the character of the writings of an unlearned shoemaker from a little provincial town in Germany of the XVI--XVII centuries. Boehme is remarkable for the bright intellectuality of his comprehensions, although there is in them a strong moral element also.

______

In the book above mentioned (The Varieties of Religious Experience) Prof. James dwells with great attention on Christian Mysticism, which afforded him much material for establishing the fact of the cognitive aspect of mysticism.

I borrow from him the following description of the mystical experiences of certain Christian saints.

St. Ignatius confessed one day to Father Laynez that a single hour of meditation at Manfesa had taught him more truths about heavenly things than all the teachings of all the doctors put together could have taught him. . . . One day in orison, on the steps of the choir of the Dominican Church, he saw in a distinct manner the plan of divine wisdom in the creation of the world. On another occasion, during a procession, his spirit

[p. 285]

was ravished on God, and it was given him to contemplate, in a form and images fitted to the weak understanding of a dweller on earth, the deep mystery of the holy Trinity. This last vision flooded his heart with such sweetness, that mere memory of it in after times made him shed abundant tears.

 

"One day, being in orison," Saint Teresa writes, "it was granted me to perceive in one instant how all things are seen and contained in God. I did not perceive them in their proper form, and nevertheless the view I had of them was of a sovereign clearness and has remained vividly impressed upon my soul. It is one of the most signal of all the graces which the Lord has granted me. . . . The view was so subtle and delicate that the understanding cannot grasp it."

She goes on to tell [Prof. James writes] how it was as if the Deity was an enormous and sovereignly limpid diamond, in which all our actions were contained in such a way that their full sinfulness appeared evident as never before.

"Our Lord made me comprehend," she writes, "in what way it is that one God can be in three Persons. He made me see it so clearly that I remained as extremely surprised as I, was comforted . . . and now, when I think of the holy Trinity, or hear it spoken of, I understand how the three adorable Persons form only one God and I experienced an unspeakable happiness."

Christian mysticism, as Prof. James shows, is very near to the Vedanta and the Upanishads. That fountain-head of Christian mysticism, Dionysius the Areopagite, tells about the absolute truth in negative formulae only.

"The cause of all things is neither soul nor intellect; nor has it imagination, opinion, or reason, or intelligence; nor is it reason or intelligence; nor is it spoken or thought. It is neither number, nor order, nor magnitude, nor littleness, nor equality, nor inequality, nor similarity, nor dissimilarity. It neither stands, nor moves, nor rests. . . . It is neither essence, nor eternity, nor time. Even  contact does not belong to it. Art is neither science nor truth. It is not even royalty or wisdom; not one; not unity; not divinity or goodness nor even spirit as we know it."

______

The writings of the mystics of the Greek Orthodox Church are collected in the books The Love of the Good, comprising five large and formidable volumes. I selected several examples of profound

[p. 286]

and fine mysticism from the book, Superconsciousness and the Paths to its Attainment, by M. V. Lodizhensky (In Russian), who studied these books and found therein remarkable examples of philosophical thought.

Imagine a circle, says Avva Dorotheus (VII century), and in the middle of it a centre; and from this centre forthgoing radii-rays. The farther these radii go from the centre, the more divergent and remote from one another they become; conversely, the nearer they approach to the centre, the more they come together among themselves. Now suppose that this circle is the world: the very middle of it, God; and the straight lines (radii) going from the centre to the circumference, or from the circumference to the centre, are the paths of life of men. And in this case also, to the extent that the saints approach the middle of the circle, desiring to approach God, do they, by so doing, come nearer to God and to one another. . . . Reason similarly with regard to their withdrawing from God . . . they withdraw also from one another, and by so much as they withdraw from one another do they withdraw from God. Such is the attribute of love: to the extent that we are distant from God and do not love Him, each of us is far from his neighbor also. If we love God, then to the extent that we approach to Him through love of Him, do we unite in love with our neighbors; and the closer our union with them, the closer is our union with God also. [*1]

(Superconsciousness, p. 266)

Hear now, says St. Isaac of Syria (VI century), how man becomes refined, acquires spirituality, and becomes like the invisible forces. . . . When the vision soars above things earthly, and above all troubles over earthly doings, and begins to experience revelations concerning that which is within, hidden from sight, and when it will turn its gaze upward, and experiences faith in the guidance of future ages, and the ardent desire for promised things, when it will search for hidden mysteries, then faith itself consumes this knowledge and so transforms and regenerates it that it becomes entirely spiritual. Then may the vision soar on pinions into regions incorporeal, may touch the depths of an inaccessible sea, participating

[p. 287]

in the mind Divine, and the miraculous acts of guidance in the hearts of thinking and feeling beings, discovering spiritual mysteries which become then comprehensible by the refined and simple mind. Then the inner senses are awakened to spirituality after the manner that they will be in the life immortal and incorruptible, for even here this redemption of the mind is a true symbol of the general redemption.

(Superconsciousness, p. 370)

When the grace of the Holy Spirit, says Maxim Kapsokalivit, descends on anyone, there is shown to him nothing of the sensuous world, but that which he never saw or never imagined. Then the understanding of such a man receives from the Holy Spirit the highest and hidden mysteries which according to the divine Paul, neither the human eye can understand nor the human reason comprehend unaided. (Ii Corinthians ii, 9). And that thou mayest understand how our reason sees them, try to apprehend that which I shall say to thee. Wax, when it is placed far from fire, is solid, and it is possible to take it and hold it, but as soon as it is thrown in fire it immediately melts, takes fire, burns, blazes and ends thus in the midst of flames. So also is human reason when it is alone by itself, ununited with God; then it comprehends in the usual way and according to its power all things surrounding it; but as it approaches the fire of Divinity and of the Holy Ghost, then is it entirely enveloped by that Divine fire, and immersed in Divine meditation, and then in that fire of Divinity it is impossible for it to think about its own affairs and about that which it desires.

(Superconsciousness, p. 370)

St. Basil the Great says about the revelation of God: Absolutely unutterable and indescribable are the lightning-like splendors of Divine beauty; neither can speech express nor hearing apprehend. Shall we name the brilliance of the morning star, the brightness of the moon, the radiance of the sun--the glory of all these is unworthy of being compared with the true light, standing farther from it than does the gloomiest night and the most terrible darkness from midday brightness. This beauty, invisible to bodily eyes, comprehensible to soul and mind only, if it illumines some of the saints leaves in them an unbearable wound through their desire that this vision of Divine beauty should extend over an eternity of life; disturbed by this earthly life, they loathe it as thought it were a prison.

(Superconsciousness, p. 372)

 

St. Theognis says: A strange word will I say to thee. There is some hidden mystery which proceeds between God and the soul. This is experienced by those who achieve the highest heights of perfect purity of

[p. 288]

love and faith, when man, changing completely unites with God, as His own, through ceaseless prayer and contemplation?

(, p. 381)

Certain parts of the writings of Clement of Alexandria (second century) are remarkably interesting.

It appears to us that painting appears to take in the whole field of view in the scenes represented. But it gives a false description of the view, according to the rules of the art, employing the signs that result from the incidents of the lines of vision. By this means, the higher and the lower points in the view, and those between, are preserved; and some objects seem to appear in the foreground, and others in the background, and others to appear in some other way, on the smooth and level surface. So also philosophers copy the truth, after the manner of painting. [*1]

Clement of Alexandria here reveals one very important aspect of truth, namely, its inexpressibility in words and the entire conditionality of all philosophical systems and formulations. Dialectically truth is represented only in perspective--i.e., in an inevitably deformed shape--such is his idea.

What time and labor would be saved, and from what enormous and unnecessary suffering would humanity save itself, could it but understand this one simple thing: that truth cannot be expressed in our language. Then would men cease to think that they possessed truth, would cease to force others to accept their truth at any cost, would see that others may approach truth from another direction, exactly as they themselves approach it, by a way of their own. How many arguments, how many religious struggles, how much of violence toward the thoughts of others would be rendered unnecessary and impossible if men would only understand that nobody possesses truth, but all are seeking for it, each in his own way.

The ideas of Clement of Alexandria about God are highly interesting, and closely approximate to those of the Vedanta, and particularly to the ideas of the Chinese philosophers.

The discourse respecting God is the most difficult to handle. For since the first principle of everything is difficult to find out, the absolutely first and the oldest principle, which is the cause of all other things being and

[p. 289]

having been, is difficult to exhibit. For how can that be expressed which is neither genus, nor difference, nor species, nor individual, nor number; nay more, is neither an event, nor that to which an event happens? No one can rightly express this wholly. For on account of his greatness he is ranked as the All and is the Father of the universe. Nor are any parts to be predicated of them. For the one is indivisible, wherefore also it is infinite, not considered with reference to its being without dimensions, and not having a limit. And therefore it is without form and name. And if we name it, we do not do so properly, terming it either the one, or the good, or mind, or Absolute Being, or Father, or God, or Creator, or Lord. We speak not as supplying His name; but for want, we use good names, in order that the mind may have these as points of support, so as not to err in other respects. [*1]

Among Chinese mystical philosophers our attention is arrested by Lao-Tzu (VI cent. B. C.), and Chuang-Tzu^ (IV cent. B. C.) by the cleanliness of thought and the unusual simplicity with which they express the most profound doctrines of idealism.

The Sayings of Lao-Tzu^

The Tao, which can be expressed in words is not the eternal Tao; the name which can be uttered is not its eternal name. [*2]

Tao eludes the sense of sight, and is therefore called colorless. It eludes the sense of hearing, and is therefore called soundless. It eludes the sense of touch, and is therefore called incorporeal. These three qualities cannot be apprehended, and hence they may be blended into unity.

Ceaseless in action, it cannot be named, but returns again to nothingness. We may call it the form of the formless, the image of the image-less, the fleeting and the indeterminable.

There is something chaotic, yet complete, which existed before heaven and earth. Oh, how still it is, and formless, standing alone without changing, reaching everywhere, without suffering harm!

Its name I know not. To designate it I call it Tao. Endeavoring to describe it, I call it Great.

Being Great, it passes on; passing on, it becomes remote; having become remote it returns.

The law of Tao is its own spontaneity.

Tao in its unchanging aspect has no name.

The mightiest manifestations of active force flow from Tao.

[p. 290]

Tao as it exists in the world is like great rivers and seas which receive the streams from the valleys.

All-pervading is the Great Tao. It can be at once on the right hand and on the left.

Tao is a great square with no angles, a great sound which cannot be heard, a great image with no form.

Tao produced Unity; Unity produced Duality; Duality produced Trinity; and Trinity produced all existing objects.

He who acts in accordance with Tao, becomes one with Tao.

All the world says that my Tao is great, but unlike other teachings. It is just because it is great that it appears unlike other teachings. If it had this likeness, long ago would its smallness have been known.

The sage attends to the inner and not to the outer; he puts away the objective and holds to the subjective.

The sage occupies himself with inaction, and conveys instructions without words.

Who is there that can make muddy water clear? But if allowed to remain still it will gradually become clear of itself. Who is there that can secure a state of absolute repose? But let time go on, and the state of repose will gradually arise.

Tao is eternally inactive, and yet it leaves nothing undone.

The pursuit of book-learning brings about daily increase (i.e., the increase of knowledge). The practice of Tao brings about daily loss (i.e., the loss of ignorance). Repeat the loss again and again, and you arrive at inaction. Practice inaction, and there is nothing which cannot be done.

Practice inaction, occupy yourself with doing nothing.

Leave all things to take their natural course, and do not interfere.

All things in Nature work silently.

Among mankind, the recognition of beauty as such implies the idea of ugliness, and the recognition of good implies the idea of evil.

Cast off your holiness, rid yourself of sagacity, and the people will benefit a hundredfold.

Those who know do not speak; those who speak do not know.

He who acts, destroys; he who grasps, loses. Therefore the sage does not act, and so he does not destroy; he does not grasp, and so he does not lose.

The soft overcomes the hard; the weak overcomes the strong. There is no one in the world but knows this truth, and no one who can put it into practice.

A Meditation of Chuang-Tzu^

You cannot speak of ocean to a well-frog--the creature of a narrower sphere. You cannot speak of ice to a summer insect--the creature of a season. You cannot speak of Tao to a pedagogue, his scope is too restricted.

[p. 291]

But now that you have emerged from your narrow sphere and have seen the great ocean, you know your own significance, and I can speak to you of great principles. . . .

Dimensions are limitless; time is endless. Conditions are not invariable; terms are not final.

There is nothing which is not objective; there is nothing which is not subjective. But it is impossible to start from the objective. Only from subjective knowledge is it possible to proceed to objective knowledge.

When subjective and objective are both without their correlates, that is the very axis of Tao.

Tao has its laws and its evidences. It is devoid both of action and of form.

It may be obtained but cannot be seen.

Spiritual beings draw their spirituality from Tao.

To Tao no point in time is long ago.

Tao cannot be existent. If it were existent, it could not be non-existent. The very name of Tao is only adapted for convenience' sake. Predestination and chance are limited to material existences. How can they bear upon the infinite?

Tao is something beyond material existences. It cannot be conveyed either by words or by silence. In that state which is neither speech nor silence, its transcendental nature may be apprehended. [*1]

______

In contemporary Theosophical literature, two little books stand out: The Voice of the Silence by H. P. Blavatsky, and Light on the Path by Mabel Collins. In both of them there is much of real mystical sentiment.

The Voice of the Silence

He who would hear the voice of the silence, the soundless sound, and comprehend it, he has to learn the nature of the perfect inward concentration of the mind, accompanied by complete abstraction from everything pertaining to the external Universe, or the world of senses.

Having become indifferent to objects of perception, the pupil must seek out the Rajah of the senses, the Thought-Producer, him who awakes illusions. The mind is the great slayer of the real.

Let the Disciple slay the Slayer.

For--

When to himself his form appears unreal, as do on waking all the forms he sees in dreams;

When he ceases to hear the many, he may discern the ONE--the inner sound which kills the outer.

[p. 292]

Then only, not till then, shall he forsake the region of ASAT, the false, to come into the realm of SAT, the true.

Before the soul can see, the harmony within must be attained, and fleshly eyes be rendered blind to illusion.

Before the soul can hear, the image (man) has to become as deaf to warnings as to whispers, to cries of bellowing elephants as to the silvery buzzing of the golden firefly.

.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

And then to the inner ear will speak--

THE VOICE OF THE SILENCE

And say:

--If thy Soul smiles while bathing in the sunlight of thy life; if thy soul sings within her chrysalis of flesh and matter; if thy soul weeps inside her castle of illusion; if thy soul struggles to break the silver thread that binds her to the MASTER, know, O Disciple, thy soul is of the earth.

.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

Give up thy life, if thou wouldst live.

Learn to discern the real from the false, the ever-fleeting from the ever-lasting. Learn above all to separate head-learning from soul-wisdom, the "Eye" from the "Heart" doctrine.

.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

Light on the Path, like The Voice of the Silence is full of symbols, hints and hidden meanings. This is a little book which makes demands upon the reader. Its meaning is elusive, and it requires to be read in a fitting state of spirit. Light on the Path prepares the "disciple" to meet the "Master," i.e., the ordinary consciousness for communion with the higher consciousness. According to the author of Light on the Path, the term "THE MASTERS" is a symbolical expression for the "Divine Life." [*1]

Light on the Path

Before the eyes can see they must be incapable of tears. Before the ear can hear it must have lost its sensitiveness. Before the voice can speak in the presence of the Masters it must have lost the power to wound. Before the soul can stand in the presence of the Masters its feet must be washed in the blood of the heart.

.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

Kill out all sense of separateness.
 Desire only that which is within you.
 Desire only that which is beyond you.
 Desire only that which is unattainable.

[p. 293]

For within you is the light of the world. . . . If you are unable to perceive it within you, it is useless to look for it elsewhere. . . . it is unattainable, because it forever recedes. You will enter the light, but you will never touch the Flame. . . .

Seek out the way.

Look for the flower to bloom in the silence that follows the storm: not till then. . . .

And on the deep silence the mysterious event will occur which will prove that the way has been found. Call it by what name you will, it speaks in a voice that speaks where there is none to speak--it is a messenger that comes, a messenger without form or substance; or it is the flower of the soul that has opened. It cannot be described by any metaphor.

.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

To hear the voice of the silence is to understand that from within comes the only true guidance. . . . For when the disciple is ready, the Master is ready also.

Hold fast to that which is neither substance nor existence.

Listen only to the voice which is soundless.

Look only on that which is invisible. . . .

______

Prof. James calls attention in his book to the unusually vivid emotionality of mystic experiences, and to the quite unusual sensations felt by mystics.

The deliciousness of some of these states seems to be beyond anything known in ordinary consciousness. It evidently involves organic sensibilities, for it is spoken of as something too extreme to be borne, and as verging on bodily pain. But it is too subtle and piercing a delight for ordinary words to denote. God's touches, the wounds of his spear, references to ebriety and to mystical union have to figure in the phraseology by which it is shadowed forth.

The joy of communion with God, described by St Simeon the New Theologian [*1] (X century) may serve as an example of such an experience.

I am wounded by the arrow of His love (writes St. Simeon). He is Himself inside of me, in my heart; he embraces me, kisses me, fills me with light. . . . A new flower grows in me, new because it is joyous. . . . This flower is of an unutterable form, is seen when it grows merely, then suddenly disappears . . . it is of indescribable appearance; attracts my mind to itself, causes forgetfulness of everything to do with fear, and then

[p. 294]

flies suddenly away. Then does the tree of fear remain again lacking fruit; I moan in sorrow and pray to thee, my Christ; again I see the flower amid the branches, Ii chain my attention to it alone, and see not the tree alone, but the brilliant flower attracting me to itself irresistibly; this flower grows in the end into the fruit of love. . . . Incomprehensible is it how from fear grows love.

Mysticism penetrates into all religions.

In India, [Prof. James says] training in mystical insight has been known from time immemorial under the name of yoga. Yoga means the experimental union of the individual with the divine. It is based on per-severing exercise; and the diet, posture, breathing, intellectual concentration, and moral discipline vary slightly in the different systems which teach it. The yogi, or disciple, who has by these means overcome the obscurations of his lower nature sufficiently, enters into the condition termed samadhi, "and he comes face to face with facts which no instinct or reason can ever know."

. . . When a man comes out of samadhi Vedantists assure us that he remains "enlightened, a sage, a prophet, a saint, his whole character changed, his life changed, illumined."

The Buddhists use the word samadhi as well as the Hindus; but dhyana is their special word for the higher states of contemplation.

Higher stages still of contemplation are mentioned--a region where there exists nothing, and where the meditator says: "There exists absolutely nothing," and stops. Then he reaches another region, he says: "There are neither ideas nor absence of ideas," and stops again. Then another region where, "having reached the end of both idea and perception, he stops finally." This would seem to be, not yet Nirvana, but as close an approach to it as this life affords. [*1]

_____

In Mohammedanism there is much of mysticism also. The most characteristic expression of Moslem mysticism is Persian Sufism. This is at the same time a religious sect and a philosophical school of high idealistic character, which struggled against materialism and against the narrow fanaticism and the literal understanding of the Koran. The Sufis interpreted the Koran mystically. Sufism--this is the philosophical free-thinking of Mohammedanism, united

[p. 295]

with an entirely original symbolical and brightly sensuous poetry which has always a hidden mystical character. The blossoming of Sufism occurred in the early centuries of the second millennium of the Christian era.

Sufism remained for a long time incomprehensible to European thought. From the point of view of Christian theology and Christian morality the mixing up of sensuousness and religious ecstacy is incomprehensible, but in the Orient the two coexisted with perfect harmony. In the Christian world "the flesh" has always been regarded as inimical to "the spirit." In the Moslem world the fleshly and sensuous was accepted as a symbol of spiritual things. The expression of philosophical and religious truths "in the language of love" was a widely disseminated custom throughout the Orient. These things are "Oriental flowers of eloquence." All allegories, all metaphors were taken from "love." "Mohammed fell in love with God," the Arabs say, desiring to convey the brightness of the religious ardor of Mohammed. "Select for thyself a new wife every spring of the new year, because last year's calendar is no good"--says the Persian poet and philosopher Sa'di. And in such curious form Sa'di expresses the thought that Ibsen puts in the mouth of Dr. Stockman: "Truths are not as many believe like long-living Methuselahs. Under normal conditions a truth may exist about seventeen or eighteen years, rarely longer."

The poetry of the Sufis will become clearer to us if we always keep in mind this general sensuous character of the literary language of the Orient, the heritage of profound antiquity. A classic example of this ancient literature is the Song of Songs.

Many parts of the Bible and all ancient myths and stories are distinguished by a sensuousness of form strange to us.

"The Persian mystical poetical Sufis wrote about the love of God in expressions applicable to their beautiful women," says the translator of Jami and other poets, Davis--"because, as they explained this, nobody can write in heavenly language and be understood." (Persian Mystics.)

"The idea of Sufism," Max Muller says, "is a loving union of the soul with God." "The Sufi holds that there is nothing in human language that can express the love between the soul and God so well as the love between man and woman and that if he is to speak of the union between the two at all, he can only do so in the

[p. 296]

symbolic language of earthly love." When we read some of the Sufi enraptured poetry, we must remember that the Sufi poets use a number of expressions which have a recognized meaning in their language. Their sleep means meditation; perfume--hope of divine favor; kisses and embraces--the raptures of piety; wine means spiritual knowledge, etc.

The flowers which a lover of God had gathered in his rose-garden, and which he wished to give to his friends, so overpowered his mind by their fragrance that they fell out of his lap and withered, Sa'di says. A poet desires to express by this, that the glory of ecstatic visions pales and fades away when it has to be put into human language.--(Max Muller Theosophy.)

Generally speaking, never and nowhere has poetry been so blended with mysticism as in Sufism. The Sufi poets frequently lived the strange lives of hermits, anchorites and wanderers, at the same time singing of love, the beauty of women, the aroma of roses and wine.

Jelal eddin describes as follows the communion of the soul with God:

A loved one said to her lover to try him early one morning: "O such a one, son of such a one, I marvel whether you hold me more dear, or yourself; tell me truly, O ardent lover!" He answered: "I am so entirely absorbed in you, that I am full of you from head to foot. Of my own existence nothing but the man remains, in my being is nothing beside you, O object of my desire. Therefore I am thus lost in you. As a stone which has been changed into a pure ruby, is filled with the bright light of the sun."--(Max Muller.)

In two well-known poems of Jami (XV century), Salaman and Abasl and Yusuf and Zulaikha, the "ascending of the soul," its purification and its union with God, is represented in the most passionate forms.

______

Prof. James pays great attention in his book to mystical states under narcosis.

"This is a realm that public opinion and ethical philosophy have

[p. 297]

long since branded as pathological, though private practice and certain lyric strains of poetry seem still to bear witness of its ideality.

"Nitrous oxide and ether, especially nitrous oxide, when sufficiently diluted with air, stimulates the mystical consciousness in an extraordinary degree. Depth beyond depth of truth seems revealed to the inhaler. This truth fades out, however, or escapes, at the moment of coming to; and if any words remain over in which it seemed to clothe itself, they prove to be the veriest nonsense. Nevertheless, the sense of a profound meaning having been there persists; and I know more than one person who is persuaded that in the nitrous oxide trance we have a genuine metaphysical revelation.

"Some years ago I myself made some observations on this aspect of nitrous oxide intoxication, and reported them in print. One conclusion was forced upon my mind at that time, and my impression of its truth has ever since remained unshaken. It is that our normal waking consciousness, rational consciousness as we call it, is but one special type of , whilst all about it, parted from it by the filmiest of screens, there are potential forms of consciousness entirely different. We may go through life without suspecting their existence, but apply the requisite stimulus and at a touch they are there in all their completeness, definite types of mentality which probably somewhere have their field of application and adaptation. No account of the universe in its totality can be final which leaves these other forms of consciousness quite disregarded. At any rate, they forbid a premature closing of our accounts with reality.

"The whole drift of my education goes to persuade me that the world of our present consciousness is only one out of many worlds of consciousness that exist, and that those other worlds must contain experiences which have a meaning for our life also.

"Looking back on my experiences, they all converge toward a kind of insight to which I cannot help ascribing some metaphysical significance. The keynote of it is invariably a reconciliation. It is as if the opposites of the world, whose contradictions and conflict make all our difficulties and troubles, were melted into unity. Not only do they, as contrasted species, belong to one and the same genus, but one of the species--the nobler

[p. 298]

and the better one--is itself the genus, so soaks up and absorbs its opposite into itself. This is a dark saying, I know, when thus expressed in terms of common logic, but I cannot wholly escape from its authority. I feel as if it must mean something, something like what the Hegelian philosophy means, if one could only lay hold of it more clearly. Those who have ears to hear let them hear; to me the loving sense of its reality only comes in the artificial mystic state of mind.

"What reader of Hegel can doubt that sense of a perfected being with all its otherness soaked up in itself, which dominates his whole philosophy, must have come from the prominence in his consciousness of mystical moods like this, in most persons kept subliminal? The notion is thoroughly characteristic of the mystical level, and the Aufgabe (the problem) of making it articulate was surely set to Hegel's intellect by mystical feeling.

"I have friends who believe in the anaesthetic revelation. For them too it is a monistic insight, in which the other in its various forms appears absorbed into the One. [*1]

"Into this pervading genus," writes one of them, "we pass, forgetting and forgotten, and thenceforth each is all, in God. There is no higher, no deeper, no other, than the life in which we are founded. The one remains, the many change and pass; and each and every one of us is the One that remains. . . . This is the ultimatum. . . . As sure as being--whence is all our care--so sure is content, beyond duplexity, antithesis, or trouble, where I have triumphed in a solitude that God is not above."--(B. P. Blood: The Anaesthetic Revelation and the Gist of Philosophy, Amsterdam, N. Y., 1874.)

Xenos Clark, a philosopher who died young (at Amherst in the '80's) was also impressed by the revelation.

"In the first place," he once wrote to me, "Mr. Blood and I agree that the revelation is, if anything, non-emotional. It is, as Mr. Blood says, the one sole and sufficient insight why or not why, but how, the present is pushed on by the past, and sucked forward by the vacuity of the future. . . . It is an initiation of the past. The real secret would be the formulae by which the 'now' keeps exfoliating out of itself, yet never escapes. We simply fill the hole with the dirt we dug out. Ordinary philosophy is like a hound hunting its own tail. The more he hunts the farther he has to go, and his nose never catches up with his heels, because it is forever ahead of them. So the present is already a foregone conclusion,

[p. 299]

and I am ever too late to understand it. But at the moment of recovery from anaesthesis, then, before starting on life, I catch, so to speak, a glimpse of my heels, a glimpse of the eternal process just in the act of starting. The truth is that we travel on a journey that was accomplished before we set out; and the real end of philosophy is accomplished, not when we arrive at, but when we remain in, our destination (being already there)--which may occur vicariously in this life when we cease our intellectual questioning. That is why there is a smile upon the face of revelation, as we view it. It tells us that we are forever half a second too late--that's all.

"You could kiss your own lips, and have all the fun to yourself," it says, "if you only knew the trick. It would be perfectly easy if they would just stay there till you got around to them. Why don't you manage it somehow?"

In his latest phamphlet Mr. Blood describes the value of the anaesthetic revelation for life as follows:

"The Anaesthetic Revelation is the initiation of man into the mystery of the open secret of Being, revealed as the inevitable vortex of continuity. Inevitable is the word. Its motive is inherent--it is what has to be. It is not for any love or hate, nor for joy or sorrow, nor good nor ill. End, beginning, or purpose, it knows not of.

"It affords no particular of the multiplicity and variety of things; but it fills the appreciation of the historical and the sacred with a secular and intimately personal illumination of the nature and motive of existence. . . .

"Although it is at first startling in its solemnity, it becomes directly such a matter of course--so old-fashioned, and so akin to proverbs, that it inspires exultation rather than fear, and the sense of safety, as identified with the aboriginal and the universal. But no words may express the surpassing certainty of the patient that he is realizing the primordial Adamic surprise of life.

"Repetition of the experience finds it ever the same, and as if it could not possibly be otherwise. The subject resumes his normal consciousness only to partially and fitfully remember its occurrence, and to try to formulate its baffling import--with this consolatory after-thought: that he has known the oldest truth, and that he has done with human theories as to the origin, meaning, or destiny of the race. He is beyond instruction in 'spiritual things.'

"The lesson is one of central safety; the kingdom is within. All days are judgment days: but there can be no climacteric purpose of eternity, nor any scheme of the whole. The astronomer abridges the row of bewildering figures by increasing his unit of measurement: so may we reduce the distracting multiplicity of things to the unity for which each of us stands.

"This has been my moral sustenance since I have known of it. In my first printed mention of it I declared: The world is no more the alien

[p. 300]

terror that was taught me. Spurning the cloud-grimed and still sultry battlements whence so lately Jehovan thunders boomed, my gray gull lifts her wings against the nightfall, and takes the dim leagues with a fearless eye. And now, after twenty-seven years of this experience, the wing is grayer, but the eye is fearless still, while I renew and doubly emphasize that declaration. I know--as having known--the meaning of existence: the sane center of the universe--at once the wonder and the assurance of the soul--for which the speech of reason has as yet no name but the Anaesthetic Revelations."

I subjoin, Prof. James says, another interesting anaesthetic revelation. This is what the subject, a gifted woman, writes about her experience, when she was taking ether for a surgical operation.

"I wondered if I was in a prison being tortured, and why I remembered, having heard it said that people 'learn through suffering,' and in view of what I was seeing, the inadequacy of this saying struck me so much that I said, aloud, 'to suffer is to learn.' With that I became unconscious again, and my last dream immediately preceded my real coming to. It only lasted a few seconds and was most vivid and real to me, though it may not be clear in words.

"A great Being or Power was traveling through the sky, his foot was on a kind of lightning as a wheel is on a rail, it was his pathway. The lightning was made of innumerable spirits close to one another, and I was one of them. He moved in a straight line, and each part of the streak or flash came into its short conscious existence only that he might travel. I seemed to be directly under the foot of God, and I thought he was grinding his own life up out of my pain. Then I saw that what he had been trying with all his might to do was to change his course, to bend the line of lightning to which he was tied, in the direction in which he wanted to go. I felt my flexibility and helplessness, and I knew that he would succeed. He bended me, turning his corner by means of my hurt, hurting me more than I had ever been hurt in my life, and at the acutest point of this, as he passed, I, SAW.

"I understood for a moment things that I have now forgotten, things that no one could remember while retaining sanity. The angle was an obtuse angle, and I remember thinking as I woke that had he made it a right or acute angle, I should have both suffered and 'seen' still more, and should probably have died.

"He went on and I came to. In that moment the whole of my life passed before me, including each little meaningless piece of distress, and I understood them. This is what it had all meant, this was the piece of work it had all been contributing to do.

"I did not see God's purpose. I only saw his intentness and his entire relentlessness toward his means. He thought no more of me than a man

[p. 301]

thinks of hurting a cartridge when he is firing. And yet, on waking, my first feeling was, and it came with tears, 'Domine non sum digna,' for I had been lifted into a position for which I was too small. I, realized that in that half hour under ether I had served God more distinctly and purely than I had ever done in my life before, or than I, am capable of desiring to do. I was the means of his achieving and revealing something, I know not what or to whom, and that to the exact extent of my capacity for suffering.

"While regaining consciousness L wondered why, since I had gone so deep, I had seen nothing of what saints call the love of God, nothing but his relentlessness. And then I heard an answer, which I could only just catch, saying, 'Knowledge and Love are One, and the measure is suffering'--I give the words as they came to me. With that I came finally to into what seemed a dream world compared with the reality of what I, was leaving. . . ."

I. S. Symonds, whom Prof. James mentions, tells of an interesting mystical experience with chloroform:

"After the choking and stifling had passed away, I seemed at first in a state of utter blankness, then came flashes of intense light, alternating with blackness, and with a keen vision of what was going on in the room around me, but no sensation of touch. I thought that I was near death; when suddenly, my soul became aware of God, who was manifestly dealing with me, handling me, so to speak, in an intense personal present reality. I felt him streaming in like light upon me. I cannot describe the ecstacy I felt. Then as I gradually awoke from the influence of the anaesthetic, the old sense of my relation to the world began to return, and the new sense of my relation to God began to fade. I suddenly leapt to my feet on the chair where I was sitting, and shrieked out, 'It is too horrible, it is too horrible, it is too horrible,' meaning that I could not bear this disillusionment. At last I awoke . . . calling to the two surgeons (who were frightened) 'why did you not kill me? Why would you not let me die?"

Anaesthetic states are very similar to those strange moments experienced by epileptics during their fits of illness. An artistic description of epileptic states we find in Dostoyevsky's, The Idiot.

He remembered among other things that he always had one minute just before the epileptic fit (if it came on while he was awake) when suddenly in the midst of sadness, spiritual darkness and oppression, there seemed at moments a flash of light on his brain and with extraordinary impetus all his vital forces suddenly began working at their highest tension. The sense of life, the consciousness of self, were multiplied ten times at these

[p. 302]

moments which passed like a flash of lightning. His mind and his heart were flooded with extraordinary light; all his uneasiness, all his doubts, all his anxieties were relieved at once; they were all merged in a lofty calm, full of serene, harmonious joy and hope.

Thinking of that moment later, when he was all right again, he often said to himself that all these gleams and flashes of the highest sensation of life and self-consciousness, and therefore also of the highest form of existence, were nothing but disease, the interruption of the normal condition. . . . And yet he came at last to an extremely paradoxical conclusion. What if it is disease? he decided, if the result, if the minute of sensation, remembered and analyzed afterwards in health, turns out to be the acme of harmony and beauty, and gives a feeling, unknown and undivined till then, of completeness, of proportion, of reconciliation, and of ecstatic devotional merging in the highest synthesis of life?

These vague expressions seemed to him very comprehensible, though too weak. That it was "beauty and worship," that it really was the "highest synthesis of life" he could not doubt, and could not admit the possibility of doubt. . . . He was quite capable of judging of that when the attack was over. These moments were only an extraordinary quickening of self-consciousness--if the condition was to be expressed in one word--and at the same time of the direct sensation of existence in the most intense degree. Since at that second, that is at the very last conscious moment before the fit, he had time to say to himself clearly and consciously, "Yet for this moment one might give ones whole life!" then without doubt that moment was really worth the whole of life. . . . For the very thing had happened; he actually had said to himself at that second, that, for the infinite happiness he had felt in it, that second really might well be worth the whole of life.

At that moment," as he told Rogozhin one day in Moscow . . . "at that moment I seemed somehow to understand the extraordinary saying that there shall be time no longer. Probably," he added, smiling, "this is the very second which was not long enough for the water to be spilt out of Mohammed's pitcher, though the epileptic prophet had time to gaze at all the habitations of Allah. [*1]

Narcosis or epilepsy are not at all necessary conditions to induce mystical states in ordinary men.

"Certain aspects of nature appear to have the peculiar power of awakening such mystical moods," says James.

It would be more correct to say that in all conditions of encompassing nature this power lies concealed. The change of the seasons--the first snow, the awakening of spring, the summer days,

[p. 303]

rainy and warm, the aroma of autumn--awakes in us strange "moods" which we ourselves do not understand. Sometimes these moods intensify, and become the sensation of a complete oneness with nature. In the life of every man there are moments which act upon him more powerfully than others. Upon one a thunderstorm acts mystically, upon another, sunrise, a third the sea, the forest, rocks, fire. The voice of sex embraces much of that same mystical sense of nature.

In the sex impulse man puts himself in the most personal relation with nature. The comparison of the sensation of woman experienced by man, or vice versa, with the feeling for nature is met with very often. And it is really the same sensation as is given by forest, prairie, sea, mountains, only in this case it is even more intense, awakens more inner voices, forces the sounding of more inner strings.

Animals often give the mystical sensation of nature to men. Almost everyone has his favorite animal, with which he has some inner affinity. In these animals, or through them, men sense nature intimately and personally.

In Hindu occultism there is the belief that every man has his corresponding animal, through which it is possible to act upon him magically, through which he himself can act upon others, and into which he can transform himself or be by others transformed.

Each Hindu deity has his own particular animal.

Brahma has a goose; Vishnu an eagle; Shiva a bull; Indra an elephant; Kali (Durga) a tiger; Rama a buffalo; Ganesha a rat; Agni a ram; Kartikkeya (or Subrananyia) a peacock, and Kama (the god of love) a parrot.

The same thing is true of Greece: all the deities of Olympus had their animals.

In the religion of Egypt sacred animals played an enormous part, and in Egypt the cat, the most magical of all animals, was held as sacred.

The sense of nature sometimes unfolds something infinitely new and profound in things which seemed to have been known a long time and in themselves contained nothing mystical.

The consciousness of God's nearness came to me sometimes [quotes Prof. James] . . . a presence, I might say . . . something in myself made

[p. 304]

me feel a part of something bigger than I, that was controlling. I felt myself one with the grass, the trees, birds, insects, everything in Nature. I exulted in the mere fact of existence, of being a part of it all--the drizzling rain, the shadow of the clouds, the tree-trunks, and so on.

In my own note book of 1908 I found a description of the same experienced state of consciousness.

It was in the sea of Marmora, on a rainy day of winter, the far-off high and rocky shores were of a pronounced violet color of every shade, including the most tender, fading into gray and blending with the gray sky. The sea was the color of lead mixed with silver. I remember all these colors. The steamer was going north. I, remained at the rail, looking at the waves. The white crests of waves were running toward us. A wave would run at the ship, raised as if desiring to hurl its crest upon it, rushing up with a howl. The steamer heeled, shuddered, and slowly straightened back; then from afar a new wave came running. I watched this play of the waves with the ship, and felt them draw me to themselves. It was not at all that desire to jump down which one feels in mountains but something infinitely more subtle. The waves were drawing my soul to themselves. And suddenly I felt that it went to them. It lasted an instant, perhaps less than an instant, but I entered into the waves and with them rushed with a howl at the ship. And in that instant I became all. The waves--they were myself: the far violet mountains, the wind, the clouds hurrying from the north, the great steamship, heeling and rushing irresistibly forward--all were myself. I sensed the enormous heavy body--my body--all its motions, shudderings, waverings and vibrations, fire, pressure of steam and weight of engines were inside of me, the unmerciful and unyielding propelling screw which pushed and pushed me forward, never for a moment releasing me, the rudder which determined all my motion--all this was myself: also two sailors. . . . and the black snake of smoke coming in clouds out of the funnel . . . all.

It was an instant of unusual freedom, joy and expansion. A second--and the spell of charm disappeared. It passed like a dream when one tries to remember it. But the sensation was so powerful, so bright, and so unusual that I was afraid to move and waited for it to recur. But it did not return, and a moment later I could not say that it had been--could not say whether it was a reality or merely the thought that, looking at the waves, it might be so.

Two years afterwards the yellowish waves of the Finnish gulf and a green sky gave me a taste of the same sensation, but this time it was dissipated almost before it appeared.

The examples given in this chapter do not by any means exhaust the mystical experience of humanity.

[p. 305]

But what do we infer from them?

First of all, unity of experience. In mystical sensations all men feel definitely something in common, having a similar meaning and connection one with another. The mystics of many ages and many peoples speak the same language and use the same words. This is the first and most important thing that speaks for the reality of the mystical experience. Next is the complete harmony of data regarding such experience with the theoretically deduced conditions of the world causes; the sensation of the unity of all, so characteristic of mysticism; a new sensation of time, the sense of infinity; joy or horror; knowledge of the whole in the part; infinite life and infinite consciousness. All these are real sensed facts in the mystical experience. And these facts are theoretically correct. They are such as they should be according to the conclusions of THE MATHEMATICS OF THE INFINITE AND OF THE HIGHER LOGIC. This is all that is possible to say about them.

Footnotes

^271:1 Vedanta is the end of the Vedas, the abridgment and commentaries on the Vedas. P. Ouspensky.

^280:1 Abridged quotation from "Select Works of Plotinus," transl. by Thomas Taylor. Bohn's Library, pp. lxxiii and lxxiiv.

^280:2 All the ensuing quotations are from the books of Prof. William James, and of Dr. R. M. Bucke.

^281:1 See quotation from Van Manen's book, Chap. xi. p. 125.

^286:1 The author of "Superconsciousness," M. V. Lodizhensky, told me that in the summer of 1910 he was in "Yasnaya Poliana," the residence of L. Tolstoy, and he conversed with him about the mystics and "The Love of the Good." Tolstoy was at first very skeptical about them, but when Mr. Lodizhensky read to him the quotation, given here, about the circle, Tolstoy became very enthusiastic, and ran into another room and got a letter in which a triangle was drawn. It appeared that he had independently almost grasped the thought of Avva Dorotheus, and had written to some one that God was the apex of a triangle: men the points within the angles; approaching to one another they approach to God, approaching God, they do the same toward one another. Several days afterward Tolstoy rode over to Mr. Lodizhensky's, near Tula, and read different parts of "The Love [p. 287] of the Good," much regretting that he had not known the books before.--P. D. Ouspensky.

^288:1 "The Ante-Nicene Fathers." Buffalo, The Christian Literature Pub. Co., 1885. Vol. II, pp. 463, 464.

^289:1 Ibid. p. 493.

^289:2 Abridged quotation from "The saying of Lao Tzu^." Wisdom of the East Series.

^291:1 Musings of a Chinese Mystic." Wisdom of the East Series.

^292:1 "Light on the Path," p. 92. London, Theosophical Pub. Co.

^293:1 Paul Anikieff. "Mysticism of St. Simeon the New Theologian." St. Petersburg, 1906.

^294:1 Prof. W. James. "The Varieties of Religious Experience," pp. 400, 401.

^298:1 Prof. William James, "The Varieties of  Experience." Lectures XVI and XVII. Mysticism.

^302:1 "The Idiot," by Fyodor Dostoyevsky, transl. of Constance Garnett. New York, the Macmillan Co.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 306]

  

CHAPTER XXIII

          Cosmic Consciousness of Dr. Bucke. The   three forms of    according to Dr. Bucke. Simple consciousness, or the consciousness of   animals. Self-consciousness, or the consciousness of men. Dr. Bucke's   fundamental error. Cosmic consciousness. In what is it expressed? Sensation,   perception, concept, higher MORAL concept--creative intuition. Men of   cosmic consciousness. Adam's fall into sin. The knowledge of good and evil.   Christ and the salvation of man. Commentary on Dr. Bucke's book. Birth of the   new humanity. Two races. SUPERMAN. Table of the four forms of the   manifestation of consciousness.

     
   VERY many men believe that the fundamental problems of life are absolutely unsolvable, that humanity will never know why it is striving, or for what it is striving, for what it suffers, or whither it is bound. It is regarded as almost indecent even to raise these questions. It is decreed that we live "so"--that we "simply live" thinking of nothing or thinking only on that which yields a solution--on the surface at least. Men have des-paired of finding answers to fundamental questions and so have left them alone.

Yet at the same time men are not in the least aware of what really created in them such a sense of insolubility and despair. Whence comes this feeling that it is better not to think about many things?

In reality we feel this despair only when we begin to regard man as something "finite," finished; when we see nothing beyond man, and think that we already know everything about him. In such form the problem is truly a desperate one. A cold wind blows on us from all those social theories promising incalculable welfare on earth, leaving a sense of dissatisfaction and chill even when we believe their promises.

Why? What is all this for? Well, everybody will be well fed and well taken care of--Splendid! But after that, what?

Let us suppose--although it is difficult, almost impossible to imagine--

[p. 307]

that materialistic culture, of itself, has led men to a fortunate state of existence. On earth, then, there exists an unadulterated civilization and culture. But after that, what?

After that, many resounding phrases of "incredible horizons" opening before science. "Communication with the planet Mars," "The chemical synthesis of protoplasm," "The utilization of the rotation of the earth around the sun," "Energy imprisoned in an atom," "Vaccine for all diseases," "Life to the length of a hundred years"--or even to one hundred and fifty! After that perhaps, "The artificial creation of men"--but beyond this imagination fails.

It is possible to dig through the earth, but that would be  useless.

Here indeed we encounter that feeling of the insolubility of the main questions concerning the aims of existence, and that feeling of despair on account of our lack of understanding.

Truly, suppose that we have dug completely through the earth--what then? Shall we dig in another direction? But it is all very wearisome after all. Nevertheless the various positivistic social theories, "historical materialism," and so forth, promise nothing better, and can promise nothing. To get any answer at all to such tormenting questions we must turn in quite another direction: to the psychological method of study of man and of humanity. And here we see with amazement, that the psychological method gives an entirely satisfactory answer to those fundamental questions which seem to us quite insoluble, and around about which we fruitlessly wander equipped with the defective instrument of the positivistic method.

The psychological method gives a direct answer at least to the question of the immediate purpose of our existence. For some strange reason men do not care to accept this answer; and they desire at all costs to receive an answer in some form that they like, refusing to recognize anything that is different from that form. They require the solution of the destiny of man as they fancy him, and they do not want to recognize that man can and must become entirely different. In him there are not as yet manifest those faculties which will create his future. Man must not and cannot remain such as he is now. To think of the future of this man is just as absurd as to think of the future of a child as

[p. 308]

if it were always going to remain a child. The analogy is not quite complete, for the reason that probably only a small part of humanity is capable of growth, but nevertheless this comparison paints a true picture of our usual attitude toward this question. And the fate of that greater part of humanity which will prove incapable of growth, depends not upon itself, but upon that minority which will progress. Only inner growth, the unfoldment of new forces, will give to man a correct understanding of himself, his ways, his future, and give him power to organize life on earth. At the present time the general concept "man" is too undifferentiated and includes within himself entirely different categories, those capable of development and those incapable. In men capable of development, new faculties are stirring into life, though not as yet manifest, because for their manifestation they require a special culture, a special education. The new conception of humanity disposes of the idea of equality, which after all does not exist, and it tries to establish the signs and facts of the differences between men, because humanity will need soon to divide the "progressing" from the "incapable of progress"--the wheat from the tares, for the tares are growing too fast, and choke the growth of the wheat.

This is the key to the understanding of our life, and this key was found long ago!

The enigma was solved long ago. But different thinkers, living in different epochs, finding the solution, expressed it differently, and often, not knowing one another, trod the same path amid enormous difficulties, unaware of their predecessors and contemporaries who had gone and were going along the selfsame path.

In the world's literature there exist books, usually little known, which accidentally or by design may happen to be assembled on one shelf in one library. These, taken together, will yield so clear and complete a picture of human existence, its path and its goal, that there will be no further doubts about the destiny of humanity (though only its minor part), but a destiny of quite a different sort from those hard labors of digging through the globe, which positive philosophy, "historical materialism" and "socialism" have in store for .

And if it seems to us that we do not as yet know our destiny, if we still doubt, and do not dare to part with the hopeless "positivistic" view of life, it is primarily because men of different categories,

[p. 309]

having quite different futures, are commingled into one in our perception; and secondarily because the necessary ideas by means of which we might understand the true relation of forces have not won for themselves their rightful place in official science--do not represent any recognized division or branch of science; it is rarely possible to find them all in one book and it is even rarely possible to find books expressing these ideas assembled together.

We do not understand many things because we too easily and too arbitrarily specialize. Philosophy, religion, psychology, mathematics, the natural sciences, sociology, the history of culture, art--each has its own separate literature. There is no complete whole at all. Even the little bridges between these separate literatures are built very badly and unsuccessfully, while they are often altogether absent. And this formation of special literatures is the chief evil and the chief obstacle to a correct understanding of things. Each "literature" elaborates its own terminology, its own language, which is incomprehensible to the students of other literatures, and does not coincide with other languages; by this it defines its own limits the more sharply, divides itself from others, and makes these limits impassable.

But there are movements of thought which strive not in words, but in action, to fight this specialization.

Books are appearing which it is impossible to refer to any accepted library classification, which it is impossible to "enroll" in any faculty. These books are the forerunners of a new literature which will break down all fences built in the region of thought, and will clearly show to those who desire to know, where they are going and where they can go.

The names of the authors of these books yield the most unexpected combinations. I shall not now mention the names of these authors, or the titles of these books, but shall dwell only upon the writings of Edward Carpenter and Dr. R. M. Bucke.

Edward Carpenter, directly and without any allegories and symbols, formulated the thought that the existing consciousness by which contemporary man lives, is merely the transitory form of another higher consciousness, which even now is manifesting in certain men, after appropriate preparation and training.

This higher consciousness Edward Carpenter names cosmic consciousness.

[p. 310]

Carpenter traveled in the Orient, visited India and Ceylon, and there he found men, yogis and ascetics, striving to achieve cosmic consciousness, and he holds the opinion that the path to cosmic consciousness is already found in the Orient.

In the book, From Adam's Peak to Elephanta, he says:

The West seeks the individual consciousness--the enriched mind, ready perceptions and memories, individual hopes and fears, ambitions, loves, conquests--the self, the local self, in all its phases and forms--and sorely doubts whether such a thing as an universal consciousness exists. The East seeks the universal consciousness, and in these cases where its quest succeeds individual self and life thin away to a mere film, and are only the shadows cast by the glory revealed beyond.

The individual consciousness takes the form of Thought, which is fluid and mobile like quicksilver, perpetually in a state of change and unrest, fraught with pain and effort; the other consciousness is not in the form of thought. It touches, sees, hears, and is those things which it perceives, without motion, without change, without effort, without distinction of subject and object, but with a vast and incredible joy.

The individual consciousness is specially related to the body. The organs of the body are in some degree its organs. But the whole body is only as one organ of the cosmic consciousness. To attain this latter one must have the power of knowing one's self separate from the body--of passing into a state of ecstasy, in fact. Without this the cosmic consciousness cannot be experienced.

All the subsequent writings of Carpenter, and especially his book of free verse, Towards Democracy, deal with the psychology of ecstatic experiences and portray the path whereby man goes toward this principal aim of his existence, i.e., to a new consciousness.

Only the attainment of this principal aim will illumine for man the past and the future; it will be a seership, an awakening--without this, with only the ordinary sleepy, "individual" consciousness, man is blind, and cannot hope to know anything that he cannot feel with his stick.

Dr. Bucke, in his book, Cosmic Consciousness, gives the psychological view of this awakening of the new consciousness.

I shall give, in abbreviated form, several quotations from his book.

I

What is Cosmic Consciousness?

[p. 311]

Cosmic Consciousness is a higher form of consciousness than that possessed by the ordinary man. This last is called Self Consciousness and is that faculty upon which rests all of our life (both subjective and objective) which is not common to us and the higher animals, except that small part of it which is derived from the few individuals who have had the higher consciousness above named. To make the matter clear it must be understood that there are three forms or grades of consciousness. (1) Simple Consciousness, which is possessed by, say, the upper half of the animal kingdom. (2) Self Consciousness possessed by man in addition to the simple consciousness, which is similar in man and in animals. [*1] (3) Cosmic Consciousness. By means of simple consciousness a dog or a horse is just as conscious of the things about him as a man is; he is also conscious of his own limbs and body and knows that these are a part of himself. By virtue of self-consciousness man is not only conscious of trees, rocks, water, his own limbs and body, but he becomes conscious of himself as a distinct entity apart from all the rest of the universe.

It is as good as certain that no animal can realize himself in that way. Further, by means of self-consciousness, man becomes capable of treating his own mental states as objects of consciousness. The animal is, as it were, immersed in his consciousness as a fish in the sea; he cannot, even in imagination, get outside of it for one moment so as to realize it. But man by virtue of self-consciousness can step aside, as it were, from himself and think: "Yes, that thought that I had about that matter is true; I know it is true and I, know that I know it is true." There is no evidence that any animal can think, but if they could we should soon know it. Between two creatures living together, as dogs or horses and men, and each self-conscious, it would be the simplest matter in the world to open up communication. We do, by watching the dog's acts, enter into his mind pretty freely. If he were self-conscious, we must have learned it long ago. We have not learned it and it is as good as certain that no dog, horse, elephant or ape ever was self-conscious. Another thing: on man's self-consciousness is built everything in and about us distinctly human. Language is the objective of which self-consciousness is the subjective, Self-consciousness and language (two in one for they are two halves of the same thing) are the sine qua non of human social life, of manners, of institutions, of industries of all kinds, of all arts useful and fine. If any animal possessed  it would build a superstructure of language. . . But no animal has done this, therefore, we infer that no animal has self-consciousness. The possession of self-consciousness and language (its other self) by man creates an enormous gap between him and the highest creature possessing simple consciousness merely.

[p. 312]

Cosmic Consciousness is a third form, which is as far above Self Consciousness as is that above Simple Consciousness. The prime characteristic Cosmic Consciousness is, as its name implies, a consciousness of the cosmos, that is, of the life and order of the universe. Along with the consciousness of the cosmos there occurs an intellectual enlightenment or illumination which alone would place the individual on a new plane of existence--would make him almost a member of a new species. To this is added a state of moral exaltation, an indescribable feeling of elevation, elation and joyousness, and a quickening of the moral sense, which is fully as striking and more important both to the individual and to the race than is the enhanced intellectual power. With these come what may be called a sense of immortality, a consciousness of eternal life, not a conviction that he shall have this, but the consciousness that he has it already.

Only a personal experience of it, or a prolonged study of men who have passed into the new life, will enable us to realize what this actually is. The writer expects his work to be useful in two ways: first, in broadening the general view of human life by comprehending in our mental vision this important phase of it, then by enabling us to realize, in some measure, the true status of certain men who, down to the present, are either exalted to the ranks of gods or are adjudged insane. The writer takes the view that our descendants will sooner or later reach, as a race, the condition of cosmic consciousness, just as long ago, our ancestors passed from simple to self-consciousness. He believes that this step in evolution is even now being made, since it is clear to him both that men with the faculty in question are becoming more and more common and also that as a race we are approaching nearer and nearer to that stage of the self-conscious mind from which the transition to the cosmic conscious is effected. He knows that intelligent contact with cosmic conscious minds assists self-conscious individuals in the ascent to the higher plane.

II

The immediate future of our race [the writer thinks] is indescribably hopeful. There are at the present moment impending over us three revolutions, the least of which would dwarf the ordinary historic upheaval called by that name into absolute insignificance. [*1] They are: (1) the material, economic and social revolution which will depend upon and result from the establishment of aerial navigation. (2) The economic and social revolution which will abolish individual ownership and rid the earth at once of two immense evils--riches and poverty. And (3) The psychical revolution of which there is here question.

Either of the first two would (and will) radically change the conditions of, and greatly uplift, human life; but the third will do more for humanity

[p. 313]

than both of the former, were their importance multiplied by hundreds or even thousands.

The three operating (as they will) together will literally create a new heaven and a new earth. Old things will be done away and all will become new.

Before aerial navigation national boundaries, tariffs and perhaps distinctions of language will fade out. Great cities will no longer have reason for being and will melt away. The men who now dwell in cities will inhabit in summer the mountains and the seashores; building often in airy and beautiful spots, now almost or quite inaccessible, commanding the most extensive and magnificent views. In the winter they will probably dwell in communities of moderate size. As herding together, as now, in great cities, so the isolation of the worker of the soil will become a thing of the past. Space will be practically annihilated, there will be no crowding together and no enforced solitude.

Before socialism crushing toil, cruel anxiety, insulting and demoralizing riches, poverty and its ills will become subjects for historical novels. [*1]

______

In contact with the flux of cosmic consciousness all religions known and named today will be melted down. The human soul will be revolutionized. Religion will absolutely dominate the race. It will not depend on traditions. It will not be believed and disbelieved. It will be part of life, not belonging to certain hours, times, occasions. It will not be in sacred books, nor in the mouths of priests. It will not dwell in churches and meetings and forms and days. Its life will not be in prayers, hymns nor discourses. It will not depend on special revelations, on the words of gods who came down to teach, nor on any bible or bibles. It will have no mission to save men from their sins or to secure their entrance to heaven. It will not teach a future immortality nor future glories, for immortality and all glory will exist in the here and now. The evidence of immortality will live in every heart as sight in every eye. Doubt of God and of eternal life will be as impossible as is now doubt of existence; the evidence of each will be the same. Religion will govern every minute of every day of all life. Churches, priests, forms, creeds, prayers, all agents, all intermediaries between the individual man and God will be permanently replaced by direct unmistakable intercourse. Sin will no longer exist nor will salvation be desired. Men will not worry about death or a future, about the kingdom of heaven, about what may come with and after the cessation of the life of the present body. Each soul will feel and know itself to be immortal, will feel and know that the entire universe with all its good and with all its beauty is for it and belongs to it forever. The world peopled by men possessing cosmic consciousness will be as far removed from the world

[p. 314]

of today as this is from the world as it was before the advent of self-consciousness.

III

There is a tradition, probably very old, to the effect that the first man was innocent and happy until he ate of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. That having eaten thereof he became aware that he was naked and was ashamed. Further, that there sin was born into the world, the miserable sense whereof replaced man's former feeling of innocency; that then and not till then man began to labor and to cover his body. Stranger than all, the story runs, that along with this change or immediately following upon it there came into man's mind the remarkable conviction which has never since left it, but which has been kept alive by its own inherent vitality and by the teaching of all true seers, prophets and poets that man will be saved by the rising up within him of a Savior--the Christ.

Man's progenitor was a creature with simple consciousness merely. He was (as are today the animals) incapable of sin and equally incapable of shame (at least in the human sense). He had no feeling or knowledge of good and evil. He as yet knew nothing of what we call work and had never labored. From this state he fell (or rose) into self-consciousness, his eyes were opened, he knew he was naked, he felt shame, acquired the sense of sin (became in fact what is called a sinner) and learned to do certain things in order to encompass certain ends--that is, he learned to labor.

For weary aeons this condition has lasted--the sense of sin still haunts his pathway--by the sweat of his brow he still eats bread--he is still ashamed. Where is the deliverer, the Savior? Who or what?

The Savior of man is Cosmic Consciousness--in Paul's language, the Christ. The cosmic sense (in whatever mind it appears) crushes the serpent's head--destroys sin, shame, the sense of good and evil, as contrasted one with the other, and will annihilate labor, though not human activity.

IV

A personal exposition of the writer's own experience of cosmic consciousness may help the reader to understand the meaning of the following facts:

In childhood he was subject at times to a sort of ecstasy of curiosity and hope. As on one special occasion when about ten years old he earnestly longed to die that the secrets of the beyond, if there were any beyond, might be revealed to him. . . .

At the age of thirty he fell in with "Leaves of Grass," and at once saw that it contained, in greater measure than any book so far found, what he had so long been looking for. He read the "Leaves" eagerly, even passionately, but for several years derived little from them. At last light broke and there was revealed to him (as far perhaps as such things can be revealed)

[p. 315]

at least some of the meanings. Then occurred that to which the foregoing is the preface.

It was in the early spring, at the beginning of his thirty-sixth year. He and two friends had spent the evening reading Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, Browning, and especially Whitman. They parted at midnight and he had a long drive in a hansom (it was in an English city). His mind, deeply under the influence of the ideas, images and emotions called up by the reading and talk of the evening, was calm and peaceful. He was in a state of quiet, almost passive enjoyment. All at once, without warning of any kind, he found himself wrapped around as it were by a flame-colored cloud. For an instant he thought of fire, some sudden conflagration in the great city; the next he knew the light was within himself. Directly afterwards came upon him a sense of exultation, of immense joyousness accompanied or immediately followed by an intellectual illumination quite impossible to describe. Into his brain streamed one momentary lightning-flash of the Brahmic splendor which has ever since lightened his life; upon his heart fell one drop of Brahmic Bliss, leaving thenceforward for always an after taste of heaven. Among other things he did not come to believe, he saw and knew that the cosmos is not dead matter but a living Presence, that the soul of man is immortal, that the universe is so built and ordered that without peradventure all things work together for the good of each and all, that the foundation principle of the world is what we call love and that the happiness of everyone in the long run is absolutely certain. He claims he learned more within the few seconds during which the illumination lasted than in previous months or even years of study and that he learned much that no study could ever have taught.

The illumination itself continued not more than a few moments, but its effects proved ineffaceable; it was impossible for him ever to forget what he at that time saw and knew; neither did he, nor could he, ever doubt the truth of what was then presented to his mind. There was no return that night or at any other time of the experience.

The supreme occurrence of that night was his real and sole initiation to the new and higher order of ideas. But it was only an initiation. He saw the light but had no more idea whence it came and what it meant than had the first creature that saw the light of the sun. Years afterwards he met a man who had had a large experience in the higher life. His conversations with this man threw a flood of light upon the meaning of what he had himself experienced.

Looking round then upon the world of man, he saw the significance of the subjective light in the case of Paul and in that of Mohammed. The secret of Whitman's transcendent greatness was revealed to him. Personal intercourse and conversations with men, [*1] who had similar experiences assisted greatly in the broadening and clearing up of his speculations.

After spending much time and labor in thinking he came to the conclusion

[p. 316]

that there exists a family sprung from, living among, but scarcely forming a part of ordinary humanity, whose members are spread abroad throughout the advanced races of mankind and throughout the last forty centuries of the world's history.

The trait that distinguishes these people from other men is this: Their spiritual eyes have been opened and they have seen. The better known members of this group who, if they were collected together, could be accommodated all at one time in a modern drawing-room, have created all the great modern religions, beginning with Taoism and Buddhism, and speaking generally, have created, through religion and literature, modern civilization. Not that they have contributed any large numerical proportion of the books which have been written, but that they have produced the few books which have inspired the larger number of all that have been written in modern times. These men dominate the last twenty-five, especially the last five centuries as stars of the first magnitude dominate the midnight sky.

V

It remains to say a few words upon the psychological origin of what is called in this book Cosmic Consciousness.

Although in the birth of Cosmic Consciousness the moral nature plays an important part, it will be better for many reasons to confine our attention at present to the evolution of the intellect. In this evolution there are four distinct steps. The first of them was taken when upon the primary quality of excitability sensation was established. At this point began the acquisition and more or less perfect registration of sense impressions--that is, of percepts. A percept is of course a sense impression. If we could go back far enough we should find among our ancestors a creature whose whole intellect was made up simply of these percepts. But this creature had in it what may be called an eligibility of growth, and what happened with it was something like this: Individually and from generation to generation it accumulated these percepts, the constant repetition of which, calling for further and further registration, led, in the struggle for existence and under the law of natural selection, to an accumulation of cells in the central sense ganglia; at last a condition was reached in which it became possible for our ancestor to combine groups of these percepts into what we today call a recept. This process is very similar to that of composite photography. Similar percepts (as of a tree) are registered one over the other until they are generalized into the percept of a tree.

Now the work of accumulation begins again on a higher plane: the sensory organs keep steadily at work manufacturing percepts; the receptual centers keep steadily at work manufacturing more and yet more recepts from the old and the new percepts; the capacity of the central ganglia is constantly taxed to do necessary registration of percepts, the necessary elaboration of these into recepts; then as the ganglia by use and selection are

[p. 317]

improved they constantly manufacture from percepts and from the initial simple recepts, more and more complex, that is, higher and higher recepts.

At last, after many thousands of generations have lived and died, comes a time when the mind has reached the highest possible point of purely receptual intelligence; the accumulation of percepts and of recepts has gone on until no greater stores of impressions can be laid up and no further elaboration of these can be accomplished on the plane of receptual intelligence. Then another break is made and the higher recepts are replaced by concepts. The relation of a concept to a recept is somewhat similar to the relation of algebra to arithmetic. A recept is a composite image of hundreds, perhaps thousands of percepts; it is itself an image abstracted from many images; but a concept is that same composite image--that same recept--named, ticketed, and, as it were, dismissed. A concept is in fact neither more nor less than a named recept--the name that is, the sign (as in algebra), standing henceforth for the thing itself, that is, for the recept.

Now it is clear as day to any one who will give the least thought to the subject, that the revolution by which concepts are substituted for recepts increases the efficiency of the brain for thought as much as the introduction of machinery increases the capacity of the race for work--as much as the use of algebra increases the power of the mind in mathematical calculations. To replace a great cumbersome recept by a simple sign was almost like re-placing actual goods--as wheat, fabrics and hardware--by entries in the ledger.

But, as hinted above, in order that a recept may be replaced by a concept it must be named, or, in other words, marked with a sign which stands for it--just as a check stands for a piece of goods; in other words, the race that is in possession of concepts is also, and necessarily, in possession of language. Further, it should be noted, as the possession of concepts implies the possession of language, so the possession of concepts and language (which are in reality two aspects of the same thing) implies the possession of self-consciousness. All this means that there is a moment in the evolution of mind when the receptual intellect, capable of simple consciousness only, becomes almost or quite instantaneously a conceptual intellect in possession of language and self-consciousness.

Our intellect, then, today is made up of a very complex mixture of percepts, recepts and concepts.

The next chapter in the story is the accumulation of concepts. This is a double process, each individual accumulates a larger and larger number while the individual concepts are becoming constantly more and more complex.

Is there to be any limit to this growth of concepts in number and complexity? Whoever will seriously consider that question will see that there must be a limit. No such process could go on to infinity.

We have seen that the expansion of the perceptual mind had a necessary limit: that its continued life led inevitably up to and into the receptual mind;

[p. 318]

that the receptual mind by its own growth was inevitably led up to and into the conceptual mind. A priori considerations make it certain that a corresponding outlet will be found for the conceptual mind.

But we do not need to depend upon abstract reasoning to demonstrate the necessary existence of the supra-conceptual mind, since it exists and can be studied with no more difficulty than other natural phenomena. The supra-conceptual intellect, the elements of which instead of being concepts are intuitions, is already (in small numbers it is true) an established fact, and the form of consciousness that belongs to that intellect may be called and has been called--Cosmic Consciousness.

The basic fact in cosmic consciousness is implied in its name--that fact is consciousness of the cosmos--this is what is called in the East the "Brahmic Splendor," which is in Dante's phrase capable of trans-humanizing a man into a god. Whitman, who has an immense deal to say about it, speaks of it in one place as "ineffable light--light rare, untellable, lighting the very light--beyond all signs, description, languages." This consciousness shows the cosmos to consist not of dead matter governed by unconscious, rigid, and unintending law; it shows it on the contrary as entirely immaterial, entirely spiritual and entirely alive; it shows that death is an absurdity, that everyone and everything has eternal life; it shows that the universe is God and that God is the Universe. . . . A great deal of this is of course, from the point of view of self-consciousness, absurd; it is nevertheless undoubtedly true. Now all this does not mean that when a man has cosmic consciousness he knows everything about the universe. We all know that when at three years of age we acquired self-consciousness, we did not at once know all about ourselves. . . . So neither does a man know all about the cosmos merely because he becomes conscious of it. . . .

If it has taken the race several thousand years to learn a smattering of the science of humanity since its acquisition of self-consciousness, so it may take it millions of years to acquire cosmic consciousness.

As on self-consciousness is based the human world as we see it with all its works and ways, so on cosmic consciousness is based the higher religions and the higher philosophies and what comes from them, and on it will be based, when it becomes more general, a new world of which it would be idle to try to speak today.

The philosophy of the birth of cosmic consciousness in the individual is very similar to that of the birth of self-consciousness. The mind becomes overcrowded (as it were) with concepts and these are constantly becoming larger, more numerous and more and more complex; some day (the conditions being all favorable) the fusion, or what might be called the chemical union, of several of them and of certain moral elements takes place; the result is an intuition and the establishment of the intuitional mind, or, in other words, cosmic consciousness. [*1]

The scheme by which the mind is built up is uniform from beginning to

[p. 319]

end: a recept is made of many percepts; a concept of many or several recepts and percepts, and an intuition is made of many concepts, recepts and percepts together with other elements belonging to and drawn from the moral nature. The cosmic vision or the cosmic intuition, from which what may be called the new mind takes its name, is thus seen to be simply the complex and union of all prior thought and experience--just as self-consciousness is the complex and union of all thought and experience prior to it.

______

Cosmic consciousness, like other forms of consciousness, is capable of growth, it may have different forms, different degrees.

It must not be supposed that because a man has cosmic consciousness he is therefore omniscient or infallible. Men of cosmic consciousness have reached a higher level; but on that level there can be different degrees of consciousness. And it must be still more evident that, however godlike the faculty may be, those who first acquire it, living in diverse ages and countries, passing their life in different surroundings, brought up to view life from totally different points of view, must necessarily interpret somewhat differently those things which they see in the new world which they enter.

______

Language corresponds to the intellect and is therefore capable of expressing it perfectly and directly; on the other hand, the functions of the moral nature are not connected with language and are only capable of indirect and imperfect expression by its agency. Perhaps music, which certainly has its roots in the moral nature, is, as at present existing, the beginning of a language which will tally and express emotions as words tally and express ideas. . . .

Language is the exact tally of the intellect; for every concept there is a word or words and for every word there is a concept. . . . No word can come into being except as the expression of a concept, neither can a new concept be formed without the formation (at the same time) of the new word which is its expression. But as a matter of fact ninety-nine out of every hundred of our sense impressions and emotions have never been represented in the intellect by concepts and therefore remain unexpressed and inexpressible except by roundabout description and suggestion.

As the correspondence of words and concepts is not casual or temporary but resides in the nature of these and continues during all time and under all circumstances absolutely constant, so changes in one of the factors must correspond with changes in the other. So evolution of intellect must be accompanied by evolution of language. An evolution of language will be evidence of evolution of intellect.

______

[p. 320]

It seems that in every, or nearly every man who enters into cosmic consciousness apprehension is at first more or less excited, the person doubting whether the new sense may not be a symptom or form of insanity. Mohammed was greatly alarmed. The Apostle Paul was alarmed in the same manner.

The first thing each person asks himself upon experiencing the new sense is: Does what I see and feel represent reality or am I suffering from a delusion? The fact that the new experience seems even more real than the old teachings of consciousness does not at first fully reassure him, because he knows the force of delusions.

Simultaneously or instantly following the above sense and emotional experiences there comes to the person an intellectual illumination quite impossible to describe. Like a flash there is presented to his consciousness a clear conception (a vision) in outline of the meaning and drift of the universe. He does not come to believe merely; but he sees and knows that the cosmos, which to the self-conscious mind seems made up of dead matter, is in fact far otherwise--is in very truth a living presence. He sees that in-stead of men being, as it were, patches of life scattered through an infinite sea of non-living substance, they are in reality specks of relative death in an infinite ocean of life. He sees that the life which is in man is eternal, as all life is eternal, that the soul of man is as immortal as God is. . . .

A man learns infinitely much of the new. Especially does he obtain such a conception of THE WHOLE--or at least of an immense WHOLE--as dwarfs all conception, imagination or speculation, such a conception as makes the old attempts to mentally grasp the universe and its meaning petty and even ridiculous.

This expansion of the intellect enormously increases the capacity both for learning and initiating.

______

The history of the development and appearance of cosmic consciousness in humanity is the same as that of the development of all the various psychic faculties. These faculties appear first in certain exceptional individuals, then become more frequent, thereafter become susceptible of development in all, and at last begin to belong to all men from their birth. Rare, exceptional, unique abilities appear in man in mature age, sometimes even in senility. Becoming more common they manifest as "talents" in younger men. And then they appear as "abilities" even in children. At last they become the common property of all from their birth, and their absence is regarded as a monstrosity.

Such is the faculty of speech (i.e., the faculty of making concepts). Probably in a distant past, at the beginning of the appearance of self-consciousness, this faculty was the gift of a few exceptional individuals and it began then to appear perhaps in senility. After that it began to appear more frequently and to manifest itself earlier. Probably there was a period

[p. 321]

when speech was not a gift of all men just as are not now artistic talents, the musical sense, the sense of color and form. Gradually it became possible for all and then inevitable and necessary, if some physical defect did not prevent its manifestation.

______

COMMENTS ON THE QUOTATIONS FROM DR. BUCKE'S BOOK

1. Though I am quoting Dr. Bucke's opinion regarding three coming revolutions, let me note that I do not at all share his optimism regarding social life, which, as follows from what he says, can and must change by reason of material causes (the conquest of the air and social revolution). The only possible ground for favorable changes in the outer life (provided such changes are generally possible) can only be changes in the inner life--i.e., those changes which Dr. Bucke calls the psychical revolution. This is the only thing that can create a better future for men. All cultural conquests in the realm of the material are double-edged, may equally serve for good or for evil. A change of consciousness can alone be a guarantee of the surcease of wilful misuses of the powers given by culture, and only thus will culture cease to be a "growth of barbarity." Democratic organization and the nominal rule of the majority guarantee nothing: on the contrary, even now, where they are realized--though only in name--they create without delay, and promise in future to create on a larger scale, violence toward the minority, the limitation of the individual, and the curtailment of freedom.

2. Dr. Bucke says that once human consciousness is attained, then further evolution is inevitable. In this affirmation Dr. Bucke makes a mistake common to all men who dogmatize about evolution. Having painted a very true picture of the consecutive gradations of the forms of consciousness observed by us--of animal-vegetable, of animal, and of man--Dr. Bucke considers this gradation exclusively in the light of the evolution of one form from another, not at all admitting the possibility of other points of view: for example, the fact that each of the existing forms is a link of separate evolutionary chains, i.e., that the evolutions of animal-vegetables, of animals and of men are different, go by different routes, and do not impinge upon one another. And this standpoint is entirely

[p. 322]

justifiable when we take into consideration the fact that we never know transitional forms. Moreover Dr. Bucke makes an entirely arbitrary conclusion concerning the inevitability of the further evolution of man, because unconscious evolution (i.e., unconscious for the individual directed by the consciousness of the species) in the vegetable and animal kingdoms is impossible with the appearance of reasoning in man. It is necessary to recognize that the mind of a man depends upon itself to a considerably greater degree than the mind of an animal. The mind of a man has far more power over itself; it can assist in its own evolution, and can also impede it. We are confronted with the general question: can unconscious evolution proceed with the appearance of reasoning? It is far more correct to suppose that the appearance of reasoning annihilates the possibility of unconscious evolution. Power over evolution passes from the group-soul (or from nature) to the individual itself. Further evolution, if it take place, cannot be an elemental and unconscious affair, but will result solely from conscious efforts toward growth. [*1] This is the most interesting point in the whole process, but Dr. Bucke fails to bring it out. Man, not striving toward evolution, not conscious of its possibility, not helping it, will not evolve. And the individual who is not evolving does not remain in a static condition, but goes down, degenerates (i.e., some of his elements begin their own evolution, inimical to the whole). This is the general law. And if we take into consideration what an infinitesimal percentage of men think and are capable of thinking of their evolution (or their striving toward higher things) then we shall see that to talk about the inevitability of this evolution is at least naive.

3. Speaking of the formation of a higher faculty of knowledge and reason, Dr. Bucke fails to take into consideration one very important circumstance. He himself previously remarks that the blending of concepts with emotional elements proceeds in the mind, and as a result of this a new understanding appears, and then cosmic consciousness. Thus it follows from his own words that cosmic consciousness is not simply a blending of concepts with emotional elements, or ideas with feelings, but is the result of this blending. Dr. Bucke however does not dwell on this with sufficient attention. Moreover he further regards the fundamental element

[p. 323]

of cosmic consciousness as the blending of sensations, perceptions and concepts with elements properly belonging to the emotional nature. This is a mistake, because one element of cosmic consciousness is not simply the blending of thought and feeling, but the result of this blending, or in other words: thought and feeling plus something else, plus something else that is absent either in the intellect or in the emotional nature.

But Dr. Bucke regards this new faculty of understanding and reasoning as a product of the evolution of existing faculties and this vitiates all his deductions. Let us imagine that some scientist from another planet, not suspecting the existence of man, studies the horse, and its "evolution" from colt to saddle-horse, and regards as its highest evolution the horse with the horseman in the saddle. From our standpoint it is clearly impossible to regard a man sitting in the horse's saddle as a fact of horse evolution, but from the point of view of the scientist who knows nothing about man, this will be only logical. Dr. Bucke finds himself in exactly this position when he regards that which transcends the region of humanity altogether as a fact of human evolution. Man possessing cosmic consciousness, or approaching cosmic consciousness is not merely man, but man with something higher added. Dr. Bucke, like Edward Carpenter in many cases also, is handicapped by the desire not to go too strongly counter to accepted views (although that is inevitable); by the desire to reconcile those views with the "new thought," to flatten out contradictions, to reduce everything to one thing, which is of course impossible--as is the reconciliation of correct and incorrect, true and false views upon one and the same thing.

______

The greater part of Dr. Bucke's book consists of examples and quotations from the teachings and writings of men of "cosmic consciousness" in the history of the world. He draws parallels between these teachings, and establishes the unity of the forms of transition into the new state of consciousness in men of different centuries and of different peoples, and the unity of their sensations of the world and of the self, testifying more than anything else to the genuineness and reality of their experiences.

[p. 324]

The founders of world-religions, prophets, philosophers, poets--these are men of "cosmic consciousness" according to Dr. Bucke's book. He does not pretend to present a full list of them, and it is of course possible to add many names to his list. [*1]

But after all, various little imperfections of Dr. Bucke's book are not important, nor additions which might possibly be made. What is important is the general conclusion to which Dr. Bucke comes--the possibility and the immanence of the NEW CONSCIOUSNESS.

All this announces to us the nearness of the NEW HUMANITY. We are building without taking into consideration the fact that a NEW MASTER must come who may not at all like everything that we have built. Our "social sciences," sociology, and so forth, have in view only man, while as I have several times shown before, the concept "man" is a complex one, and includes in itself different categories of men going along different paths. The future belongs not to man, but to superman, who is already born, and lives among us.

A higher race is rapidly emerging among humanity, and it is emerging by reason of its quite remarkable understanding of the world and life.

It will be truly a HIGHER RACE--and there will be no possibility of any falsification, any substitution, or any usurpation at all. It will be impossible for anything to be bought, or appropriated to oneself by deceit or by might. Not only will this race be, but it already is.

The men approaching the transition into a new race begin already to know one another: already are established pass-words and counter-signs. And perhaps those social and political questions so sharply put forward in our time may be solved on quite another plane and

[p. 325]

by quite a different method than we think--may be solved by the entrance into the arena of a new race CONSCIOUS OF ITSELF which will judge the old races.

_____

In my remarks I called attention to certain imperfections in Dr. Bucke's book arising chiefly from a strange indecisiveness of his, from his timidity in asserting the dominant significance of the new consciousness. This results from the desire of Dr. Bucke to establish the future of humanity from a positivistic standpoint upon social and political revolutions. But we may regard this view as having lost all validity. The bankruptcy of materialism, i.e., "logical" systems, when it comes to organizing life on earth is now evident in the bloody epoch which we are undergoing, even to those men who but yesterday were prating of "culture" and "civilization." It became clearer and clearer that the changes in the outer life of the majority, when these changes come, will do so as a result of inner changes in a few.

We may say further with regard to Dr. Bucke's entire book, that touching the idea of the natural growth of consciousness, he does not notice that these faculties do not unfold themselves perforce: conscious work on them is necessary. And he does not dwell at all on conscious efforts in this direction, on the idea of the culture of cosmic consciousness. Meanwhile there exists a whole series of psychological teachings (occultism, yoga, etc.) and a large literature having in view a systematic culture of the higher consciousness. Dr. Bucke does not remark this, and insists upon the idea of natural growth, although he himself several times touches upon the culture of consciousness. In one portion of his book he speaks very contemptuously regarding the use of narcotics for the creation of ecstatic states, not taking into consideration the fact that narcotics cannot give anything which man does not possess (this is the explanation of the different action of narcotics on different men), but can only in certain cases unfold that which is already in the soul of man. This entirely alters the point of view upon narcotics, as Prof. William James has shown in his book, The Varieties of Religious Experience.

[p. 326]

In general, allured by the evolutionary point of view, and looking at the future, Dr. Bucke, like many others, does not pay sufficient attention to the present. That new consciousness which men may discover or unfold in themselves now is indeed far more important than that which may or may not appear in other men millenniums hence.

______

Regarding from different standpoints the complex forms of the manifestation of spirit, and analyzing the views and opinions of various authors, we are always confronted with what seem to be consecutive phases or consecutive stages of this unfoldment. And we find such phases or stages to be four in number. Further consideration of the living world known to us, from the lower animal organisms up to the highly developed body of man, reveals the simultaneous existence of all four forms of consciousness to which all other aspects of the inner life correspond: the sense of space and time, the form of activity, etc. Still further consideration of man of the higher type reveals the presence of all the four forms of consciousness which are in living nature, with forms corresponding to them. (See table, <page 327>.)

The simultaneous coexistence of all four forms of consciousness at once, both in nature and in the higher type of man makes the exclusively evolutionary standpoint seem forced and artificial. The evolutionary standpoint is often made the means of escape from difficult problems, and from hard thinking.

Some people apply the evolutionary theory where there is no necessity for it whatever. In many cases this is a compromise of thought. Not understanding the existing variety of forms, and not possessing the skill to think of all this as a unity, men have recourse to the evolutionary idea, and regard this great variety of forms as an ascending ladder--not because this conforms to facts, but from a desire to systematize the observed facts at all costs, though on entirely artificial foundations. It appears to men that having built a system they already know something, whereas in reality the absence of a system is often much nearer to real knowledge than an artificial system.

[p. 327]

          FORMS OF CONSCIOUSNESS

       LIVING WORLD

       MAN OF HIGHER TYPE

     
      Latent   Consciousness, similar to our instincts and subconscious feelings.

       Cells,   groups of cells, plants, lower animals, and organs and parts of body of   higher animals and of man.

       Cells,   groups of cells, tissues and organs of the body.

     
      Simple   Consciousness and flashes of thought.

       Animals   possessing complex organisms. Absence of consciousness of death.

       Body,   instincts, desires, voices of the body, emotions.

     
      Reasoning.   Moments of self-consciousness and flashes of cosmic consciousness.

       Man.   Consciousness of death or fantastic theories of immortality.

       Simple   emotions, logical reason, mind.

     
      Self-consciousness   and beginning of cosmic consciousness.

       Man   of higher type. Beginning of immortality.

       Higher   emotions, higher intellect, intuition, mystical wisdom.

     
   "Evolutionists," being incapable of understanding the whole, without representing it to themselves as a chain, one link of which is connected with another, are like the blind men in the Oriental fable, who feel of an elephant in different places, and one affirms that the elephant is like pillars, another that it is like a thick rope, and so forth. The evolutionists however, add to this that the trunk of the elephant must evolve from the feet, the ears from the trunk, and so on. But we after all know that this is an elephant, i.e., a single being, unknown to men who are blind. Such a being is the living world. And with regard to the forms of consciousness, it is far more correct to consider them not as consecutive phases or steps of evolution which are separate from one another, but as different sides or parts of one whole which we do not know.

In "man" this unity is apparent. All forms of consciousness in him can exist simultaneously; the life of cells and organs, with their consciousness; the life of the entire body, taken as a whole; the life of the emotions and of the logical reason, and the life of the higher understanding and feeling.

[p. 328]

The higher form of consciousness is not necessary for life; it is possible to live without it. But without it the organization and orderliness of life is impossible. Long under the domination of materialism and positive thinking, forgetting and perverting religious ideas, men thought that it was possible to live by the merely logical mind alone. But now, little by little, it is becoming quite evident to those who have eyes, that merely by the exercise of logical reason men will not be able to organize their life on earth, and if they do not finally exterminate themselves, as some tribes and peoples are doing, in any case they will create (and have already created) impossible conditions of life in which everything gained will be lost--i.e., everything that was given them in the past by men of self-consciousness and cosmic consciousness.

______

The living world of nature (including man) is analogous to man; and it is more correct and more convenient to regard the different forms of consciousness in different divisions and strata of living nature as belonging to one organism and performing different, but related functions, than as separate, and evolving from one another. Then the necessity disappears for all this naive theorizing on the subject of evolution. We do not regard the organs and members of the body of man as evolved one from another in a given individual and we should not be guilty of the same error with relation to the organs and members of the body of living nature.

I do not deny the law of evolution, but the application of it to the explanation of many phenomena of life is in great need of correction.

Firstly, if we accept the idea of one common evolution, after all it is necessary to remember that the types which develop slower, the remnants of evolution, may not continue to follow after, and at a slow pace, the same evolution, but may begin an evolution of their own, developing in many cases exactly those properties on account of which they were thrown out from basic evolution.

Secondly, though we accept the law of evolution, there is no necessity to regard all existing forms as having been developed one from another (like man from the ape, for example). In such

[p. 329]

cases it is more correct to regard them all as the highest types in their own evolution. The absence of intermediate forms makes this view much more probable than that which is usually accepted, and which gives such rich material for discussions about the obligatory and inevitable perfection of all--"perfection" from our standpoint.

The views propounded here are indeed more difficult than the usual evolutionary point of view, just as the conception of the living world as an entire organism is more difficult; but this difficulty must be surmounted. I have said already that the real world must be illogical from the usual points of view, and by no means can it be made simple and comprehensible to one and all. The theory of evolution is in need of many corrections, additions, and much development. If we consider the existing forms on any given plane, it will be quite impossible to declare that all these forms evolved from the simplest forms on this plane. Some undoubtedly evolved from the lowest ones; others resulted from the process of degeneration of the higher ones; a third class developed from the remnants of some evolved form--while a fourth class resulted as a consequence of the incursion into the given plane of the properties and characteristics of some higher plane. It is certainly impossible to regard these complex forms as developed by an evolutionary process upon the given plane.

The below classification will show more clearly this correlation of forms of manifestation of consciousness, or of different states of consciousness.

First form. A sense of one-dimensional space in relation to the outer world. Everything transpires on a line, as it were. Sensations are not differentiated. Consciousness is immersed in itself, in its work of nutrition, digestion and assimilation of food, etc. This is the state of the cell, the group of cells, of tissues and organs of the body of an animal, of plants and lower organisms. In a man this is the "instinctive mind."

Second form. A sense of two-dimensional space. This is the state of the animal. That which is for us the third dimension, for it is motion. It already senses, feels, but does not think. Everything that it sees appears to it as genuinely real. Emotional life and flashes of thought in a man.

Third form. A sense of three-dimensional space. Logical

[p. 330]

thinking. Philosophical division into I and Not-I. Dogmatic religions or dualistic spiritism. Codified morality. Division into spirit and matter. Positivistic science. The idea of evolution. A mechanical universe. The understanding of cosmic ideas as metaphors. Imperialism, "historical materialism," socialism, etc. Subjection of the personality to society and law. Automatism. Death as the extinction of the personality. Intellect and flashes of self-consciousness.

Fourth form. Beginning of the understanding of four-dimensional space. A new concept of time. The possibility of more prolonged self-consciousness. Flashes of cosmic consciousness. The idea and sometimes the sensation of a living universe. A striving toward the wondrous. Sensation of infinity. Beginning of self-conscious will and moments of cosmic consciousness. Possibility of personal immortality.

Thus the third form includes that "man" whom science studies. But the fourth form is characteristic of the man who is beginning to pass out of the field of observation of positivism and logical understanding.

The table at the end of the book is a summing up of the contents of the entire book, and shows more in detail the correlation of the observed forms of consciousness in the living world and in man."

EVOLUTION OR CULTURE?

The most interesting and important questions arising with regard to cosmic consciousness may be summed up as follows: 1.--Is the manifestation of cosmic consciousness a problem of the distant future, and of other generations--i.e., must cosmic consciousness appear as the result of an evolutionary process, after centuries and millenniums, and will it then become a common property or a property of the majority? And 2.--Can cosmic consciousness make its appearance now in contemporary man, i.e., at least as the result of a certain education and self-development which will aid the unfolding in him of dominant forces and capabilities, i.e., as the result of a certain culture?

It seems to me that with regard to this, the following ideas are tenable:

[p. 331]

The possibility of the appearance or development of cosmic consciousness belongs to the few.

But even in the case of those men in whom cosmic consciousness may appear, certain quite definite inner and outer conditions are requisite for its manifestation--a certain culture, the education of those elements congenial to cosmic consciousness, and the elimination of those hostile to it.

The distinguishing signs of those men in whom cosmic consciousness is likely to manifest are not studied at all.

The first of these signs is the constant or frequent sensation that the world is not at all as it appears; that what is most important in it is not at all what is considered most important. The quest of the wondrous, sensed as the only real and true, results from this impression of the unreality of the world and everything related thereto.

High mental culture, high intellectual attainments, are not necessary conditions at all. The example of many saints, who were not intellectual, but who undoubtedly attained cosmic consciousness, shows that cosmic consciousness may develop in purely emotional soil, i.e., in the given case as a result of religious emotion. Cosmic consciousness is also possible of attainment through the emotion attendant upon creation--in painters, musicians and poets. Art in its highest manifestations is a path to cosmic consciousness.

But equally in all cases the unfoldment of cosmic consciousness demands a certain culture, a correspondent life. From all the examples cited by Dr. Bucke, and all others that one might add, it would not be possible to select a single case in which cosmic consciousness unfolded in conditions of inner life adverse to it, i.e., in moments of absorption by the outer life, with its struggles, its emotions and interests.

For the manifestation of cosmic consciousness it is necessary that the center of gravity of everything shall lie for man in the inner world, in self-consciousness, and not in the outer world at all.

If we assume that Dr. Bucke himself had been surrounded by entirely different conditions than those in which he found himself at the moment of experiencing cosmic consciousness, then in all probability his illumination would not have come at all.

He spent the evening reading poetry in the company of men of

[p. 332]

high intellectual and emotional development, and was returning home full of the thoughts and emotions of the evening.

But if instead of this he had spent the evening playing cards in the society of men whose interests were common and whose conversation was vulgar, or at a political meeting, or had he worked a night shift in a factory at a turning-lathe or written a newspaper editorial in which he himself did not believe and nobody else would believe--then we may declare with certainty that no cosmic consciousness would have appeared in him at all. For it undoubtedly demands a great freedom, and concentration on the inner world.

This conclusion in regard to the necessity for special culture and definitely favorable inner and outer conditions does not necessarily mean that cosmic consciousness is likely to manifest in every man who is put in these conditions. There are men, probably an enormous majority of contemporary humanity, in whom exists no such possibility at all. And in those who do not possess it in some sort already, it cannot be created by any culture whatever, in the same way that no kind or amount of culture will make an animal speak the language of man. The possibility of the manifestation of cosmic consciousness cannot be inoculated artificially. A man is either born with or without it. This possibility can be throttled or developed, but it cannot be created.

Not all can learn to discern the real from the false; but he who can will not receive this gift of discernment free. This is a thing of great labor, a thing of great work, which demands boldness of thought and boldness of feeling.

Footnotes

^311:1 This division constitutes Dr. Bucke's principal error. Human consciousness, i.e., the consciousness of the enormous majority of men, is "simple consciousness"; "self-consciousness," like "cosmic consciousness," exists only in a flash.

^312:1 See the comment 1, p. 321.

^313:1 See the comment 2, p. 321.

^315:1 Among whom was Edward Carpenter.

^318:1 See the comment 3, p. 322.

^322:1 See p. 292. Quotation from  Collins' book.

^324:1 Dr. Bucke makes a very important error concerning self-consciousness. In his opinion "simple consciousness" characterizes an animal and "self-consciousness" characterizes a man. But as a matter of fact a prolonged self-consciousness during sensation, feeling or thinking is a very rare phenomenon in man, usually that which is called self-consciousness is simply thought and it goes post factum. True self-consciousness exists in man only potentially, and, if it manifests itself, it does so only by moments. These moments of  should not be identified with prolonged self consciousness. Prolonged self-consciousness is already "a new consciousness," and there is the possibility of moments of cosmic consciousness, which in the course of further development may, in turn, become prolonged.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 333]

  

CONCLUSION

In conclusion I wish to speak of those wonderful words, full of profound mystery from the Apocalypse and the apostle Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians, which are placed as the epigraph of this book.

The Apocalyptic angel swears that THERE SHALL BE TIME NO LONGER.

We know not what the author of the Apocalypse wanted to convey, but we do know those STATES OF SPIRIT when time disappears. We know that in this very thing, in the change of the time-sense, the beginning of the fourth form of consciousness is expressed, the beginning of the transition to COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS.

In this and in phrases similar to it, the profound philosophical content of the evangelical teaching sometimes flashes forth. And the understanding of the fact that the MYSTERY OF TIME is the first mystery to be revealed is the first step toward the development of cosmic consciousness along the intellectual path.

But what did the Apocalyptic sentence mean? Did it mean precisely what we are now able to construe in it--or was it simply a bit of verbal art, a rhetorical figure of speech, the accidental harping of a string which has continued to sound up to our own time, through centuries and millenniums, with such a wonderfully powerful, true and beautiful tone of thought? We know not now, nor shall we ever, but the words are full of splendor, and we may accept them as a symbol of remote and inaccessible truth.

The apostle Paul's words are even more strange, even more startling by reason of their mathematical exactness. (A friend showed me these words in A. Dobroluboff's From the Book Invisible, who saw in them a direct reference to "the fourth measure of space.")

Truly, what does this mean?

. . . . That ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the BREADTH and LENGTH and DEPTH and HEIGHT.

[p. 334]

First of all, what does the comprehension of breadth and length and depth and height mean? What is it but the comprehension of space? And we now know that the comprehension of the mysteries of space is the beginning of the higher comprehension.

The apostle says that "being rooted and grounded in love, with all saints" they may comprehend what space is.

Here arises the question: why must love give comprehension? That love leads to sanctity--this is easily understood. Love in the sense that the apostle Paul understands it (Chapter XIII of the First Epistle to the Corinthians) is the highest of all emotions, the synthesis, the blending of all highest emotions. Incontestably, this leads to sanctity. Sanctity: that is the state of the spirit liberated from the duality of man, from his eternal disharmony of soul and body. In the language of the apostle Paul sanctity meant even a little less than in our contemporary language. He called all members of his church saints; sanctity meant to him righteousness, morality, religiosity. We say that all this is merely the path to sanctity. Sanctity is something more--something attained. But it is after all immaterial how we shall understand his words--in his meaning or in ours--sanctity is a superhuman quality. In the region of morality it corresponds to genius in the region of mind. Love is the path to sainthood.

But with sanctity the apostle Paul unites KNOWLEDGE. Saints comprehend what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and he says that all--through love--may comprehend this with them. But may comprehend what, exactly? COMPREHEND SPACE. Because "breadth and length and depth and height" translated into our language of shorter definitions actually means space.

This last is the most strange.

How could the apostle Paul possibly KNOW that sanctity gives a new understanding of space? We know that it must give it, but FROM WHAT could he know that?

None of his contemporaries ever united sanctity with the idea of the comprehension of space; and in general there was no discussion at all about "space" at that time, at least among the Greeks and Romans. Only now, after Kant, and after we have had access to the treasures of thought of the Orient, do we understand that the transition into a new phase of consciousness is impossible without the expansion of the space-sense.

[p. 335]

But we wonder if this is what the apostle Paul wanted to say--that strange man: Roman official, persecutor of the first Christianity who became its preacher, philosopher, mystic; the man who "saw God," the bold reformer and moralist of his time, who fought for "the spirit" against "the letter" and was of course not responsible for the fact that he himself was understood by others not in "the spirit," but in "the letter." Is it this that he wanted to say? We do not know.

But let us look at these words of the Apocalypse and the Epistles from the standpoint of our usual "positivistic thinking," which sometimes condescendingly agrees to admit the "metaphorical meaning" of mysticism. What shall we see?

WE SHALL SEE NOTHING!

The flash of mystery, which appeared just for an instant, will immediately disappear. The words will be without any content, nothing in them will attract our wearied attention, which will merely glide over them as it glides over everything. We will indifferently turn the page and indifferently close the book.

An interesting metaphor, yes: But nothing else!

And we fail to observe that we rob ourselves, deprive life of all beauty, all mystery, all content; and wonder afterwards why everything is so uninteresting and detestable to us, why we do not desire to live, and why we do not understand anything around us; we wonder why brute force wins, or deceit and falsification, though to these things we have nothing to oppose.

THE METHOD IS NO GOOD.

In its time "positivism" appeared as something refreshing, sober, healthful and progressive, which explored new avenues of thought.

After the sentimental speculations of naive dualism "positivism" was indeed a great step forward. Positivism became a symbol of the progress of thought.

But we see now that it inevitably leads to materialism. And in this form it arrests thought. From revolutionary, persecuted, anarchistic, free-thinking, positivism became the basis of official science. It is decked-out in full dress. It is given medals. There are academies and universities dedicated to its service. It is recognized; it teaches; it tyrannizes over thought.

But having attained to well-being and prosperity, positivism immediately opposed obstacles to the forward march of thought.

[p. 336]

A Chinese wall of "positivistic" sciences and methods is built up around free investigation. Everything rising above this wall is condemned as unscientific.

And seen in this way positivism, which before was a symbol of progress, now appears as conservative, reactionary.

The existing order is already established in the world of thought, and to fight against it is declared to be a crime.

With astonishing rapidity those principles which only yesterday expressed the highest radicalism in the region of thought have become the basis of opportunism in the region of ideas and serve as blind alleys, stopping the progress of thought. In our eyes this occurred with the idea of evolution, on which it is now possible to build up anything, and with the help of which it is possible to tear down anything.

But thought, which is free, cannot be bound by any limits.

The true motion which lies at the foundation of everything, is the motion of thought. True energy is the energy of consciousness. And truth itself is motion, and can never lead to arrestment, to the cessation of search.

ALL THAT ARRESTS THE MOTION OF THOUGHT--IS FALSE.

Therefore the true and real progress of thought is only in the broadest striving toward knowledge, that does not recognize the possibility of arrestment in any found forms of knowledge at all. The meaning of life is in eternal search. And only in that search can we find something truly new.

Tertium Organum, by P.D. Ouspensky, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 337]

  

TABLE OF THE FOUR FORMS OF THE MANIFESTATION OF CONSCIOUSNESS

For ease of online reading, I have exchanged the rows and columns in this chart.--JBH

 

         

       1ST   FORM

       2ND   FORM

       3RD   FORM

       4TH   FORM

     
      THE   SENSE OF SPACE AND TIME

       The   sense of one-dimensional space. The world on the line. The line as space, everything   else as time. Everything except things lying on this line is in motion.

       The   sense of two-dimensional space. The world on the plane. The plane as space,   everything else as time. Angles and curves as motions.

       The   sense of three-dimensional space. The world in an infinite sphere. The sphere as space. Everything else as   time. Phenomena as motions. A becoming and changing universe.

       The   sense of four-dimensional space.
   Spatial sensation of time.

     
      PSYCHOLOGY

       Appearance   of the first sensation. Sensation a unit. Its division into two. The gradual   evolution of sensations and the accumulation of remembrances concerning them.

       Perception.   The expression of sensations by cries, sounds, motions. The absence of words   and speech. Were there speech it would consist of substantives only.

       Concept.
   Words.
   Judgment.
   Syllogism.
   Reasoning.
   Speech.
   Written language.
   Allegory. 
   Emotions.

       Self-consciousness.
   New sensations.
   Higher emotions.
   Expansion of concepts.
   Direct knowledge.
   Symbolism.
   Cosmic consciousness.

     
      LOGIC

       The   absence of thinking, or a confused   thinking of the 2nd form.

       This   is this.
   That is that.
   This is not that.
   The beginnings of logic. The logic of the uniqueness of each separate thing.

       A   is A.
   A is not Not-A.
   Everything is either A or Not-A.
   Dualistic logic.
   A logic of antitheses.
   Syllogism.

       A   is both A and Not-A.
   Tat twam asi. Thou art that.
   "Tertium Organum."
   Logic of the unity of all.

     
      MATHEMATICS

       The   absence of numeration, or a confused   numeration of the 2nd form.

       The   comparison of separate visible   objects or separate perceptions.
   The direct sensation of quantity. Computation   within the limits of this sensation.

       Every   magnitude is equal to itself. The part is less than the whole, etc.
   Finite and constant numbers. The geometry of Euclid.

       A   magnitude can be not equal to itself. The part can be equal to the whole,   etc.
   Metageometry.
   Mathematics of variable and infinite magnitudes.

     
      FORMS   OF ACTIONS

       Reflex,   unconscious, responsive action to external irritation.

       Instinct.   "Emotional" end expedient action without consciousness of results.   Seeming consciousness.
   Inability to manipulate a lever.

       The   consciousness of the purpose of actions performed. The possibility of a consciousness of results. The cause of actions   in the outer world in impressions received from the outer world. The   impossibility of in dependent actions without impulses coming from the   outside.

       The   starting of conscious actions. The starting of actions with the understanding   of their cosmical meaning and purposes. The commencement of independent   actions proceeding from oneself.
   MAGIC.

     
      MORALS

       Unconscious   actions (like the actions of a man asleep).

       The   beginnings of the maternal, family, and tribal instincts.
   Laws of the life of the species as   a condition of evolution. The unconscious submission to the "group   soul" of the species manifesting through instincts.

       Logical   and conventional division into good and evil. The submission to the group   consciousness of the family, of the clan, of the tribe, of the nation, of   humanity, of the class, of the party, of a custom, of a fashion, etc.

       The   return to the law inside oneself. A new   conscience. Emancipation from submission to the group-consciousness. The   realization of oneself as an independent unit.

     
      FORMS   OF CONSCIOUSNESS

       Potential   consciousness. Consciousness in a latent state--asleep. Consciousness as   in sleep without dreams.

       Simple   consciousness. "It pains me," but the impossibility of saying,   "I am conscious that it pains me." The reflected state of   consciousness. Vision as in dreams. The passive state of consciousness.

       The   ability to think of one's states of consciousness. The division of I and   Not-I. Active consciousness.
   The moment when further evolution can   be conscious only.

       The   commencement of self-consciousness.
   Ecstatic states.
   Transitions to cosmic consciousness.

     
      FORMS   OF KNOWLEDGE

       Unconscious   receptivity of the environment, and unconscious reaction to it.
   "ADAPTABILITY."

       The   beginnings of attention. Observation. The accumulation of instincts. The   recognition of everything sensed as   real. The failure to discriminate between that which is illusory and that   which is real.

       Experience.   Experimental knowledge. A complete and deep division and mutual   misunderstanding between four forms of knowledge--religion, philosophy,   science and art.

       The   beginning of the development of forms of knowledge. Mystic knowledge. A new   sensation of time. The sensation of infinity. The sensation of the unreality   of the phenomenal, visible world. A knowledge of the hidden substance of   things by their outer signs. Unfoldment of the "world of the   wondrous." Co-ordination in a complete whole of religion, philosophy,   science and art.

     
      FORMS   OF SCIENCE

       An   accumulation of "traces" from the produced reflexes. The appearance   of instinct and the accumulation of simple instincts.

       Personal   knowledge. Impotence to communicate experience. The beginnings of the   communication of experience in the training of the young.

       Positive   science. Positive philosophy. Materialism. Spiritualistic philosophy.   Dogmatic religions. Spiritism and pseudo-occultism. Sectarianism. Dualism.   Matter and spirit. Separation of different forms of science.

       Idealistic   philosophy. Mathematics of the infinite. Tertium   Organum. Mystical religion. God and the Cosmos--one. The sensation   of a living and conscious universe. The union of all sciences into one.   Occultism. Understanding of "Dharma,"   i.e., of laws of relativity.

     
      DIFFERENT   BEINGS

       The   lower animal. Cells of the tissues and organs of the body. The   one-dimensional being. Vegetative or   semi-vegetative life.

       The   higher animal. The body of man. The two-dimensional being. The absence of   duality, divisibility and disharmony. Animal   life.

       Man.   A three-dimensional being outwardly   and dual inwardly. Inner warfare.   The impossibility of attaining inner harmony. The "soul" as the   battlefield of the "spirit" and the "flesh." The kingdom   of the personal. Unconscious automatism. The absence of personal immortality.

       The   beginnings of the transition to a new type, and a new sensation of space.   Victory of consciousness. "Men of cosmical consciousness." Triumph   of the super-personal principle. Conscious automatism. The attainment of   inner unity and harmony. The "soul" as the center of independent   actions, The beginnings of personal immortality.

     
  

    


===== BOOK: toa.txt =====



The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

THE TREASURE OF ATLANTIS

Here is an action-filled fantastic written in the early days of Edgar Rice Burroughs and employing many of the devices that the master hand used in opening up a whole new field of fiction in that remote period prior to 1920. Here is a novel from the 1916 pages of the half-fabled All Around magazine, full of the nostalgia and dreams of that era when the world was so much larger and life was, accordingly, less complicated.

In J. Allan Dunn's THE TREASURE OF ATLANTIS, an orchid hunter's discovery is the catalyst that leads an expedition into the interior of South America to the lost remnant of ancient Atlantis. Cut off from the modern world, Atlantis offers swashbuckling intrigue, danger, and action that is eminently suitable for the "Time-Lost" series. Here is thrilling adventure out of the past in the Edgar Rice Burroughs tradition.

[p. 2] [p. 3]

THE TREASURE OF ATLANTIS

[p. 4] [p. 5]

  

THE TREASURE OF ATLANTIS

  

J. ALLAN DUNN

1872-1941

  

[1916]

Source edition: New York: Centaur Press, October 1970. Originally published in All Around, December 1916.

Scanned, Proofed and Formatted at sacred-texts.com, December 2009, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923. The additional material from the Centaur Press edition is included because of a lack of copyright notice in this edition.

Click to enlarge
Cover

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Verso. Note lack of copyright notice

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6] [p. 7]

  

INTRODUCTION

All Around ...

All Around ... The New Magazine ... New Story ... half-fabled, near-legendary magazine of the 'teens.

It began in November 1910 as The New Magazine, became New Story in August 1911, and experienced one more title change--to All Around--in December 1915, before combining with another Street & Smith pulp, People's Magazine, in April 1917.

New Story was an exciting and robust magazine. In 1913 it succeeded in obtaining the second novel of the immensely popular Tarzan series by Edgar Rice Burroughs--in direct competition with The All-Story (the Munsey magazine that had published "Tarzan of the Apes" in October 1912). "The Return of Tarzan" was published as a seven-part serial beginning in June 1913. A month after it had ended, another Burroughs' serial, historical and heroic, "The Outlaw of Torn," began in the January 1914 issue. It was in good company, for the popular English novelist H. Rider Haggard was represented with "Allan and the Holy Flower" at the same time.

By the time the title had changed to All Around in December of 1915, the magazine was basically one of fantastic and swashbuckling adventure, and it is easy to believe that the  and startling success  by Edgar Rice Burroughs beginning in 1912 was influential in the pattern of stories adopted by the magazine. Indeed, Burroughs was represented in the February 1916 issue with "Beyond Thirty," a fantastic which loomed as near-unobtainable for a period approaching fifty years.

Other inclusions were in the same vein. Robert Ames Bennet who had written the popular THYRA at the turn of the century was represented

[p. 8]

with a fine serial, "The Bowl of Baal." This is set in the far reaches of Arabia during World War I, and it involves a lost race, some fearsome creatures, and enough high adventure to satisfy the most avid reader. "The Buddha's Elephant" appeared in the August 1916 issue from the pen of prolific H. Bedford-Jones writing under the name of Allan Hawkwood. It is a tale of an ancient Greek city surviving in the Gobi. George B. Rodney's fantastic, "The Underground Trail," appeared in the last (March 1917) issue of All Around. It was good enough to be published in book form as BEYOND THE RANGE, and, even in 1970, it remains an attractive book to the science-fantasy collector.

"The Treasure of Atlantis" appeared complete in one issue in December 1916. It reflected some of the news and theories of the day with its Crete/Atlantis theme, and in many ways allies itself with the 1970 thinking which holds that Cretan civilization was destroyed by volcanic eruption. As early as 1909, Atlantis had been identified with Crete in some archeological circles, and the belief was popular in the 'teens. But the fact, the theory behind "The Treasure of Atlantis" is unimportant. It is enough to say that this story was written to entertain--to quench the interest and appetite of the armchair adventurer.

There is little doubt that "The Treasure of Atlantis" was written for the same audience that had made the Burroughs' stories popular. Morse, its hero, is strong and silent, and despite his position of wealth and influence in a world of more than fifty years ago, he is unhappy with civilization. His partner in exploration, the great archeologist, is a character that is part-Burroughs, part-Haggard, with more than a little of Conan Doyle's famous Professor Challenger about him.

"The Treasure of Atlantis" combines the lure of the unknown, the grandeur of the fabled past, and savage, swashbuckling action. As such, it is' a fitting novel for the "Time-Lost" series.

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

  

CONTENTS

          Chapter

        

       Page

     
      I

       The Flowing Road

       <page 13>

     
      II

       The Vase of Minos

       <page 21>

     
      III

       Laidlaw's Theory

       <page 24>

     
      IV

       Caxoeira Canyon

       <page 34>

     
      V

       Kiron

       <page 41>

     
      VI

       The Gates of Dor

       <page 54>

     
      VII

       The Queen Advances

       <page 64>

     
      VIII

       Aulus the Gladiator

       <page 68>

     
      IX

       The Initiation

       <page 76>

     
      X

       The Isle of Sele

       <page 87>

     
      XI

       The Judgment of Ru

       <page 106>

     
      XII

       The Hall of Sacrifice

       <page 114>

     
      XIII

       The End of Atlantis

       <page 121>

     
   

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 10] [p. 11]

THE TREASURE OF ATLANTIS

[p. 12] [p. 13]

  

THE TREASURE OF ATLANTIS

  

CHAPTER I--THE FLOWING ROAD

"It's good to be back again, Morse, back to civilization, and it's mighty good of you to take me in this way."

Stanley Morse looked at the orchid hunter as the latter leaned forward from the cozy depth of the saddlebag chair and stretched his lean hands to the blaze. The fingers were more like claws than human attributes; the whole man seemed little more than a well-preserved mummy, a strangely different person from the vigorous naturalist Morse remembered meeting three years before on the higher reaches of the Amazon--the "Flowing Road." The man's clothes hung in ludicrous folds about his gaunt frame, and he shivered despite the heat of the blazing logs that almost scorched his chair.

"Nonsense, Murdock!" he said. "I'm only trying to repay your own hospitality. Do you suppose I have forgotten the time you took me into camp on the Huallagos River, when my raft had gone to pieces in the Chapaja Rapids with all my equipment? You've got the malaria in your system yet. Let me get you something to offset that ague."

"It's more than malaria, Morse. There's nothing in your medicine chest, or anyone else's, that can help me,

He laughed a little hysterically and stripped back the sleeve from one arm. The limb, save for its power of movement, seemed atrophied, flesh and muscle and skin had shrunk about the bones until they looked like two sticks held together with twisted cords.

"That's emblematic of the rest of me," he said, as the loose cloth slid back over his knobby wrist. "I've done my last league on the Flowing Road or any other road, for that matter. I've found my last orchid."

[p. 14]

"You'll be all right with a few weeks' rest," replied Morse, with forced optimism. "As for the financial end of it, we can build a bridge across that stream."

"I need no man's charity," said Murdock, with a flash of fierce resentment. "If you'll put me up for a while--it won't be long--as you have offered to, I'll accept it gladly; but I can pay my way, Morse."

"That's all right," answered Morse, sensing the  excitement of his guest; "we'll not talk of payment. Tell me about your trip, if you feel up to it. And join me in a hot toddy."

He touched a bell, and a deft man-servant answered, retiring to bring in the necessary concomitants.

"This beats chacta," said Murdock, as he sipped the steaming liquid. "And this"--his eyes roved round the big room, the walls set with well-filled bookcases that reached half their height, the spaces above covered with curios and trophies of the chase, mostly South American--"this is a long way from Ucali's hut on the headwaters of the Xingu."

He lapsed into a reverie, staring into the fire, his skull-like head sunk between his hands, as if he could see in the glowing coals the seething cataracts of a torrent racing between rugged sandstone palisades clothed with dense forests, where the lianas writhed between the trees and bound them together in an almost impenetrable jungle.

Stanley Morse, gentleman adventurer, who spent his bountiful income in the exploration of unknown lands for the sheer love of sport and the thrill of danger, watched his guest pityingly. There were hardly ten years between them, he reflected, remembering the man of three years ago, bronzed and lusty, barely entering the prime of life. Now he seemed sixty, twice Morse's own age, and prematurely old at that. Presently he relapsed with a long sigh, finished his toddy, and settled back amid the cushions luxuriantly.

"The headwaters of the Xingu. That was where you came out?" Morse queried. "Don't talk if you are too tired. Let it go until tomorrow, and turn in."

"There may be no tomorrow," answered the orchid hunter. There was nothing morbid in his tone. He spoke cheerfully, as one who recognizes overpowering odds

[p. 15]

and accepts them bravely. "So I shall talk tonight. Yes, that is where I came out of the carrasco (brush)--alone. But the story I want to tell you begins back of that, on the chapadao (plateau) between the Xingu and the Manoel, south of Para, in Matto Grosso State."

He turned his head, with its dark eyes glowing in deep hollows sunk in the skin that looked like brown parchment, and spoke in a low tone fraught with impressiveness.

"Did you know, Morse," he queried, "that there was a great city on the southern part of the Amazonian plateau?"

"It hardly surprises me," said Morse. "I've never seen any evidences in Brazil myself, but I made a trip to Chan Chan, in Peru, near Trujillo. Pre-Inca they call it. Not much left but a honeycomb of mud walls now, though."

"Mud walls! Pish! I'm not talking of ruins, man! I mean a living city. Temples cut from the living rock, great buildings of stone set along the shore of a mighty lake amid tropical foliage and cultivated fields. Paved roadways, and people thronging them clad in brilliant garments. Boats on the lake, with banks of oars and striped sails. A city set in a bowl of gray cliffs in the shadow of a snow-capped peak with a plume of smoke coming from it like the curl of a lazy fire!"

"You've seen it?"

"Twice!"

He spoke with conviction, and Morse for a moment shared the vision. The next sentence shattered it:

"Twice in the air. Don't think I'm crazy, Morse. It was a mirage, but even a fata Morgana has to be projected from an actual object. And there's tangible proof to back it up. They were not air castles I saw, not the 'airy segments of a dream.'"

Morse tried to veil his growing skepticism. The orchid hunter was Scotch, and the Gaels, he reflected, were apt to be "fey" and see visions. The man was physically and probably mentally sick. But he humored him. "A mirage is an optical effect rather than an optical illusion, I believe," he said. "Undoubtedly there was some solid basis for the reflection. Are you sure about the smoke above the peak? It was my impression that

[p. 16]

[paragraph continues] Brazil was free from disturbances. It's a long time since I read up anything about it, but I seem to remember that there were no eruptive features since the Devonian period, according to the scientists."

"A fig for the scientists! Let the scientists travel a country instead of theorizing about it. Show me the scientist who has hacked his way through twelve miles of carrasco and charted the lower Amazonian chapadaos. I lay no claim to being a scientist. I know one branch of botany, but I know it well, and I know enough of geology in that connection to tell a crystalline formation from an amorphous. The valleys of the Madeira, Tapajos, Manoel, and Xingu are floored with crystalline. And the rest of the formations are tilted and faulty. In fifteen years I've known a third as many temblors (earthquakes), and I know a volcano when I see one. Twice I saw it, across the canyon--the temples by the lake, the snow-capped cone, and the plume of vapor. Twice!"

Again he focused his attention on the burning logs, speaking as if the fiery recesses were focal points through which he viewed the strange sights of the land that is bordered by the Flowering Road, the mighty Amazon.

"You know, without my telling you, the general characteristics of the chapadao region," said Murdock. "The main plateaus at an average level of three thousand feet, but up by the streams and rivers into sections, dense forests in the lowlands, woodlands in the shallower valleys, and the grassy campos on the heights. It seemed as if misfortune trailed us. Our bogadores deserted us, the cargadores were a lazy crowd, reports of rare blossoms turned out myths, hardly a week occurred without some accident, common enough, save when they happened so frequently.

"I had started late, owing to difficulties brought up by the European war, going up the Amazon eight hundred and seventy miles from Para to Itacoatiara and so up the Madeira River six hundred and sixty-odd miles to San Antonio Falls. From there I had to traverse and raft it to the Small Pebble Rapid, Guajara Merim, they call it, and it was hard work. I was after a Cycnoches, a weird, night-blooming orchid that looks, by moonlight, exactly like a great azure butterfly. It was worth five

[p. 17]

thousand dollars to me for every fertile capsule I could bring out, and I stayed longer than I should. It was the middle of September before I started on the four-hundred-and-fifty-mile trek--that's as the parallel rulers mark it on the map--to the Alto Tapajos, with another four hundred miles downriver through almost continuous rapids to really navigable water to Marahao Grande. It was foolhardy to stay that long, but it looked like my last trip with a fortune at the end--and I found my orchid!

"Then the luck turned. definitely. Our stores were low, and we hurried along, half fed, in an attempt to forestall the rainy season. You know what that means--a difference of forty feet in the rivers, making them all but impassable. I never met with such a mat or jungle, lianas fighting us every foot of the way, and the gnats, flies, and beetles, to say nothing of the vampire bats and leeches, draining our strength and impregnating us with their poisons. I had a young chap named Gordon with me. I left him behind, poor fellow! He was a clever naturalist and a plucky comrade. We staggered on, delirious from insect venom often--the whole trip seems a nightmare--and, after crossing the Janiar, the ill luck culminated.

"We came across a settlement where the native chief was sick, and we were called upon to cure him--a common enough occurrence, but one that landed us this time on the horns of a dilemma. The man was dying, due to pass out in forty-eight hours or less, from enteric fever. You can imagine the situation. Fail to treat him, or treat him and fail! It made you either a beneficent wizard or a devil! I did the best I could, and kept him alive a week. He was grateful enough, poor wretch, but there were ugly looks as we left the pueblo, and I knew the news would be sent ahead by the 'jungle wireless,' the hollow logs hung on lianas that they beat with a stick coated with rubber.

"As we advanced, I had evidence of increasing hostility. We had dogs with us, and they constantly warned us of lurking enemies. We extinguished all fires and buried the embers before dark, and all smoking was stopped after nightfall while we kept constant watch. We caught the sound of drums one afternoon, first in one

[p. 18]

direction, then in another, and I knew we were trapped. The cowardly cargadores started to pick up their packs and flee, but I made them stop, and we felled trees for a barricade. Well, they attacked just before dawn, and poor Gordon was hit with an arrow tipped with urari.

"We beat them off that time, and pressed on, with Gordon in a litter. He lasted three days, with his arm swollen up twice the size of his thigh, and passed out in coma. Four times different bands tried to leave us in the jungle, and each time I lost two or three of the cargadores through flight that undoubtedly cost them their lives. The last time an arrow scratched me, passing under my arm through my shirt. I put leeches on the wound and took strychnine, but I was a doomed man from that moment. My heart failed me at every exertion and the poison was absorbed inevitably into my system.

"We shook them off at last, and two weeks later we crossed a campo of dried grass and came to a great cut in the plateau eroded by a stream that ran in rapids five hundred feet below. I made camp there, hoping to gain strength.

"It was the next morning I saw the mirage. Not I alone, but the half dozen carriers still left with me. It was as I told you, plain in the sky--temples, buildings, lake, boats, and the crowded causeways. I had practically no fever that morning. The cargadores prostrated themselves in terror. That afternoon they left, taking their 'packs with them while I was having my siesta. My two machete men stayed behind, not from any particular fidelity, but, as they expressed it, we were bound to be killed, anyway, and they might as well stay where they were comfortable and meet death rather than try and run away.

"You may imagine it was not a cheerful situation! I was on my last legs in the heart of the Brazilian jungle, the rainy season close at hand, practically all my supplies gone, without bearers! It was a tight hole. To crown the trouble, the cargadores had taken along my orchids in their scurry.

"There was nothing to do but to make the best of it, and that meant getting under way. My rifles and ammunition were in the shelter, and one of the dogs had stayed behind. There was no use crossing the stream, for the

[p. 19]

opposing cliffs were sheer and apparently unscalable, though I thought I saw traces of a succession of rough steps that almost looked like masonry leading to a ledge halfway up the cliff. But there they ended definitely in a smooth wall. So I decided to follow the stream downward. It ran almost due northeast toward the Amazon, and I hoped that later it would widen and become navigable for a raft. Shorthanded as we were, that was a slim chance, but the only one in sight.

"It was useless to follow the carriers. The day was drawing to a close, and I determined to pass the night where we were. At sunset I heard a shout from the machete men, and found them groveling on the edge of the precipice. It was the mirage again, floating in a sky of pale green. It was no hallucination, Morse. I was not the only one to see it, and if ever a man had braced himself for an emergency I was in that condition. I found that the Indians considered it a sure sign of death, a vision of their heaven, I imagine. But the two who stayed with me were real men.

"We struck out early next morning. The plateau sloped sharply downward, and in two hours we were clear of the grass and brush and among trees and jungle once more, following a fairly well-beaten trail. About a mile in, the dog got restless, and we advanced cautiously. Suddenly the hound, which was ahead, began to whimper--he was trained not to bay or howl--and stood still. I crept up to him. The trail widened out. Swinging face downward in the center of the opening, his outstretched fingers a foot clear of the ground, a man hung, one leg caught in the running loop of a rope that was attached to a springy palm, the noose trap that the Indians set for tapirs in the river runways. But this was not a tapir trail. The man had evidently hung there for a long time. The free leg swayed limp, the body was relaxed, and the face, as it swung toward us, was congested. There was a red fillet about his hair that proclaimed him a chieftain, the alcalde of some pueblo.

"We had him down in a jiffy. I could scent help to ourselves from his gratitude if he wasn't dead. We worked over him , and presently he groaned and opened his eyes, and then his mouth, down which I poured some chacta that helped him to tell his story.

[p. 20]

"His name was Tagua, chief of a tribe inhabiting the village of Apara. He was an old man, but still too fond of life to suit his nephew who wanted his place. This precious relative had set the trap and then told Tagua that he had seen a tatu (armadillo) on the trail, knowing the old man would travel ten miles to get its flesh. That was the day before. Tagua walked into the trap in the afternoon, and was jerked up in a second. It was fortunate for him that no peccaries came that way, or a jaguar. None of the villagers did. His nephew looked out for that.

"When we had kneaded and rubbed Tagua's joints into place and pliancy, his gratitude knew no bounds. He knew all about us by the wireless drums, and volunteered to send back a message that would leave us immune. He may have given up the information that we were murdered.

"When we marched into Apara, Tagua managing to put up a front for the entry, we created a sensation. Mbata, the nephew, had already usurped the leadership, but he was quickly convinced of his mistaken ambition. After a big feast, Tagua put me up in his own hut, and that night I solidly cemented the friendship. Mbata paid us a visit about three o'clock with a big knife calculated to sever all friendly relations. I woke as he came in, and dropped him with a revolver bullet as he leaned over Tagua, knife in hand.

"After that I owned the village. I had not only saved Tagua's life, but snuffed out that of the one man he was afraid of. He gave me ten of his pisanos (villagers), four of them boatmen and six carriers, and all the yuca, dried fish, and bananas we wanted. More than that, he sent out scouts for my missing carriers, but they failed to find any trace of them.

"I left him my hound and poor Gordon's rifle, with a good supply of cartridges, and he forthwith adopted me. It was not all form, as I will show you. The night before we left, I spoke of the mirage and Tagua confirmed its existence. It was known to his people as Dor, and its inhabitants were not Indians, but men whose skins were white as mine. Long generations before, his people had been used as slaves over a period of years. When the work was complete they had been driven out

[p. 21]

through a hole in the cliff at the head of the masonry steps I thought I had seen, and the place closed up after them. His own great-great-great-grandfather had been among the captive workmen, and when he left he had stolen a vase from the house of his bondlord.

"This vase had long been a fetish in Tagua's family. It was one of the things Mbata had desired. But Tagua had hidden it cunningly in the floor of his hut, and Mbata had been unsuccessful. It had been a bad fetish, he declared, and to my astonishment, seriously gave it as his opinion that stolen goods never brought good fortune.

"So he insisted on my taking it. And it was gold! He said that twice a year the people of Dor threw many vessels and ornaments of gold and jewels into their lake for sacrifices. The city was sealed in by cliffs that could not be climbed, but it was rich in metal. Gold was used for ornaments, for plates, for drinking cups.

"Whatever his imagination though, the vase attested that he told at least some measure of truth. I took it. We got to the Xingu in the rains, and to Para--"

"And the vase?"

"Is here. I brought it with me."

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II--THE VASE OF MINOS

Long after the orchid hunter had gone to bed, Morse held the vase in his hands, turning it over and over while the ruddy firelight played upon the repousse surface, speculating upon its history. Had he known what the cup held for him of perilous adventure upon the very rim of death, it is possible that he would have resisted the spell it gradually wound about him.

It was untarnished and undented, despite the softness of the beaten surface of unalloyed metal, and it was of the most exquisite workmanship. Finally he set it upon the table beneath the glow of his lamp. The vase was an oval container, exquisitely symmetrical, supported by four serpents of solid gold whose heads met with forked tongues touching beneath the center of the bowl.

Its main surface was divided into two panels by the duplicated design of a double ax. On one side a superbly

[p. 22]

modeled bull was being baited by a youth and a maid, clad in garments apparently Grecian. The figures were lithe in action, beautiful in pose. Darts clung to the snorting, wounded bull that pawed the ground with lowered head. The other panel was filled with ancient writings above which, in raised letters, was the word minos that Morse easily deciphered, though the characters were ancient Greek.

Here was a riddle: a golden vase brought back from the heart of Brazil, yet eminently Grecian! He turned to his bookshelves, the word "Minos" stirring his recollections. Far into the night he read of the great Minoan dynasty established on the isle of Crete, in the Mediterranean, of its wonderful empire and powerful fleet, houses that possessed ventilating and sanitary systems far ahead of their time, and of the civilization that produced both pictorial and linear writing two thousand years beyond Phoenician culture, for long credited as leader in such matters.

He read of Minos, the Sun God, son of Zeus, and of his wife, Pasiphae, the "all-shining Moon Goddess," of the cruel sports in the Minoan bull rings, the tragic death of Minos, killed by a king's daughter, who poured boiling water over him in a bath. Of Minos' children, Daedalus and Ariadne, noted names of Greek mythology. Of the victims tortured by being enclosed in the belly of a red-hot brazen bull, and of the invasion of the kingdom of Crete two thousand years before Christ, and its final destruction, four hundred years later, in the Dorian Conquest, by the rude tribes of northern Europe.

It was a curious tale, half legend, half history, fancy and fact interwoven in a web of fascination; but what had Crete, the little island empire south of Greece, in common with the tale of Murdock, the orchid hunter, and of Tagua the tribal chieftain over a thousand leagues away, separated by the length of the Mediterranean Sea and the breadth of the Atlantic Ocean?

The puzzle was too great for him to solve. He left it for the time, set back the glowing embers of the fire, placed the vase of Minos in a wall safe, and switched off the lights. On his way to his bedroom, he passed the room set aside for Murdock and smiled at the open door. He knew the sign of the traveler, fresh from months in

[p. 23]

the open air, to whom closed doors and windows seem to create a stifling prison. As he tiptoed past, he paused to listen to the orchid hunter's breathing. That the man would never travel again the Flowing Road he was assured, and he wondered if his guest was resting easily.

There was no sound. As Morse stood in the doorway, listening, the street lights faintly illumined the room and the prone figure on the bed, fully dressed. It held a rigidity of pose that alarmed him. He entered and bent above his guest, shook him lightly by the shoulder, then raised his arm. The pulse was irresponsive, and the hand fell heavily upon the quilt.

Morse turned on the lights. There was no need for a second glance. Murdock had found his last orchid, had departed on his final trek. Morse telephoned for a physician and sympathetically arranged the wasted form, hardly more than an articulated skeleton.

The orchid hunter had been writing. There was a folded paper beneath a book on the desk that was a part of the room's well-chosen furnishings. This was addressed to his host. It read:

My heart is very weak tonight. No pain, only an absence of power that leaves me barely strength to write these words. I leave the vase and its history, not just in gratitude, but because I believe it was given me that the mystery of the City in the Sky may be solved. So things work out in the history of us all, I think. The riddle of the race leaves a clew that sooner or later falls into the proper hands. Such hands are yours. Here is my diary, kept daily, and there is a  in my trunk that will guide to Tagua and the canyon of the vision.

I have neither kith nor kin. I leave no one to be sorrowful about me save the orchid dealers who made their desk-chair profits from my risks. It was a great game while it lasted, and the Flowing Road is the trail of trails. Good night, good friend; goodby, perhaps, and, if so, remember, when you enter the city of Dor, your grateful visitor,

Ronald Murdock.

[p. 24]

The physician confirmed Morse's idea that Murdock's death was not to have been put off.

"Strychnine could hardly have prolonged it," he said after an examination. "It does not need an autopsy to tell that the man's heart was rotten. Valve muscles flabby. He was a strong man once. Urari, you say? Humph! That's a local name for curare, extract of resinous South American barks. Has several alkaloids in its active principle. We really know very little about it save that it is one of the deadliest of poisons. Defies analysis to a certain extent. It must have been a diluted or weakened extract and the slightest of incisions. A friend of yours, Mr. Morse? I am sorry. It was a peaceful death. I will attend to the certificate."

"And I to his funeral," Morse promised himself. A sudden idea struck him, and he registered it as a vow to make a fitting burial of the sturdy Scotchman.

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III--LAIDLAW'S THEORY

To Stanley Morse, the dead man's letter, as he read it, seemed to bind him to a quest made sacred by the last testament of the orchid hunter. The more he pondered over the idea, the more it found favor with him. He had no ties nor business to keep him in New York, and the fever of adventure was easily stimulated in his veins. The interior of Brazil offered a trip that he had always promised himself, and the prospects of discovering a hidden city soon dominated both his waking thoughts and his dreams at night.

A week after Murdock's death, he made a visit to the Metropolitan Museum, where he was made welcome by an assistant curator of archaeology. The museum was already the richer for Morse's travels, and he was privileged to ready admission to the administrative offices and the time and knowledge of its experts.

Morse set the vase on the green blotter of the scientist's desk, and, going to the window, raised the blind so that the March sunshine lit the rich metal with a radiance that was dazzling on the high places of the embossed design.

"What do you make of that?" he asked.

[p. 25]

The curator took the vase up reverently, examined it with close scrutiny for ten silent minutes, then set it down again.

"Where did you get it?" he parried.

"That is the pith of the story," laughed Morse. "Don't look at me as if you thought I'd been raiding some of your precious cases. I came by it honestly. As a preamble I'll tell you that I'm not going to give it to the Metropolitan or any other museum. It is dedicated to a special purpose."

The official's face fell involuntarily.

"Or sell it, I suppose?"

Morse shook his head.

"It's worth a small fortune," said the curator. "It's a perfect example, a glorious example, of a Cretan vase. The tableau is undoubtedly connected with the Minotaur legend. None of the excavations at Cnossus have unearthed anything finer. Crete, you know, was given autonomy in 1889 by the European powers, and the government exercises a jealous eye over all discoveries. Do you know anything of the ancient history of the island?"

"I've been reading it up of late. I retained enough of my school days to make out the word 'Minos.' What's the inscription?"

The curator shrugged his shoulders. "You'll have to take that to Laidlaw," he said. "I can't decipher it."

"Who is Laidlaw?"

"Gordon Laidlaw, F. R. G. S., archaeologist and anthropologist. Haven't you met him? He's a master scientist, but from my standpoint pretty much of a crank."

"He holds an unprovable theory that the lost country of Atlantis, or its remains, is to be found somewhere on the American continent, where it was left after a mighty cataclysm split the earth into the continents of Africa and America and formed the Atlantic Ocean." The curator spoke almost contemptuously.

"Atlantis? Wasn't there some theory a few years back which tied Atlantis and Crete together?"

"There was a long article in the London Times about six years ago. A man named Martin also advanced the idea. Why?"

"Because this vase was found by an orchid hunter

[p. 26]

in the center of the Amazonian chapadao, or plateau." "Impossible! I beg your pardon, Mr. Morse, but are you sure of that?"

"Absolutely."

The curator sprang from his chair and paced his office in his excitement, talking staccato sentences.

"It's insane--insane! Can there be something in Laidlaw's theory after all? No, it's preposterous! Atlantis is a myth. A theoretic foundling! And you've never met Laidlaw? It's insane--insane!"

He picked up the vase and fondled it between his palms.

"May I keep this overnight--in the museum?" he asked. "I want to show it to my colleagues and tell them the story."

"You haven't heard it yet," said Morse dryly, "but I'll tell it to you if you introduce me to Laidlaw."

"Surely. He lives up in the Berkshires. I'll wire him. He'll be down in the morning--tonight, if he could get here."

"Will you let me know when he arrives? You have my telephone?"

"Of course. Now tell me about the orchid hunter."

 

Morse's decorous valet awakened him the next' morning before daylight.

"There's a--a person who demands to see you, sir," he said. "Quite an extraordinary party, with a face--you'll pardon me--like a wild lion. Name of Laidlaw."

"Laidlaw!" Morse shook off the filmy net of sleep and set up in bed. "Show him up!" he ordered.,

A minute later he heard a bass voice bellowing in the hall:

"Which room? That one? All right."

His door opened as if a gale had forced the lock, and a man, half giant, half dwarf, waddled into the room. Large amber eyes were set in a weather-burned face, as much of it as was discernible in the frame of tawny, shaggy hair and beard that seemed to make up a continuous mane. His nose was beaked like an eagle's, his eyes aflame with a light that might have been equally that of fierceness or a proud invincibility of purpose.

[p. 27]

Below the broad shoulders, the massive torso was that f a giant; by all fairness the man should have been even feet in height, but ludicrous legs, short, curved like those of a Pekingese spaniel, supported the upper frame.

He advanced to the bed, his glance compelling that of the half-awake Morse.

"Where?" demanded Laidlaw, and his great voice boomed like the roar of a bull. "Where is the vase?"

Morse shook off his sleep and slipped on a dressing robe as he rose to greet his visitor.

"The vase is not here, Mr. Laidlaw," he said.

"Not here? You've not lost sight of it? Man, how could you?" The visitor groaned and sat down on a chair where the effect of his dwarfed legs was immediately discounted and he appeared a giant, a troubled giant, mopping his brow and gazing anxiously at Morse.

"It means comparatively little to you, compared to what it does to me," he went on. "I have been scoffed at by my fellows for years on account of a theory that is absolutely sound, but which they smile at to my face and laugh at behind my back, or else say: 'Poor Laidlaw, he's been overdoing things, and he's a bit cracked.' I know them. And now comes the chance to choke them with their own laughter, to make them take back the sneers, to make the most important archaeological discovery of all time--and you've let some one get the vase away from you--the vase that would tell me in a moment whether I was a genius or a crackbrain!"

The man's gestures, the tones of his bass voice, ranging from enthusiasm to deep despair, were almost enough to make Morse laugh. But he hastened to reassure him:

"It's at the museum. I left it there overnight with our mutual friend. I'm sure it will be perfectly safe with him."

The archaeologist groaned.

"We can't get at it until ten o'clock, and it's not yet five! Man! And I've come ramping down from the Berkshires in a rattletrap that stuck in the mud and balked at the hills. Mud up to my waist. I'd have walked to make better time if it hadn't been so deep."

"I had no idea you'd arrive so soon, Laidlaw."

[p. 28]

"If you had been waiting for the biggest thing in your life for twenty-odd years, would you hesitate? Though I beg your pardon for letting my impatience upset your household, to say nothing of your sleep."

"That's nothing. You've had no breakfast? I'll order some. In the meantime, here is Murdock's dairy and his map. I'll be dressed before you've read them."

Laidlaw was immediately immersed in the diary. The unconventionality of using his host's bedroom as a reading room did not even occur to him, and Morse smiled to himself at his guest's enthusiasm. He gave instructions for a meal and entered his bathroom. Midway through his shower, the bathroom door opened and Laidlaw's leonine face and massive shoulders protruded through the opening.

"If you've ordered eggs," he said, "I forgot to tell you that I cannot eat them if they're more than just thoroughly warmed through. You'll pardon me for mentioning it."

Morse smiled again before he turned off the shower. The idea of a man who had devoted a third of his lifetime to one theory with an almost fanatic devotion bothering about the time of his eggs was amusing.

"I'm fussy about that myself," he answered. "Always boil them and time them at the table."

"Good!" Laidlaw's eyes roved over Morse's muscular and athletic figure. "Man, but you're powerfully built!" he said. "I wish--but that's one of my faults; I cannot help but envy a well-made man. I've got the torso of Hercules and the legs of a bullfrog!"

He closed the door abruptly and disappeared. Morse began to entertain a singular liking for his visitor with his almost childlike enthusiasm and frankness. Breakfast was over before seven o'clock, and after the meal Laidlaw dilated at length upon his theory of the lost city of Atlantis. The main thread of his belief centered in the migration of the Cretans after the Dorian invasion in the sixteenth century B.C. to a place on the then western coast of Africa.

"All probabilities point to this," he said. "The Cretan, or Minoans, were on most friendly terms with the Egyptians. They were primarily responsible for much of the civilization of ancient Egypt. Their hieroglyphics

[p. 29]

antedate all others. In Babylonian scripts and many records of Egypt I have found constant reference to Atlantis as a country somewhere toward the west, the setting sun. The Luxor Museum contains a vase and certain inscribed tablets telling of gifts made to Egyptian royalty by the people of Atlantis, and the script and workmanship of the vase are undoubtedly Minoan. Have you a world projection?"

They were in the library, and Morse produced a large atlas, which he laid upon the center table and opened at an equivalent projection in which the world was cartographed in an ellipse. Both bent above it.

"I am only going to take up the question in hand," said Laidlaw, his face lit up with the belief in his theory. "You are, of course, acquainted with the general idea of world subsidence. The Pacific is studded with the mountaintops of a submerged continent, though its depths are far greater than those of the Atlantic. Not a nation or tribe of either inland or coast possessions, civilized or barbaric, but unites in the story of a great flood. This, I maintain, was caused by--avoiding technical terms--a shrinkage of the earth's surface due to the settling of substrata even today manifested in lesser degree by earthquakes more or less persistent along recognized zones.

"Now, look at the contours of North and South America, as opposed to South Africa and Europe. Allowing for lowlands that are now permanently submerged shoals, does not the map resemble a puzzle picture with the assembled portions shaken apart? See how the eastern angle of Brazil, at Cape St. Roque, would fit snugly into the Gulf of Guinea, the bulk of the Sahara Desert lie along the retreating northeastern coast of South America, the lower half of the same continental coast line correspond with that of southwestern Africa."

Morse followed the argument with an interest that began to be leavened by the other. man's conviction. The theory was at least plausible.

"So! Then presume that this cataclysm found the Minoan, then settled in their new country of Atlantis, established somewhere westward of what is now Cape Verde, in the Franco-African possessions. After the movement had subsided, the survivors found themselves

[p. 30]

on the Brazilian coast, in the neighborhood of Para, south of the Amazon, itself a subsidiary crack of the catastrophe reaching more than two thirds of the way across South America. The sands of Sahara--the sandstone plateaus of Brazil are coeval!"

The idea was startling, revolutionary; yet to Morse, listening to the inspired voice of Laidlaw, it gained possibility.

"But would the Minoans or Atlanteans survive such a catastrophe?"

"Why not? Other tribes did, and handed down the story of the Deluge. There is no reason why their descendants should not be living today. Remember, their have been persistent rumors since the earliest explorations of white-skinned peoples living in the remote interior of South America. If we find a people in Dor who show the characteristics of Atlantis--or Crete--why then my critics are confounded, and you and I will have achieved no small measure of fame.

"What time is it?" he broke off.

"Eight o'clock."

"I can't wait two hours, Morse. It's an impossibility. Where is your telephone?"

He called the assistant curator at his home and persuaded him to meet them at the museum within half an hour. Falling in with his mood, Morse brought his car around and within a quarter of an hour they were standing on the steps of the Metropolitan, with fifteen idle minutes facing them. Morse lit a pipe and watched Laidlaw curiously. The latter paced up and down with the nearest attempt to a stride his ridiculous legs would permit. It would be a rash man, Morse thought, who would make open fun of the scientist's physique. The mighty chest, and arms that swung below the knee, the leonine face, eagle nose, and keen eyes held a promise of more than ordinary strength that would easily offset the handicap of the bowed, short legs. Laidlaw might lower the pace on a trail, but he would be a good man to have along in a pinch.

The assistant curator appeared at last, stepping down from a bus and blinking through his glasses. Laidlaw waddled down the steps, clutched him by the arm to the amusement of the passersby, and almost bore the

[p. 31]

slighter man up to the museum entrance, not releasing his clutch until after they were in the department office. Then he spoke for the first time.

"The vase?" he gasped.

"If you'll let go my arm," said the curator, with mild reproach, "I'll get it out of the vault."

Laidlaw mumbled an apology, and the museum official departed, rubbing his almost paralyzed arm. When he returned, he handed the vase over to Morse, who in turn handed it to the expectant Laidlaw.

The theorist trotted to the window with his prize like some great mastiff with a bone, and examined it minutely, inside and out, from all angles. There came a series of grunts from him that Morse translated as both favorable and excited.

"What did the museum authorities think of it?" he asked the curator.

"Cretan, beyond a doubt. You will pardon me, Mr. Morse, but our experts are inclined to believe some extraordinary coincidence must have taken that vase to the Brazilian jungle. Some Old World adventurer, who carried it with him on all his journeys. The other suggestion is--appears to be--inexplicable."

Morse shrugged his shoulders.

"It is interesting," he said. "I am going to see what there is in it. I have always intended an expedition into the heart of Brazil."

"Is Laidlaw going with you?"

For the moment Morse was frankly at fault. Then he laughed.

"To tell you the truth, I had never thought of him as not doing so. Since he arrived at my house before daylight there has been little doubt of his determination, and he apparently took it for granted that I agreed with him. Even if I had not practically planned the trip, Laidlaw has a certain way with him..."

The curator nodded.

"Most fanatics have a gift for persuasion...But I shouldn't call him that. He may be right. Who knows?"

And then, changing the subject: "Mr. Morse, the faculty has empowered me to make you a very liberal offer for the vase. It should be preserved for science and the public benefit--"

[p. 32]

"If it passed from me to the museum it would be as a gift," said Morse. "But that is impossible."

"As a loan? While you are absent?"

"I'll tell you what I'll do," said Morse jestingly. "If you think you can get it away from Laidlaw, I might agree. But seriously, it may be useful on the trip. I want to take it along, and I have decided to dedicate it to an object that is more or less sacred to me. If we get through and back again, I'll bring the museum something that will more than make up for it."

In the meantime, Laidlaw, his face aglow, had left the window and seated himself at the desk, entirely unconscious of the presence of anyone. Vase in front of him, he was copying the characters of the script onto a pad, evidently intending to waste no time in deciphering them.

"He'll do in a few minutes what would take us hours," whispered the curator to Morse. He is the acknowledged authority on Minoan lore for all his tangential ideas."

They watched him working energetically, arranging the symbols, grouping and comparing them. Presently, he laid down his pencil with a sigh and gazed into vacancy, exaltation irradiating his strong features.

Morse and the curator moved toward him. He regarded them blankly; then recognition slowly came into his eyes.

"There," he said triumphantly, "is a literal translation of the linear script. No doubt Mr. Morse will permit photographs of the vase before we take it with us. There is no time for confutation before we start. It is up to the museum to verify this translation and to prepare the world for what will come out of Brazil. Listen!

Minos
 Son of Zeus and Europa
 Minos the Sun God.
 Husband of Pasiphae
 The All-Shining
 Pasiphae the Moon Goddess.
 Father of Ariadne
 The Exceeding-Holy
 Ariadne the Nature Mother. [p. 33]
 Minos the King
 The King of Kings
 Minos the Law Giver.

Made by Zal the Artificer in the forty-ninth generation after the Great Flood in the seventh year of the reign of the Fifth Pta, descendant of Minos, King of the New Atlantis in his capital of Dor.

Laidlaw brought his great fist down on the oak desk with a shwack that splashed the ink from the wells.

"Ha!" he exclaimed. "Refute that if you can. The forty-ninth generation after the Great Flood in the reign of the Fifth Pta, King of the New Atlantis! The gift vase in the Luxor Museum bore the name of Pta the First."

He turned to Morse.

"And I am taking the glory," he said. "It is you who have solved the matter. Wherever the name of Laidlaw is mentioned, that of Morse must be coupled with it."

Suddenly his exultation faded, and his face grew anxious. "Mr. Morse," he said, "I have been carried away by my own enthusiasm. I have thought you shared it. You have been so interested, so cordial to me, a--crude and blustering fool who broke in on you like a thief in the night. I have assumed you were going to Dor. It is your discovery; I have no right to exploit it without your permission. I understand you are an explorer, that you know much of South America--"

"Say no more, Laidlaw. I am going to Dor; I have a mission there aside from the adventure. You will join me, of course. You are a scientist; I am merely an explorer, and an amateur one at that. It would lend me dignity if you were to go along."

The face of Laidlaw cleared and he gripped Morse's hand silently, his features working in their emotion.

"There is one condition," said Morse, as he released his fingers and slipped his hands into his pocket.

"Anything. What is it?"

"That you reserve your handshakes for your enemies, not your friends. I won't be able to hold a pen for a week."

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

  

CHAPTER IV--CAXOEIRA CANYON

Vivid flashes of forked lightning, following hot puffs of wind, illuminated the aisles of the Amazonian forest, inky black between the intervals. The long line of carriers, tired of struggling over and under the tough festoons of tree roots and ground vines and the trailing lianas that disputed every inch of the trail, came to a sudden halt. The two leaders, stumbling persistently behind the bearers, confirmed the move, and the Morse-Laidlaw expedition tried to find secure shelter from the coming storm that had driven night before it in such untimely fashion.

There was little cover from the threatened hurricane that could be considered satisfactory. The cargadores threw their burdens beneath the heaviest undergrowth they could find, and, with their employers, leaned against the tree trunks. Morse and Laidlaw ensconced themselves in a fold of a great massaranduba (cow tree) as the first heavy drops fell.

"I'm not built for this trail, Morse," said Laidlaw, though his cheery voice evinced no complaint. "I've tripped up in these infernal jungle traps a dozen times. My nose is bleeding, and I've cracked both shins falling on my rifle."

"And I've been swung off my feet with a noose about my neck about as often," replied Morse. "We're due here till morning, anyway. By tomorrow night I hope to reach Apara. Here it comes!"

They shrank against the mighty bole as the gale swept through the forest, the roar of the wind intensified by the crackling of trees that were literally up-rotted and tossed by the tempest as if they had been so many wisps of straw. Two  trunks crashed down close to their feet, and only the giant spread of mighty bough above them saved them from destruction. In the intermittent pauses of the storm the shrieks of monkeys and the screeching of parrots and herons joined the wailing of the bearers and machete men in an appalling din. Birds flapped heavily to the branches overhead; animals shuffled in among them; and once a wild cry of dismay went up as a great snake wound its scaly length among the Indians, too disturbed for attack.

[p. 35]

The gale lasted two hours. It was the last effort of the rainy season, and had not been unexpected by Morse, who had deliberately chosen the time of the trip to take advantage of the high water in the rivers. They had come by steamship to Para, at the mouth of the Amazon, traversed eight hundred and seventy miles of the Flowing Road to the mouth of the Madeira, and ascended that tributary nearly seven hundred miles in a launch to the San Antonio Falls, above which the river raged in continuous rapids for three hundred miles, impossible for upriver travel. At San Antonio, they engaged their porters and machete men and struck eastward across the great plateau broken up into subsidiary chapadaos, crossing the Tapajos River at Taguaraizino, and its tributary, the Manoel, at the border angle of Para and Matto Grosse States, reaching the old, half-grown trail of Murdock, and arriving with a few days' march of Apara village, at a stream marked on the orchid hunter's map as Caxoeira, in the beginning of May, with six months of good weather in prospect.

It had been a hard trek, and the caravan showed signs of the trying-out process. Morse had marveled at Laidlaw's adaptation to the trying conditions. Once eggs disappeared inexorably from the menu, he made neither murmur nor suggestion as to meals, accepting chameleon or monkey with manioc for vegetable and banana for dessert with equanimity. The drawback of his short legs was eliminated by his endurance.

Once, for sport, he had drawn himself up into the lianas and swung along above ground for a hundred yards as easily as a gorilla, scaring the prehensile-tailed monkeys that chattered above him and striking awe into the hearts of the Indians. The quest well started, nothing seemed to disturb a certain humorous equanimity that characterized him and made him an ideal trail companion. Torrential rains soaked them; they steamed in their own perspiration; gnats and gaudy-flied, heavy-shelled beetles, all laden with poison sacs and natural hypodermic syringes, tormented them, but they proved immune to the fevers, and their formidable numbers and equipment secured them from hostile attacks.

Morse was in top condition. By dint of strict discipline and a general knowledge of conditions, he kept his

[p. 36]

train in similar shape, and they made unprecedented time. Across the grassy summits of the chapadaos, the day's march was more often over than under twenty miles, and a general spirit of confidence in their own ability permeated the party. Morse had said nothing to the bearers concerning the real object of the expedition. He had consulted with Laidlaw, and they had decided to keep silent.

"We may not be welcome at Dor," Morse suggested, "and, according to Murdock, the Indians seem inclined to be superstitious in the matter. We don't want to lose them before we reach Apara."

In spare hours since they had left New York, Morse applied himself, under the tutelage of Laidlaw, to acquiring facility in ancient Greek and learning to decipher the symbols of Cretan pictorial and linear script.

"There will be variations in the language, undoubtedly," said Laidlaw, "but the roots may be the same, and present practice will prove a fine working basis." So Morse resurrected the memories of his school and college classics and pounded away until he was able to converse freely with Laidlaw. Except where the Greek held no equivalents for the names of modern articles, they practically adopted it in place of English.

"Dialects spring up and mother languages alter with change of location and climate, much as we will undoubtedly find the old Cretan ceremonials and customs, religious and social, dominated by local conditions," warned Laidlaw. "If the snow-capped cone mentioned by Murdock is a volcano, it will undoubtedly have had its influence on their worship. The old Minotaur legend will likely have become a myth unless they have cattle, which I doubt. The volcanic fires will have an important part in their ritual, I imagine. Though it is, of course, all theory on my part."

With education and speculation, the time passed quickly, and it seemed only a short time since Laidlaw had first burst into Morse's bedroom. A genuine friendship, founded on mutual peril and respect for each other's bearing and sturdy manhood, sprang up between the two men. Morse was amazed at the resources of Laidlaw's learning, and Laidlaw treated the other as a son of whom he was justly proud, relegating to him the

[p. 37]

leadership by right of experience and capability.

The morning after the storm, Morse broke camp at daybreak. The hurricane had blazed a broad trail of uprooted trees, torn undergrowth, and lianas through the forest and strewn it with boughs and branches. Dead a birds lay here and there, and one great limb had smashed to a pulp a great anaconda fully thirty feet in length and as thick around as Morse's thigh.

According to the map, they had crossed the last watercourse and had now only to climb out of the valley to the highlands where Tagua ruled the village of Apara. During the morning they made good progress, and at sunset they arrived at the village and sent in word to its ruler with gifts of bright-colored prints.

There was no surprise at their appearance; the jungle wireless had announced them as it had elsewhere along the route. The bearers fraternized with the half-naked pisanos of the village, and two headmen escorted Morse and Laidlaw to a large bamboo hut which they speedily made comfortable with their camp equipment.

Morse asked for Tagua by name. "Tell him," he said, "that we are friends of Murdock to whom he made the present of the cup of gold."

The response from the chief took initial form in return presents of fat capybaras, an agouti, and an armadillo, together with wild figs and bananas. In half an hour the chief arrived, apologizing for his delay. He had been in a mud bath for his rheumatism, and had waited to cleanse himself. He limped badly, and was evidently in pain, though he beamed with evident friendliness.

"You come from Senhor Mirradoche?" he asked in the flowing Indian dialect. "Does he send greetings?"

"Greetings from beyond the trail, Tagua. The senhor is dead."

"Eyah! It is bad news. He was a good man. I linger like an old tree, but he is taken."

He lapsed into silence which the Americans did not interrupt. At length he asked: "What may I do for you?"

Morse repeated the story told by the orchid hunter.

"We would find the city and enter it," he concluded.

Tagua sank back in mingled incredulity and horror. "It is impossible!" he exclaimed. "The way is closed, and they permit no strangers within the city

[p. 38]

save as bondmen. You cannot go alone. And none of the pisanos would dare go with you. It is a land of ghosts who dwell sometimes on the land and sometimes in the sky. Have I not seen it? Did not Mirradoche see the Sky City and the people walking?"

"Nevertheless we will go," declared Morse, "even if we go alone. Where is the way?"

"You are strong men and brave," said the chief thoughtfully, "and friends of my friend. Therefore I warn you. But you men of other jungles are all mad and most stubborn. Yet, maybe you are magicians. Have I not heard of him who swings in the trees and talks to the apes like a brother?"

It was somewhat of an exaggeration; but Laidlaw, who had long ago mastered the key language of the Amazonian dialects, laughed.

"But that will not help you scale the walls," Tagua went on. "The way leads by the stairs that Mirradoche told you of, but they are broken and the ghosts have sealed the cliff. Give it up, senhors. Maybe tomorrow you may see the Sky City from the campo. I myself will lead you opposite the stairway. Then return while still your bodies hold your soul."

They quizzed him, but he could add nothing to the dim legend that once the Indians had been forced to work in the Land of the Ghost People and had been driven out at the end of their task, his ancestor bringing with him the golden vase he had taken.

Morse opened a pack and produced it, setting it on the camp table. A cover for the vase had been made at his direction, carefully designed to conform with the original. This was soldered tightly to the bowl.

"This cup," he said, "was given me by our friend. In it are his ashes. I shall give them burial within the city of Dor. I swear it!" he added, setting one hand upon the urn.

Tagua looked at him with astonished admiration.

"If you say so, then I believe you will do it."

Outside the hut, the night was filled with weird noises when they emerged. Tagua had declared a feast in his visitor's honor. Fires blazed at the ends of the mud-caked street, and villagers dressed in gaudy prints, bedecked with strings of alligator teeth, feathers, and

[p. 39]

lustrous bird skins paraded up and down behind musicians beating loudly on drums and blowing piercing notes through reed flutes in rude rhythm. With them mingled the bearers and machete men. Native liquors were in evidence, and the crowd sang and danced at will.

At the appearance of Tagua and his guests the crowd entered a big hut decorated with fresh palm trees and lit by tallow dips along the walls. The chief conducted Morse and Laidlaw to a platform at one end to watch the dancing, which took place on the uneven mud floor with much stamping of feet to the drums and flutes. It was evident that before long the native ferments would be in full possession.

Morse took advantage of the first pause brought about by temporary exhaustion and stated the object of the expedition. With the first mention of the Sky City a silence fell upon the mob. He concluded with a call for volunteers, promising a rifle to each man and other rewards that would make them comparatively rich for life.

The men shuffled their feet and whispered among themselves, and Tagua spoke.

"I am old and useless," he said. "Also I am afraid of the Ghost People. Yet would I go with these two if only that shame should not be set upon my village and Apara be called the abode of cowards. Maya"--he singled out a tall warrior hung with rows of alligator teeth--"what say you?" The men stepped forward. His chest bore the scars of close encounter with some sharp-clawed jungle denizen; he carried his head high, and was evidently regarded as a sub-chief.

"If I send an arrow against a jaguar or a man," he said, "I know when I have hit. If I miss, it is my fault. But how can one fight against ghosts when the arrow pierces a shadow and is lost in a cloud? Yet am I no coward. What one dares I dare! Xolo! Will you follow these strangers with me?"

Xolo, long and lean, streaks of gray in his black hair, not an ounce of spare flesh on his body, naked save for a breechclout, corded with stringy muscles, came to the side of Maya.

"I will go," he said simply.

But that was the end of the recruiting. The men who

[p. 40]

had accompanied the expedition were paid, and neither Morse's offer of high payment nor Tagua's persuasive powers could coax another warrior into service. Maya and Xolo were the best hunters of the district, Tagua said, and both had performed notable deeds in war against hostile tribes. Better still, while both were adepts with spear and bow and blow gun, Tagua had intrusted them from time to time with the use of the rifle given him by Murdock, and they were accustomed to its use and fairly good shots.

It was not Morse's idea to make an entry into the mystic city with any force that might be construed as an attempt at invasion, but he had hoped to secure enough men to bear the bulk of his equipment. With only Maya and Xolo available, he and Laidlaw were forced to spend the morning reducing their outfit to only the most necessary articles. The two Indians were intrusted with rifles; Morse and Laidlaw, besides these, armed themselves with automatic pistols. A few presents, a compass, powerful flashlights, some few canned provisions, with ammunition, made up the bulk of what they selected to take with them.

The rest Morse gave into Tagua's charge.

"If we do not return for these before the rainy season, they are yours," he said, after opening one bale that contained cotton goods of startling color and design, which he gave outright to the chief.

They set out in mid-afternoon for the spot where Murdock had camped across the canyon from the stone steps. Tagua accompanied them. Close to sunset they came out of a clump of carrasco upon the edge of the precipice. The wall dropped almost sheer five hundred feet to the torrent, which, swollen by the recent rain, swirled and seethed from bank to bank. The opposing cliff was far higher than the one they stood upon, a perpendicular scarp of rock on the rim lifting up to almost a thousand feet.

The setting sun was almost level with the flat summit of the plateau behind them and painted the farther cliff with a broad band of rose. Beneath their feet the canyon was in shadow, in which the foaming rapids showed like a cavalry charge of gray horses.

Morse imagined that he could dimly make out the

[p. 41]

stone steps leading halfway up the cliff. Laidlaw was gazing at the summit of the opposing wall, sharp against the eastern sky of pale turquoise-matrix green, flecked here and there with little rosy clouds, the heralds of the gorgeous afterglow to follow.

Suddenly he drew in his breath sharply, and Morse looked up. Tagua, Maya, and Xolo were on their hands and knees, their heads resting on the ground.

In the sky, ethereal, slightly tremulous, but distinct, was the vision of a city built upon the shores of a lake that held the reflections of its stone buildings and of colonnaded temples that seemed to be hewn out of the solid rock. On the lake, ships were being rowed shoreward with banks of oars, some propelled by sails of striped material, a multitude of people were passing along a paved highway by the edge of the water. Luxuriant verdure set off the buildings, and, reared from the back cliff, there rose a snow-capped dome with a plume of smoke lazily curling from its peak.

As the sun dropped behind the western edge of the plateau, the colors of the mirage blended with the afterglow, the waters of the lake seemed to slowly rise and inundate the city, the plume of smoke became a floating cloud, and the vision vanished.

Morse and Laidlaw turned in common impulse and clasped hands. There was no need for words. It was the city of Dor, cloud-painted indeed, but a sky canvas copied from an original that lay somewhere beyond the high precipice that now bent a grim frown upon them, the rosy band vanished with the descending sun.

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER V--KIRON

Morse and the scientist were on the canyon rim before sunup, but no mirage greeted them. Evidently the vision occurred only during certain atmospheric conditions. To both of them its timely appearance upon their arrival seemed a happy harbinger. But, as they gazed into the depths of the gorge, evidence that the real difficulty of the quest was just making itself manifest was very clear.

In the still morning air the hissing rush of the

[p. 42]

turbulent waters far below them was plainly heard. The descent from where they stood appeared impossible, nor, as far as they could see in either direction, could they determine any natural trace of a trail. In the present high condition of the water, the torrent lapped either precipice without indication of a beach from which to launch whatever craft they might use in crossing.

Opposite the stairway, which led only to a narrow ledge, the Caxoeira surged in a great whirlpool, part of the giant eddy evidently occupying a hollow in the cliff directly below them. As they gazed, great logs came riding down the current, tossed about like matches in a mill stream, rearing half their length out of the wild race of tawny waters as they struck against submerged rocks, plunging, splintered and sullen, back into the tide to be carried on the circle of the whirlpool till they were sucked into the vortex or spurned from the outer eddies into the main current.

"We'll have to wait a day or so until the water goes down," said Morse. "We could get down the cliff with ropes, but to cross that flood is a different proposition, even if we had a raft ready built and at water level."

Laidlaw shrugged his shoulders resignedly.

"I suppose so," he answered, scanning closely the stairway with his binoculars. "There is no doubt but that has been built up with a masonry of boulders and cement," he said. "But either it led to a higher ledge which has fallen away, or Tagua's story of the opening appears to be sheer legend. I can't find a sign of any entrance, past or present. But it must have been built for some purpose and led to or from somewhere."

Tagua had returned to his village the night before, and neither Maya nor Xolo could offer any enlightenment. Maya volunteered the information that the stream was fifteen feet above its usual height and might be expected to return to normal within forty-eight hours.

"But the whirlpool," he added, "is always present."

A mile upstream, the cliff could be descended to a stony beach as soon as the water subsided.

"We should find plenty of stranded logs to make a catamaran," said Morse. "We can use lianas to bind it together. They are even better than rope. And we'll need poles and paddles." He gave the order to Maya and

[p. 43]

[paragraph continues] Xolo to descend to timber level and secure these, with sufficient green lianas, when Laidlaw, who had continued his examination of the stairs, grasped his arm and drew him back from the brink of the cliff, motioning at the same time to the Indians to follow the movement.

"What is it?" asked Morse. Laidlaw's face was flushed, his eyes blazing with excitement.

"Crawl out to the edge, and you'll see," he answered, setting the example.

Flat on their stomachs they cautiously moved to the brink, Maya and Xolo wriggling behind them like snakes.

The face of the cliff that backed the ledge to which the stone steps led was no longer a blank wall. In it appeared two openings, symmetrical, equal, evidently the work of man, separated by a narrow strip of rock that protruded like a tongue across the ledge.

"A slab that swings on a pivot," muttered Laidlaw in Morse's ear. "Worked from within only, in all probability. But an entrance nevertheless. Look!"

The word was superfluous. The attention of the four pair of eyes was glued to the openings not far below their own level. Through the righthand portal came a figure, clad in a loin cloth of red and yellow stripes, fringed to the knees. A short cape of jaguar skin hung over one shoulder. In one hand he bore a long wand tipped with metal. His skin was copper-colored, but worn and weathered like some piece of driftwood from the sea. Through their glasses, Morse and Laidlaw saw, with growing eagerness, that the man was an Indian, but unlike any they had ever seen.

Laidlaw's hand rested on Morse's shoulder, and his powerful fingers sank deep into the latter's muscles. Four more Indians issued from the heart of the cliff. These wore only short clouts of yellow. Between them they bore the naked figure of a man, bound with arms tight lashed to his sides, the ropes encircling him to his ankles so that the body was stiffened with the wrappings. His skin was in marked contrast to the others. Where the sun had not tanned it, it was white.

Through their glasses they could see the man's lips move, though the noise of the river drowned his words. His face was calmly contemptuous, the features regular, the hair smooth and dark. His captors made no

[p. 44]

attempt at answer, but laid him down on the ledge, helpless. The man with the staff bent over him and ordered some loose boulders to be set between him and the rim of the ledge. Then he motioned to the others, who preceded him into the dark mouth of the tunnel. Ten seconds after their disappearance the slab turned on its pivot and fitted into the cliff so completely that the powerful glasses failed to reveal a trace of its existence.

Morse sprang to his feet, followed by Laidlaw.

"He's not an Indian," he cried.

"He is a Greek, distinctly a Greek," said Laidlaw.

"Whatever he is, we've got to get him off of that," said Morse, and suddenly cupped his hands and shouted. The man, by frightful effort, had succeeded in slightly arching himself upon the soles of his feet and the top of his head and was trying to edge himself to the verge of the narrow platform.

"He can't get by those boulders," said Laidlaw. "That's what they put them there for."

"I'm not so sure of that," replied Morse. He's making a desperate attempt. He didn't hear me. I wish we had a megaphone. You try it, Laidlaw. Tackle him in Greek."

The next instant the scientist's stentorian voice bellowed its message. It bridged the noise of the stream and the bound man turned his face toward them as Laidlaw repeated his brief sentence of friendship and promised help. A slight smile passed over the man's face, but he renewed his efforts, only to abandon them temporarily from exhaustion.

"He understands me, I am sure of that," said Laidlaw. "But he seems bent on killing himself. I wonder what he's afraid of?"

The question was answered by a shadow that slid over the ground among their own. Looking up, they saw a great bird soaring in the blue. Higher up was another speck, and beyond that yet another.

"Urubu," said Maya briefly, as the vulture planed downward in a great spiral.

"That's what he's afraid of," said Morse. "Before we could reach him those brutes will strip his bones. I imagine he's afraid of losing consciousness; and they may not wait until he's dead, seeing him helpless. He

[p. 45]

prefers a quick death to a slow one. Well, we can discourage their little game."

The scavenger of the sky wheeled so close above their heads that they could feel the draft from its outspread pinions, the naked, repulsive neck craning from a ruff of dirty white feathers, its eyes regarding them curiously but unafraid. Laidlaw raised his rifle.

"Better wait till he lights and make sure of him," said Morse. "And look out for a."

"I'll leave it to you," said Laidlaw. "You're the better shot. But don't leave that poor devil down there in suspense, tortured like a modern Prometheus."

The vulture suddenly lifted his wings tip to tip and dropped plummetwise to the ledge, where he spread his pinions for balance, losing all the grace of his early motion as he shuffled along the ledge toward the helpless man.

Morse's rifle cracked. The bullet thudded softly into the broad back of the bird between its shoulders, and with a harsh croak it toppled from the ledge and fell into the whirlpool, a lifeless bundle of feathers.

"Next!" said Morse grimly, levering a cartridge into position. Another vulture hovered uncertainly above the canyon, and, gaining courage, made the ledge, only to meet the fate of the first bird. A third, realizing that unusual conditions prevailed, halted on the topmost rim of the cliff, peering over until a bullet settled him.

"You'll kill the bound man from fright yet," said Laidlaw, "to judge from his face. He must take us for gods."

"That's a dangerous role to adopt, from all I've seen," said Morse. "I don't see any more of the brutes about. I fancy we've accounted for the local air patrol. Now we've got to get across to him somehow. He must be in torture from those ropes. Tell him we're coming, Laidlaw."

The scientist roared his message across the gulf, and the man nodded. Apparently the summary slaughter of the birds inspired him with confidence in the men who spoke to him in his own tongue, for he ceased struggling.

"Now then," said Morse, "we've got a man-size job ahead. Let's get at it, Maya!"

The Indians disappeared on the run, and Morse and

[p. 46]

[paragraph continues] Laidlaw overhauled their store of strong hempen line, set aside some provisions, and cached their rifles and the remainder of their goods in the thick brush, retaining only their automatics. Maya and Xolo returned with a supply of lianas and half a dozen stout poles which they had trimmed with hand axes. There was no time for shaping paddles, and Xolo explained that they would not be necessary. He studied the whirlpool intently, and Morse passed his field glasses for better observation. With a brief grunt at the power of the lenses, Xolo continued his survey of the eddies for several minutes.

"I think," he said, "there is a big cave below--so." He scooped out an imaginary hollow with his arms and squatted on his haunches. "We will make a raft and find the current." He traced the proposed course with his finger in the soil. "If we keep close into this side, we will follow the water to the other. Then Maya and I will jump ashore on the steps. There is a big rock there for anchor."

Even from the height it seemed a desperate venture, but Morse knew the skill and knowledge of the Indian raftsmen, and their two companions were superb examples of courage and strength. Gathering up the equipment, they followed Maya to the point where he declared descent was practicable. It was a hard climb, encumbered as they were, with sheer descents from ledge to ledge, but they accomplished it at last and stood on a great, level-surfaced boulder a foot above the rapids.

Xolo took the hempen lines they had brought and busied himself in the manufacture of a lariat, while Maya carefully surveyed the preliminary eddies. Speech was only possible by shouting above the thunder of the raging water, racing by with tawny manes, fretting at the rocks that curbed its mad career to the Amazon, a thousand miles away.

The Indian poised himself, his fellow standing clear of the whirling loop, holding with Morse and Laidlaw the slack of his line in readiness to take up the sudden tug. A log came riding down the cataract, its heavier butt lifting the lighter upper half. Xolo tossed the lariat, and the noose settled fairly behind the projection of a broken branch. The swift pull almost dragged the four men from the boulder before Morse could snub the line about

[p. 47]

a smaller rock and bring the log to rest alongside their impromptu wharf.

In half an hour they had secured six fairly matched logs and dragged them on the boulder. Then they set to work to make four of them into a rude platform, binding them together with the lianas. Laidlaw's strength was a notable aid in hauling tight the lashings. The two remaining logs they arranged as outriders, rigging them with some branches that the current had already washed among the rocks. When it was completed they were smoking with perspiration and ready for rest and food.

"We'd better strip, Laidlaw," said Morse, as they finished the meal. "We may stand a better chance if we have an upset."

"Small chance of getting free of that maelstrom," said Laidlaw, as he began to peel his sweat-glued shirt from his massive chest. "What do we do?"

"We'll fend off when we're told," said Morse. "Otherwise we'll leave it to Maya and Xolo."

It was hard work to launch the catamaran, which, the moment it was freed, was swept away in the clutch of the current, bucking like the craziest of wild horses. The Americans knelt for steadiness; but Maya and Xolo, balancing themselves, rode the writhing logs upright, one at either end of the raft. Their judgment of the swift surges was marvelous, seeming to see the hidden rocks as plainly as if the torrent bed was dry, while thrusting with their poles and avoiding a dozen disasters in a minute, and keeping the catamaran close to the nearer shore. In five minutes they had entered the whirlpool, and the hollow predicted by Xolo showed in a deep cavern swept by the tawny, foam-streaked waters. The rocking logs, threatening every instant to tear away from the tough web of the lianas, were sucked under the cliff by a force that seemed bent on smashing them against the inner wall.

"Yai!" shouted Xolo, and Morse and Laidlaw thrust with all their might. The stout poles bent like bows, and Morse felt his muscles cracking with the strain, while Laidlaw's stood out from the mighty shoulders like clustering snakes. A second more and they were free of the hollow and riding the circumference of the whirlpool in a great arc toward the opposite shore and the stone

[p. 48]

staircase. Xolo crouched for his leap and sprang, his bronze body lithe as that of a jaguar, carrying a line with him which he quickly cast about the boulder he had noted from the clifftop. Maya followed with another line, and slipped on the wet surface of the rock, falling waist-deep into the torrent.

For an instant the raft swung to the single line, taut as a harp string, opposing the full force of the current. Maya, clinging with one hand to his rock, pitched the line he still held to Xolo, who took two swift turns about the boulder. The double cable held. Maya scrambled ashore, and Morse and Laidlaw followed in safety just as the first line parted with a twang. The raft swung broadside and the second line, chafing against a sharp surface, gave way. The logs, suddenly released, entered the whirlpool at a tangent and were rapidly drawn into the vortex, disappearing in a broken jumble.

"Touch and go, Laidlaw. There goes the grub!"

"How do we get back?" replied his companion with a grin. "If I wait till that stream goes down I'll be too weak to wade, much less swim."

"We won't go thirsty, anyway," answered Morse. "Where's that bundle?" He looked for a special parcel of restoratives bound tightly with the lesser lianas that he had tossed ahead of him. It had dropped safely on the surface of the steps, and he picked it up.

The lower treads of the stone stairway--and they were obviously cut by human hands--were submerged. The remainder led steeply up the side of the cliff, broken away here and there, but easily surmountable.

The party hurried up them to the ledge where the prisoner lay. As the four came into sight of the bound man, they stopped dead in their tracks. Close by the prostrate form poised a great vulture, beak ready to plunge into the unprotected man's face.

Morse's pistol flashed from its belt holster, and the foul creature fell, flapping feebly, across the form of its intended victim. Laidlaw, as swiftly as his short legs would allow, reached it and flung it by one wing far out into the canyon.

The man had fainted. Maya and Xolo slashed at the leather strips that had sunk cruelly and deeply into his flesh, while Laidlaw chafed the released limbs with

[p. 49]

gentle strength and Morse forced a few drops of aguardiente between the clenched teeth. The man swallowed, coughed on a second mouthful, and opened his eyes upon the solicitous face of Morse upon whose knee his own head rested.

"We are friends," said Morse in Greek. For a second the man's eyes looked puzzled, then he smiled and answered in a swift gush of words of which Morse only vaguely caught the drift. Laidlaw answered promptly, and the two began an animated conversation which Morse interrupted by an offer of iguana flesh and bananas which the man gratefully accepted.

"You'll soon get the swing of what he says," Laidlaw told Morse in English. "The language was certain to. have some variants, but essentially it is the Greek of Homer. I will ask him to talk more slowly. He has said that we are not friends, but his preservers--gods, in fact. I am trying to disabuse him of that idea."

When their patient had completed his meal, Laidlaw looked whimsically across the scraps at Morse. "I wish I were a god," he said. "I wouldn't be so dependent on food. You haven't got a banana or two hidden away for supper have you?"

The two Indians had taken over the rubbing of the Atlantean's limbs, massaging them methodically, apparently a little in awe of him. He accepted their ministrations as one born for such attention.

Presently he stood up and stretched himself, going through a series of calisthenics that he persisted in despite his evident stiffness. His body was as finely modeled as a Greek statue, muscles showing evidence of athletic training, ivory skin speaking eloquently of special care. Beside Laidlaw he appeared almost a stripling. The Atlantean was more a reduced replica of Morse's almost perfect physique.

As the twilight gathered in the depths of the canyon L and the setting sun painted its daily band of rose on the cliff above their heads, he told his story.

"I am Kiron," he began, with a proud consciousness of all the name imported among his own people. "Male regent of the New Atlantis. In the one hundred and twenty-third generation after the great flood"--Laidlaw looked meaningly at Morse--"the last Pta died

[p. 50]

without issue, and the people were divided concerning a successor. So the kingdom was made a double kingdom, and a son and a daughter of the two brothers of Pta were made joint rulers. Ever since then a king and queen have reigned over the land together. Now, Rana, daughter of my uncle, is queen. She is ambitious to establish an individual monarchy, both from her own desires and those of the priests under Ru, who is their chief.

"Rana is not my consort, for it is against our law for the children of brothers or sisters to mate with each other. Neither is there love between us; nor has there ever been. Moreover, my heart is long given elsewhere.

"Therefore, she and Ru plotted against me that Rana might rule, for there is no one of the rank to take my place. Open warfare they feared lest the best of the land be killed. For you must know that we people of Atlantis mingle not with other nations, and much care has been given to our breeding that the race might sustain its strength and beauty. It is the law of Atlantis that none may lead who are not perfect in body. Indeed, despite all care in mating and the development of the young men and maidens, we have lost much in stature."

He paused and gazed admiringly at Morse.

"There goes any lingering idea of my godhood," said Laidlaw. "I don't qualify."

Kiron resumed his tale. "Rana and Ru sent me a message to come to her in secret on a question of grave import. When I did so, they commanded me to be seized and borne to this place by the secret way that has been closed for many generations, leaving me here for the vultures to devour.

"It was a shrewd stroke. I was at my private palace of Zut, and crossed the lake by night--last night--and none saw my entrance to the palace by the royal water gate save my slaves. I found Rana and Ru, and their henchmen made me captive without preamble. No others know what has befallen me, and Rana and Ru would not dare announce it. For I am beloved of my people.

"They brought me here at daybreak, and as the bird-settled for its meal--you came! Henceforth you are as my brothers." He extended his hands to them with a gesture of equality.

"Will not your slaves tell of your visit?"

[p. 51]

"All Atlantean slaves are bred dumb," Kiron answered. "Neither can they read nor write. We find that it makes them far less prone to revolt... It is a good custom." He looked casually at the two Indians, squatting apart, and they seemed to catch the import of his words.

"Now, my brothers," said Kiron, "tell me of your purpose and of your own land, in which doubtless you are princes."

Laidlaw complied, Morse listening with increasing ease as the familiar accents of the scientist's voice aided him to catch the change of phrasing and of word endings. The scientist dealt lightly with American customs and democracy, and soon included Morse in his story with the discovery of the vase. Kiron's interest evinced itself by his rapt silence. Night fell as Laidlaw told of his own researches in Europe and northern Africa, of his theory and its apparent proving.

The stars came out and the shining constellations changed as they swung above the canyon gap, but Laidlaw still boomed his tale in sonorous Greek.

They were three thousand feet above sea level. The night was warm and two men, one naked and the other practically so, listened to a third, whose mighty upper body showed gray in the dusk, tell his strange story. The two Indians, smudges of silent statuary, hunkered with heads on their knees, appeared to sleep as Laidlaw knitted together the raveled web of bygone ages and annihilated the years, while below them the torrent labored at the never-ending task of world-shaping.

"By all the gods, that is a mighty tale!" said Kiron. "And you may hold me witness that it is the truth. As prince regent, I was taught much of our lore that is hidden from all save the priests and monarchs, and your story bridges the chasms and throws light upon the dark places. Ru shall hear you and be abashed before your knowledge, and all Atlantis shall proclaim your wisdom."

He turned to set a friendly hand upon Morse's arm.

"And you, brother, who are formed even as Minos himself, son of Zeus and god of the sun, greatly will we reward you. And, because of your manhood, Atlantis shall make you a first noble and you shall enter the

[p. 52]

[paragraph continues] Brotherhood of Kal."

"You do us honor," said Morse. "But how may such things be accomplished? It seems to me we sit outside a barrier beyond which lies your kingdom and the fulfillment of your wishes toward us."

Kiron laughed. "Truthfully," he said, "I had forgotten. On the third morning slaves will come to find what the vultures have left and cast the remains into the river, and then report that Kiron has been disposed of. We will stand aside until the way is open, and it shall be the slaves who are fed to the water. If you care not to soil your own hands, I will slay them with mine."

He spoke with an arrogant confidence in his powers. "So we shall descend the pathway of the burned out fires and come to Dor," he continued. "It will be a rare sight, the faces of my Cousin Rana and of the high priest, Ru! They will say nothing, for even Rana's people would not,. dare to seize me and would rise against her. A king of Atlantis may not be judged save by universal consent. You will do well to watch Rana's face, my brothers. It is as beautiful and yet as cruel as the Flower of the Long Sleep that slays you as you bend to inhale its fragrant, deadly breath.

"But where is this vase you speak of?"

"It is across the canyon with the rest of our weapons and some of our supplies," said Laidlaw, sighing half out of weariness and half out of hunger.

"We may cross the river by nightfall tomorrow," said Kiron. "I fear I have left you hungry, yet what is hunger compared with the gain of knowledge and of friendship? Let us sleep here on the ledge. Tomorrow we shall pass to your encampment and return to punish the dogs that Rana intrusted with her treachery."

Morse spoke to Maya and Xolo and, without a word, they found a sleeping place and settled themselves for the night. The Americans and the Atlantean were soon to duplicate their example.

They cat-napped away a good part of the following day, with some time devoted to fruitless exploration. In the late afternoon the torrent had subsided sufficiently for them to cross the stream, wading and leaping from boulder to boulder, and to climb to the summit of the cliff.

[p. 53]

While Maya and Xolo prepared the meal that was so badly needed, Kiron examined the vase.

"It is from the royal treasury," he said, "though the cover is of strange craftsmanship. See here the double axes of Minos and Pasiphae. I would like to meet the dog who stole it!"

"He is long since dust," said Morse, and he explained to Kiron the presence of the funereal ashes of Murdock within the vase and his intentions concerning their disposition.

The idea caught the young king's imagination. "It is a worthy deed," he proclaimed. "It shall be carried out, and the name of your friend carven upon the walls of the temple along with your own. Have you not brought great news to Atlantis?"

After the meal he examined with unconcealed wonder the rifles, the field glasses, compass, and chronometer, following intelligently the explanations of Laidlaw of their use and mechanism. The compass was new to him only in form. The flashlights excited his particular delight. "They are little suns," he exclaimed, "little suns that shall light us through the fire path."

They recrossed the stream with little difficulty in the gray of early morning, relying on Kiron's assurance that the slaves could not reach the ledge before dawn. Carefully and quickly they disposed themselves close to the gate that led to a lost race.

The sun rose behind the cliff, touching the plateau with a glorious golden color. The Indians were motionless statues on the stairway. Morse, Laidlaw, and Kiron stood quietly against the cliff on either side of the opening. Time passed slowly.

Suddenly, without a sound, the great slab of basalt swung upon its pivot and ears strained for the footfalls that must follow. Out from the dark hole came the leader, advancing onto the ledge with the staff that proclaimed his authority held firmly in one hand. The silent watchers did not move. Now, four men appeared in the opening and their emergence became a signal for action.

Silently, on the balls of their feet, the three attacked from behind. Morse felled the nearest with a single blow and Laidlaw's fist crashed down upon the back of another's skull. Both fell, blood gushing from

[p. 54]

the mouth of the one the scientist had hammered with his great fist.

The headman sprang backward, whirling his staff in both hands as Kiron ran in upon him. The Atlantean ducked under the weapon and seized his opponent around the hips. Without apparent effort he raised him and heaved him over the cliff as if the powerful slave leader had been an inanimate bundle of little weight.

One of the slaves fled down the staircase, only to meet the charging Indians. In an attempt to stop, he lost his footing and plunged into the gulf below. The last man fought furiously, but Laidlaw gained a gorilla-like embrace and quickly pushed his crumpled opponent away.

Before they could interfere, Kiron had spurned one of the fallen slaves over the precipice. His fellows lay insensible. "We shall leave these carrion to the birds."

"Let your little suns shine," he said, "and I will lead you to Dor."

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VI--THE GATES OF DOR

For a little way the tunnel was dimly lit by the daylight that came through the opening. Kiron reached above his head and tugged at a bronze handle attached to a lever working in a slot of metal in the wall. A sound of falling water came to their ears, and the daylight faded as the gates behind them closed upon the outer world.

"Hydraulic?" asked Laidlaw.

"The lake has thrice risen and flooded the lower dwellings," said Kiron. "The engineers drove a course-way through the rock that follows this tunnel and empties into a great cleft we shall presently cross. The flood waters open doors automatically and carry off the waste. Meantime we use a small supply to open and close the gates and raise the bridge."

Morse used only his flashlight, saving Laidlaw's and the extra batteries for an emergency. The power lens and reflector gave a brilliant light that was amply sufficient. The way led slightly upward through a shaft of volcanic origin. The flashlight revealed iridescent walls that occasionally changed in character, though always carrying the scars of ancient fires. At times great

[p. 55]

stalactites hung from the roof, and once they walked through a realm covered with the yellow prisms of sparkling sulphur crystals. The steamy air was laden with brimstone. Laidlaw, testing the water that trickled down the sides, hastily withdrew a blistered finger.

To right and left, chambers and passages opened out. The floor had been roughly paved, and their progress was rapid. Ten minutes' travel brought them to the cleft which Kiron had spoken of. Here, the sound of rushing waters beneath them could be plainly heard. But the gap was almost entirely covered by a bridge of bronze cantilever construction. The heels of Morse and Laidlaw clanged on its metal, and Kiron, once across, pulled another handle. The bridge swung upward on silent hinges, completely blocking the passage and leaving a deep gulf in front of it.

The tunnel showed increasing signs of man's work. Its steeper pitches had been made into series of low steps. At regular intervals along the sides, bronze brackets connected with an ornamental pipe that seemed to be designed for lighting.

"They are served from metal reservoirs at the far end which contain a gas that collects in the fissures of the mountain," explained Kiron. "The control is at Dor, and they are only lit on special occasions."

"There is volcanic fire also?" asked Laidlaw.

"Dor is beneath the shadow of a great volcano in which lava simmers," answered Kiron. "And in the temple, below the Spot of Sacrifice, is a deep shaft in which the fire of the altar of the gods always plays. Tele, the astrologer, whom you shall meet, will tell you that the wrath of the gods has not been manifested for more than fifty generations. Our traditions tell us that New Atlantis was born of fire and water, and by water and fire it shall be destroyed."

Presently the tunnel became quadrangular with smooth walls and ceiling. Frescoes appeared, painted upon a plaster background with occasional bas-reliefs in the same material, showing rows of processional figures treated in the style of decorations found in the ruins of early Greece and Egypt.

Before one of these Kiron halted while Morse turned his light upon the pictographs. They represented an

[p. 56]

enormous creature, seemingly as large as a hippopotamus in proportion to other figures. It stood erect on hind feet, balanced by a great tail, it sides covered with scaly armor. Parallel lines of servants and warriors in crested helmets, with broad-bladed swords, framed the monster. On one side was the giant form of a man with the head of a jaguar, holding a bow, the arrows from which bristled from the chest of a great beast. Above was a cartouche filled with hieroglyphics which Laidlaw translated.

"Here Pta the King, Pta the Hunter, Pta the Lord of All that Breathes, killed the Beast of the Caves. Mighty is Pta!"

Laidlaw waved his hands excitedly. "The beast is a mylodon, one of the mammoth cave sloths of the Pleistocene and recent deposits. A fantastic find!"

"Its skeleton and skin are in the royal museum," said Kiron. "It is said that this was the last of its kind, but in the last three generations there have been reports that a great beast lives in the big caves at the southern end of the lake. What truth there is in this I do not know, but I have often meant to hunt it. If you wish, we will some day seek the beast together. Those death-giving tubes of yours should be more than a match for it, and you shall gain the wreath of victory."

Realizing that the king was offering them an honor coveted by himself, Morse thanked him. "Let us teach you the use of the tubes, and you shall not be outdone even by Pta himself."

Kiron remained silent, but his expressive features could not hide the pleasure that came to his face.

Abruptly, the tunnel turned to the right. They mounted a long flight of steps with daylight far above them. At the head of the staircase the way was closed with massive bronze gates, and beyond there loomed a beautifully paved terrace guarded by a balustrade of stone. Beyond this, traced against a cloudless sky, were the serrated summits of a volcanic ridge.

A circular gong of bronze, three feet in diameter, hung close to the gates. Beneath it, in a wall niche, was a knobbed stick, the end thickly coated with rubber. Kiron picked it up and handed it to Laidlaw.

"Strike, my brother," he said, "and strike your

[p. 57]

mightiest, that Dor may know a king knocks at its gates. But strike only once. Kings summon with one call, one stroke, one trumpet cry, and others knock and wait."

Kiron's nakedness had been covered with a long strip of striped cloth from the Americans' supplies. It was draped about him and belted to form a flowing skirt that fell halfway between knees and ankles, making a mantle that covered his shoulders and left his right arm bare. Xolo had made him a pair of sandals from broad forest leaves such as he himself wore.

Morse, watching Laidlaw grasp the rubber knob, smiled to himself at his companion's soiled and stained khaki, the trousers tucked into high, laced boots, a dingy solar helmet upon his head. He became aware of his own disarray and wondered briefly how this lost people might regard their travel-worn appearance.

Laidlaw swung his arm, and the rubber knob struck its target fair in the center. It tilted heavily at the ponderous blow, and the deep cry of its vibrations echoed in the tunnel and beat against their eardrums.

The sound had not reached its height before a man in a short skirt and a jacket that resembled a bolero appeared. The surprise upon his face changed to consternation as he beheld Kiron and the strangers. For a moment he hesitated in apparent bewilderment.

"Open!" pronounced Kiron somberly.

The man produced a curiously pronged key, inserted it in the lock, and turned it. As he pressed his foot upon a metal stud in the paving, the gates rolled noiselessly aside. The man groveled.

"Pardon, O great king!" he stammered. "I had thought--"

"Let it be your last one," said Kiron sternly. "Thoughts can be dangerous at a time like this. Send quickly and bring us litters.

"It would be better, I think," he said, as the man disappeared at a run, "if we go in closed litters to my wing in the palace. There we can attire ourselves fittingly. You will permit me to offer you clean linen?"

Morse accepted, pleased at the Atlantean's delicacy.

"Give me a long robe, Kiron," said Laidlaw, "that these legs of mine may not too early disgrace your standards."

[p. 58]

"Would that mine bore as stout a body," replied Kiron. Then he continued: "The rains are over, and this is the month of Minos, the festival month of the reappearance of the Sun God. At noon, when he looks through the roof of his upper temple, the people will assemble and give thanks. Ru will address them and doubtless Rana will as well. She may lament my absence," he added satirically. "I shall be glad to be on hand to reassure her."

By this time three litters of carved wood inlaid with carved ivory panels on which the double ax was conspicuous were at hand. Morse and Laidlaw climbed into two of these, and pulled close the silken curtains at Kiron's direction. The strong shoulders of the bearers took them along in comfort.

Lying on his side, Morse could observe the lake through a crack in the curtains. Stretching toward purple hills, the water was dotted with islands. On the nearest one rose the white columns of a temple surrounded by trees. Boats with striped sails glided over the water.

The lake seemed to occupy the bowl of a great crater. Its waters were strangely blue and placid; the blue of another world. Off in the distance came the distant sound of trumpets. A deep-throated chant echoed mournfully across the water. But no one was encountered, and the bearer's feet padded along tirelessly in route to their unknown destination.

They entered a doorway and traversed a passage lined with white stone on which the double-ax sign was endlessly repeated. Finally, the litters were set down, and Morse and Laidlaw stepped out into a paved courtyard in the center of colonnades.

Palms grew in great vases between the pillars. The bearers disappeared noiselessly. Kiron stood beside the edge of a pool in which a fountain splashed in the sun.

"Welcome to Dor!" he greeted them. "I will show you your apartments; my own slaves will attend you."

He led them to a room of great size. The walls were frescoed in gesso duro, with unglazed window openings cased in bronze lattice, over which trailed flowering vines. Low couches and chairs shaped to the figure stood about. Through a doorway they caught an inviting glimpse of water in a pool.

[p. 59]

Kiron pointed to another door of paneled wood.

"There is your bath," he said. "When you have bathed, will you join me in the pool?"

Morse gazed in astonishment at the lavatory fittings.

"Hot and cold water!" he exclaimed. "Silver fittings, ivory combs! And a mirror, no less!"

He surveyed himself disconsolately in a tall plate of polished metal.

"A nice pair of scarecrows we are!" he said. "Fine visitors for a palace. Look at this luxury, Laidlaw. You take it as if you had registered at the Ritz."

"I expected it," said Laidlaw. "The Cretans were fully our equals in sanitary science. Thank the Lord for a bathtub. I wonder when we eat?"

"You're impossible," laughed Morse. "What do you think they'll serve us? Peacock and mullet, I suppose. I'm hungry myself."

A series of light knocks sounded on the door.

"Come in," called Laidlaw.

A pair of bronzed youths entered. One bore a ewer of gold in a deep bowl in which snow was closely packed with two goblets inserted bowl downward in the cool crystals. The other carried linen cloths and a cake of what might have been soap. They retired without uttering a word.

"Kiron's silent system," commented Laidlaw. "I wish this soap-weed cake were edible."

"What's in the pitcher?" asked Morse.

"Try it." Laidlaw poured the silver cups full of a ruby-colored liquor that smelled of spices and grapes. It was sweet, cloying to their palates, but nonetheless invigorating. After a hot bath, they crossed the main apartment to where Kiron awaited them.

Without a word, the three moved simultaneously, diving into the inviting, emerald water and racing for the far end of the marble tank, a hundred feet away. Just as the fingers of Morse and Kiron were outstretched to touch its side, Laidlaw, with a mighty surge, forged in ahead of them, the winner of the undeclared race. More youths awaited them as they emerged, dripping, clad them in loose linen wraps, and escorted them to couches. There they were massaged with sweet

[p. 60]

scented oils. A servant brought a pile of garments, dividing them into three groups. The youths assisted Morse and Laidlaw to invest themselves in the strange attire, after one had passed a comb through Laidlaw's tawny hair and beard, to his passive disgust. Kiron and Morse were shaved quickly and smoothly by attendants with wedge-shaped razors that were as well-tempered as any American product.

Laidlaw was garbed in a pleated skirt of dull red that fell to his insteps and was bordered with a fringe of gold. His misshapen dwarf legs were well concealed. A golden girdle, scaled and flexible as a snake's skin, held it in place. Above was a tunic of fine wool, purple in hue, the left arm short-sleeved and the right bare, showing Laidlaw's Herculean proportions to their full advantage. Gilded sandals, bound with thongs of soft leather, and a fillet of the same material about his brows completed the costume.

Like some lord of ancient Assyria, he walked the length of the pool, squaring his shoulders before the critical eyes of Kiron.

Morse wore a double chiton of white wool, sleeveless, caught at the shoulders with gold fibulae brooches, and belted with vermilion leather incrusted with gold filigree set with pale-green olivines. The skirt of this singular garment touched his knees, and its cloth was bordered with golden brocade. His sandals were scarlet, his garb almost a duplicate of Kiron's.

Morse enjoyed the freedom and coolness of the costume, and his naturalness brought an exclamation from Laidlaw.

"You look like an Atlantean to me, Morse."

The discarded clothing lay on one of the couches of the main apartment when they entered. Kiron showed them a space in the wall, masked so cunningly by a part of the design that the uninitiated eye would never suspect its existence. In it they stowed their goods, and Kiron revealed the secret of its opening by pressing the paneled eye of a big cat creeping over ivy-covered rocks and about to spring upon a pheasant-like bird.

"Now," said the Atlantean, "let us eat. We have an hour before the middle day."

Laidlaw did not try to suppress a sigh of pleasure.

[p. 61]

In the courtyard, a trestle table and seats had been arranged. Glossy leaves bearing red waxen flowers were entwined between goblets and platters of gold on a white cloth. The peacocks of Morse's imagination did not make an appearance, but the mullets were typified by a lake fish of delicate flesh, served in a sauce of thyme and cucumber. This was followed by a pudding of meal, surrounded by a number of enormous frogs' legs. A sweet pudding filled with chopped fruits ended the repast, at which time even Laidlaw attempted to loosen the links of his girdle.

There were litters in attendance, and the three were borne from the palace behind silken curtains. When they halted in a paved alley between high walls, Kiron dismissed the bearers and led the way to an entrance barely the height of Morse. The Atlantean struck his foot upon a disk of metal that protruded slightly from the threshold, and the bronze gateway slid into the wall. Fifty steps stretched down to a corridor leading to a blank wall. A flower of bronze, hollow-centered, projected from a stone slab.

Kiron advanced and spoke into the petals. Immediately there was a light sound of clicking. A section of the wall descended into the floor. Kiron turned his head to Laidlaw.

"We, too, have our inventions," he said proudly as they passed through the opening. "This is a hidden entrance to the temple."

A long incline appeared before them, rising to the antechamber of a great hall, and ending in a high screen woven from golden threads into a weird design of foliage and fruit. The workmanship was so fine that the light pierced it, and through it came the sound of a high, querulous voice.

"That is Ru," said Kiron, anger rising in him.

A blare of trumpets followed; a burst of voices in a swelling harmony. A strange incense penetrated the antechamber. A woman's deep contralto, ineffably sweet and alluring, reached them.

"Re has removed the veil from his face and smiles once more. Great is Re. The blossoms are invested with his breath and speak of golden fruit. The land sends up incense. The hearts of youth listen to the mating

[p. 62]

cries of the birds and are glad. Atlantis smiles beneath the glory of Re that now descends upon us."

And now a chant sounded:

"His glory descending
  Our hearts fill with pleasure
  Our voices ascending In manifold measure
  Proclaim adoration,
  The joy of a nation
  To greet thee, O Re!
  Re! Re!
  Giver of Light and Life!
  Our hearts with joy are rife
  Hear us, O Re!"

Beyond the screen, the hall was suddenly flooded with a golden glow. Presently the woman's voice broke the silence.

"The golden flower opens! Lo, our prayers are acceptable! Gladness shall come to Atlantis, and fertility. Yet there is a shadow upon the radiance that showers down. Kiron, our king, beloved of Re, is missing from the festival, absent from this gathering."

A cry arose of "Kiron! Kiron!"

But Kiron did not move, and a sardonic smile crossed his face.

"Wait! Rana has not yet ended."

"You call for Kiron, and he answers not," said the queen. "Some grave misfortune must have befallen him. The oracles are silent, though Ru, your spirit lord, has besought them. The holy fires smoldered sullenly at his questioning."

"Kiron! Where is Kiron?" called a voice, quaveringly. "Has he lost favor with the gods?"

"I cannot answer you, my people," said Rana. "Like you, I can only ask: 'Where is Kiron?'"

"Here!"

Beckoning Morse and Laidlaw to follow, Kiron strode around the screen. Bearded priests in flowing robes encircled a platform. A slender woman stood before a throne of gold that glittered with gems. Beside it, a second royal chair was empty. The emblem of the

[p. 63]

double ax, gleaming blades on ebony staffs, loomed between them. From an opening in the roof, a shaft of sunshine poured in. Beyond it the Americans vaguely glimpsed a multitude of shifting forms.

"Here!" repeated Kiron, one arm upraised, advancing until he stood in the center of the dancing motes of sunray. "Kiron is here, and unto Re the Sun God gives his salutation."

A cheer from a thousand throats echoed from roofs and walls.

Morse saw Rana shrink back, terror in her eyes. A priest whose robes were heavy with brocade down which his long beard broke in a silver shower stepped to her side and whispered. She straightened her slim length and advanced to the edge of the dais. Her eyes were transformed into crimson orbs of hate, which she quickly masked with lowered eyelids.

"Zeus be praised!" she said. "Kiron, chosen of Re, Rana the queen rejoices with our people."

She extended a hand that was like a white flower. Kiron chose to ignore it and ascended the platform as the people roared their approval.

"People of Atlantis," he began, "I bring to you my brothers, strangers who are not strange, visitors who bring tidings from the remote past, of Minos, king of kings, bearers of great news. See, Re shines on them and hails them as his own!"

The shifting shaft of sunbeam had enveloped Morse and Laidlaw where they stood.

"Disperse to the feasting and the dance," said Kiron. "Presently Ru, high priest of Minos and of Re, shall address you. We would be alone with our new brothers."

Morse and Laidlaw felt the challenge of keen glances. Morse found the gaze of Rana directed at him with an admiration that she made no attempt to hide. Laidlaw's amber eyes encountered another kind of look. For there was both challenge and threat centered in the narrow look of Ru.

As the crowd departed, Kiron addressed himself to Rana. "The vultures feed on the carrion you sent to give them daintier food. Are you not glad to greet me, cousin?"

[p. 64]

"You speak in strange riddles, Kiron," she answered softly in a voice that held the magic of united strings. "Truthfully, I am glad to see you. Present me to your brothers."

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VII--THE QUEEN ADVANCES

After his one speech to Rana in which he acknowledged her treachery, Kiron, strangely, made no further mention of it. To Morse's astonishment, he spoke to his cousin in a cordial and open manner, as if the subject were forgotten.

Kiron occupied his throne, settled himself naturally, and directed Laidlaw to relate his story to the ring of priests. Rana, in the meantime, had beckoned Morse to her side with a slight motion and a strange magnetic look in her deep and unfathomable eyes. In spite of his knowledge--and he could not shake the picture of Kiron lying bound upon the ledge as food for the vultures--he felt an attraction to this beautiful woman. He fought it wonderingly. Rana was beautiful by any standards, and her manner was an entrancing combination of swiftly changing vivacity and languor. Insensibly Morse began to place much of the blame of her actions upon Ru, who made no attempt to hide his antipathy for the strangers, even as he acknowledged the wonder of Laidlaw's story.

The ring of priests stood wide-eyed as Laidlaw told of the discovery of the cup, and showed keen interest in his account of the island of Crete and its history. There was unbridled enthusiasm at the disclosure of a living race who were at least remotely related to them. And there was wonder and disbelief as Laidlaw promised to display a collection of photographs of Greek art and architecture, the American describing as simply as he could the nature of a "sun picture."

Ru listened with a scowl deepening on his brows, alternately watching Laidlaw and Morse, or noting the satirical smile that continually played across the face of Kiron.

Rana plied Morse with a thousand questions, and her expressive eyes and red, pouting lips were a magnet to him. "Were there many men like him in his own

[p. 65]

land? Yes. Ah, he was surely too modest. In Atlantis such a man might aspire to anything; even a throne!"

Morse, in almost a hypnotic trance, tried to affect an ignorance of her plain speaking. She halted and appraised him, a trace of puzzlement on her brow. And all at once the vivacity flamed again. She covered him with a flattery that made no attempt to hide her delight in his person. She praised his Greek and promised to be his personal tutor of Atlantean idioms. She outlined a tour with a score of things to see with her as guide. And she made it clear that any attempt to include Laidlaw would prove distasteful to her.

"Let him prate to the priests," she said. "He is old and I do not like his legs." Evidently her keen eyes had judged their hidden proportions, despite the long robes. "His face is hairy, and he is a musty creature. Knowledge is for age, when the joys of manhood are mere fruit husks. Let us not waste our time upon rinds when the luscious pulp is before us."

At last Laidlaw was finished, but there was further talk with the priests. There were games in the afternoon, and what better time was there that Ru might present the strangers to the people?

"He can sit in the priests' benches," said Rana, indicating Laidlaw. "You shall sit with me."

Somehow, the imperiousness, the totality of her manner began to penetrate his consciousness, and beyond the outwardly beautiful shell he began to see her more clearly. Morse began to wonder what her purpose was in showering him with attention.

 

He was limp and perspiring when he left her spell; aware that he had been fighting with himself for nothing more than his own right to think; aware of her beauty and her magnetism; and suddenly and vividly aware of how Kiron had been tied and left to die at her command. He shuddered.

 

Laidlaw was full of talk and excitement. He was in his element. He had talked past a meal and had not even missed it. Now that the great archeologist had a few minutes apart from this hidden people, he could not silence his hoarse voice. And while he had been addressing

[p. 66]

[paragraph continues] Morse all along, he suddenly realized that his fellow American was there.

"The queen is a beautiful woman," he began, a question in his voice.

"She is that," replied Morse unfeelingly.

"Remember Kiron," admonished Laidlaw, for once laconic.

Morse nodded slowly, and was silent for a time.

"There is something about her," he said at last, searching carefully for words. "When she was near me it was almost as if that part of me that knew what she had done was blocked out--there was something powerful about her... She is powerful!"

"Ru is powerful, too," said Laidlaw. "He hates us, and someday he means to fill a throne. If that day comes ... " Laidlaw stopped and drew a finger across his throat suggestively. Then he continued:

"The old struggle between church and state is here. And the Atlantean priesthood is losing its grip. The people are overcivilized, too sophisticated. They demand to be amused, and the theologians are unable to satisfy them. Ru recognizes this and realizes that his only way of retaining power is to seize the throne. Oh, I found out a few things," said Laidlaw. "Didn't talk all of the time!

"Kiron is a cultured aristocrat, the kind out of style in most of the world. He was born to privileges that he will not give up lightly. Rana is a woman. One thing only dominates her--sex. It is her weapon, her armor, her delight; the one thing that Ru plays upon. He has her convinced that Kiron's indifference is scorn, and she hates him.

"Ru has no love for either of us, but he fears you because you could become a permanent fixture--if Rana can dominate you."

Morse looked at him quizzically. "You seem to have a keen insight into the ways of women."

"I? Risk myself in that kind of labyrinth?" Laidlaw laughed, but there was a touch of bitterness in his voice. Morse wondered whether there was a claw mark somewhere that had not entirely healed.

"Rana," summed up the scientist, "has been spoiled by adulation. As princess and queen, she has been

[p. 67]

accustomed to cry for the moon and keep on crying until she got it. Now that she's in power, she is incorrigible."

"Don't you believe in suffrage, Laidlaw?"

"Suffrage and sex--the fair sex don't make a team. Over there"--he pointed to the island they had seen from the litter where the columned temple rose from its setting of tropical verdure--"is the home of Atlantean suffrage minus sex. It is the island of Sele, inhabited by a cult of women who have deliberately subordinated sex to the pursuit of knowledge and power. Their leader is none other than Rana's sister, Leola, who is said to be more beautiful than Rana herself. But Rana is not jealous. Leola abjures mankind. She is the high priestess of Pasiphae, the moon goddess, sharer of the double ax."

Morse looked at the island with curiosity. An island of beautiful virgins who had deliberately chosen to challenge men's prerogatives was intriguing to him.

"Only the priesthood is allowed to land there," said Laidlaw, interpreting his friend's glance. "Ru and his followers are also celibates. I don't imagine that Leola and her followers are overpopular. The population of Atlantis is on the wane."

"Do you think they have any chance of achieving their ambitions?" asked Morse.

"To become the equal of man? I doubt it. Mentally and physically they are handicapped by the sex instinct. It would take many generations to overcome that, and by their own laws future generations are impossible. They can only add to their numbers by fresh recruits who are largely influenced by the chance of becoming more or less conspicuous. The priestesses of Pasiphae are very important at festival functions."

"If you had been Adam, the world would never have been populated," laughed Morse. "Eve would have had a lonely time of it."

"It is because there is some of the old Adam in me that I am on my guard," replied Laidlaw to his friend's astonishment. "I am not a bachelor from choice, Morse. I am as human as you are."

"I'm afraid that you met the wrong woman once," thought Morse, but he did not speak his thoughts. Instead, he asked: "Did you notice that the lake water is noticeably warm?"

[p. 68]

"The priests mentioned it," Laidlaw replied. "They say it is a recurrent phenomena that precedes activity in the volcano, and they are rather glad of it. I imagine it gives them an opportunity to renew their grip on the credulity of the people by ceremonials. They can magnify their own importance and supposedly ward off the calamity by appeasing the wrath of the gods."

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VIII--AULUS THE GLADIATOR

The games were held in an amphitheater hewn from living rock on a volcanic islet not far from the mainland. Laidlaw was quickly ushered off into a group of priests, and Morse found that he was to share a seat in the royal lodge between the two monarchs.

Rana claimed his attentions immediately.

Morse looked to Kiron who merely shrugged and smiled. But when the opportunity afforded itself, he whispered: "Beware of the Flower of Everlasting Sleep. Do not inhale the fragrance. It intoxicates, but it is fatal."

The Atlantean games opened with a procession of maidens, singing and bearing great armfuls of flowers with which they strewed the arena. Trumpeters with long-necked instruments circled the arena, accompanied by a band of priests. They halted at the royal lodge and hailed its occupants by name. Morse was surprised to hear himself included.

A second halt was made on the opposite side of the arena before a purple canopy. Morse was able to make out the figure of Ru--and beside him Laidlaw--as the hailing ceremony was repeated.

A strange perfume arose from the crushed petals that filled the arena. The air was clear, and the rays of the sun were warm and dazzling for the mid-afternoon spectacle. Morse fought to stay clear of Rana's intense being and a repetition of their first meeting. He concentrated on the arena, asked questions profusely, and finally with a slight smile Kiron came to his aid--to the obvious displeasure of his co-ruler.

The monarch spoke of many things: of traditions and ancient festivals, of horses--unknown in New

[p. 69]

[paragraph continues] Atlantis and known only through the lore of the past--of cattle. Kiron revealed that they possessed cattle, but their herd had shrunk and bulls were a scarcity. They were used only upon very special occasions--"of which this is one," he added diplomatically.

A quartet of footraces began the arena activities, and when they had been completed wreaths of gilded leaves were bestowed upon the victors by the monarchs. Immediately following, a bull made its appearance. It was a magnificent creature, white, spotted with black, with gilded horns and hoofs, and a garland of roses about its neck. The crowd acclaimed it, calling it by name as if it were some stage favorite.

To those who were thirsty for blood-letting, this was a disappointment. Bulls were too scarce to be killed and served merely as a motive for an exhibition of marvelous agility. Youths and maidens armed with long spears and shorter darts attacked the brute, but the points of their weapons were short, and hardly drew blood. The bull was driven into a frenzy and finally into a sullen fit. A girl vaulted lightly to its neck, seized its horns, and rode off in triumph as her companions prodded the creature to an exit.

The gladiatorial games that followed provided the cue for general excitement. The weapons were real and the men in earnest. They fought in bands at first, then in couples: a javelin thrower, clad only in a linen breechcloth, protected by a partner with broad-bladed sword and a shield almost as long as himself. So dexterous were they that few serious wounds were dealt in the minutes allowed to each bout by the arena master. Still, there was blood enough to bring fierce shouts from their adherents on the benches.

Morse turned away from the action. He saw the beautiful mouth of Rana take on  lines, saw her eyes glaze with crimson like some fierce beast. There was no hypnosis here. Morse knew Rana now; knew she could never hold him in trance again. He turned to Kiron who watched somewhat wearily, while making expert comments on the moves of the battlers.

The finest gladiators had been reserved for single combat, and the crowd shouted for its favorites. Occasionally, a winner, still breathing heavily, would

[p. 70]

advance to a spot before a group of nobles and offer a challenge to the amateurs. There would be a pause, and finally a young aristocrat would rise, cast away his outer garments amidst the cheers of the spectators, and descend to the arena. At times, the professionals were hard pressed, but for the most part they treated their opponents with a good-humored tolerance born of conscious superiority.

Last of all came the boxers, deep-chested giants of heavier mold--men who flailed at each other within the limits of a square indicated by upright posts. Their hands were protected with leather bands bound about the knuckles, fastened at the wrists, and studded with bronze. Two slaves fought ferociously for a prize of freedom, one felling the other with a savage blow upon the temple, and watching with a grin as the loser was dragged away, dying and insensible.

The Atlanteans fought stripped save for the cestus on the knuckles, and adhered to rules that precluded wrestling and kicking. The fights ended with one combatant owning himself beaten or unable to continue. The winners that came for their victory wreaths were badly bruised, but apparently they were Rana's favorites for she added to their wreaths gold coins from a bag brought by an attendant.

Few of the boxers challenged the spectators, and there were no takers, a fact which brought jeers of derision from the populace. Apparently they were not keen to face a possible disfigurement or bad beating.

The final bout ended with a victory for the champion of Atlantis. He was a massive man, weighing well over two hundred and fifty pounds, his powerful body a mass of gnarled muscles and brute strength. The sympathy of the spectators was with his opponent, a lighter, younger man who circled about his foe, raining upon him a torrent of quick swinging blows. The champion waited patiently, dodging and guarding some of the blows, but taking many full upon his features. Finally, the lighter man slowed his attack, breathing heavily from his exertions. And this seemed to be a signal for the champion's strategy. He leaped forward with ponderous arms swinging, too suddenly for his tired opponent to dodge completely away. A glancing blow slowed him, and then

[p. 71]

one great blow from the champion caught the challenger full on the base of the skull. The latter crumpled without a sound.

The victor advanced with a lurching swagger toward the royal box. His bestial features, scarred in earlier fights, were livid and bruised where the blows of his most recent opponent had gone home. Tiny, piglike eyes glared at Morse from beneath scarred brows. A trickle of blood dripped from his nose, but the broad chest of the fighter rose and fell evenly--as if he had not even exerted himself.

"So, Aulus, you are still champion," said Rana as she bent to place the wreath upon the low brow and dropped some clinking coins into the cestus-bound palm. "This is but a tithe I won on you from the king today."

"I have always contested that Aulus is clumsy," said Kiron, as casually as if he had been discussing the points of a hound. "Some day a quicker, more intelligent man will come along. Diagoras was beaten before he tied on his cestus, beaten by a title."

"Which I still hold," grinned Aulus. "Diagoras will fight no more. I struck the marrow from his spine. Aulus is still champion--unless"--he hesitated for a moment, as if fearful of his own boldness--"unless someone should lift this and take away my wreath."

He stepped back, took off the bloodstained cestus from his left hand, raised it toward Morse, looking straight at him, and flung it to the sand in front of the royal box.

There could be no mistaking the directness of the challenge, nor the taunting leer in the gladiator's eyes. The arena caught the situation as one person and grew silent. Morse felt himself the target of a thousand eyes. Beside him, Rana leaned forward, her lips parted, her eyes bent upon his face. Across the wide arena he could distinguish Laidlaw standing upon his feet.

Kiron touched his arm and whispered to him. With Aulus still glaring at him, the silence was overwhelming. Morse dimly caught some words: "--a trick of Ru." But his blood was mounting under the eyes of the champion. If there were some trick, the only way to circumvent it would be to beat the champion at his own game or lose all prestige for himself and Laidlaw.

[p. 72]

He rose, and the spectators lost their silence. They rose with him, cheered, pushed, and the arena became a bedlam. Morse vaulted lightly onto the victor's platform, ran down the steps to where the cestus lay, and held it aloft. The dark eyes of Rana caught his own. They tried to see into them, and a baffled look passed over the beautiful face. Morse knew that she was trying to calculate his chances of victory; she looked for fear, for courage, for stupidity, and looked for other intangibles. And Morse knew that she saw--nothing!

The noise of the arena gradually subsided, and Kiron's modulated voice called: "Thrice the amount of the bet against Aulus once again, Rana."

And Morse was surprised by the answer.

"You tempt me to discourtesy. I wager on our guest."

At these words, the face of Aulus turned into a scowl. He took up the cestus that Morse tossed upon the platform, and looked long into the crowd. Morse had turned without a word and followed the arena master into the gymnasium. Strange butterflies crawled within his stomach for he was not one to seek out a fight. Still, he told himself, the Atlantean boxers were clumsy--punchers. He believed in his own skill, and he had taken lessons from modern experts. Morse hoped that his boxing ability, his speed of hand and foot, and his conditioning would offset the superior weight and brute strength of Aulus.

The American was seized with an intense desire to defeat this swaggerer, and his butterflies disappeared.

In the gymnasium he stripped to a loin cloth and allowed himself to be rubbed with oils by a sad-eyed man who proclaimed himself the trainer of the slain Diagoras. When it came time to don the cestus, there were none save those belonging to the gladiators.

"Give me those of Diagoras," said Morse.

The trainer brought them reluctantly.

"I fear that they are covered with misfortune," he said.

"They are covered with the blood of Aulus," replied Morse grimly. "More of it will wipe away the evil."

"That is well spoken," said the trainer, and then in an aside: "Beware of his right arm. And if he appears

[p. 73]

to weaken in any way, then be most wary."

Morse nodded understanding and stepped into the arena, knowing now that civilization was far behind. A throaty roar greeted him as he crossed the sand. Flowers flung by half the populace littered his path, as many tried to emulate their rulers by making him their favorite. But many were quiet, and Morse knew that they had wagered on the professional.

As he advanced Morse felt a strange sense of exultation as if some ancestor--or he himself in a former incarnation--had once trod the arena to pit his strength and skill against another's.

Aulus waited disdainfully, leaning his bulk against one of the pillars of the fight space. When his opponent was only a few paces away, he coiled suddenly like some great reptile ready to strike. Morse waited expectantly, but the arena master hurried between them, and with a few words led the two before the royal box. Right arms extended, they hailed the monarchs.

Rana gazed at them in anticipation of the savage sport that was to follow. The fire of her eyes held those of Aulus, but Morse turned his glance to Kiron's face. The monarch's lips moved silently and quickly, and the American read the words: "right lower ribs."

Accompanied by the arena master, the combatants moved in a measured step to the square that was to be their place of conflict.-The two were of a height, but the shoulders of Aulus were broader, and his chest and hips formed a square torso, in distinction to that of Morse, whose frame sloped inward to narrow hips. The American's muscles were long and less visible than those of the professional; and his legs, though well-developed, were saplings beside the huge boughs of the gladiator.

Morse's trip through the jungle had left him in fine condition, without an extra ounce of weight. Aulus was a trifle gross with good living, although his wind had seemed excellent in the earlier combat. Morse remembered the wild swings of the Atlantean boxers and planed to treat the populace to an exhibition of jolting straight arm punches. He hoped they would be a disconcerting surprise to Aulus, who owned a sixty pound weight advantage. "Jabbing and footwork," he told himself.

[p. 74]

The combatants took their places, and after a look to Kiron, the arena master dropped his baton, the signal that commenced the battle.

Distaining his opponent for a moment, Aulus carefully placed his right foot forward, the left hand on guard, and the right hand opposite his breast in the now familiar Atlantean form. Morse opposed him loosely, hands high, poised on both feet ready to move in and out with lightning thrusts.

The arena had fallen silent again, and the battlers could hear the chirp of a bird from an outer tier. Aulus stood like a rock, derisively smiling with swollen lips that disclosed teeth broken from cestus blows. Morse felt a fury to erase the mocking grimace. He advanced, feinted with his left, drawing up the right hand of Aulus. Instantly Morse led with his right hand, and followed with a low smash to the ribs, side-stepping the wild counter swings.

Aulus grunted as the blow smashed home, and Morse knew that at some time his man had been injured sufficiently for him to favor a spot that might hold a weakness. The cruel cestus studs had ripped the skin, and blood ran down the gladiator's flanks, bringing a shout from the benches. Raging, Aulus wheeled and charged with a flurry of blows. So swift and determined was the attack that Morse had barely time to deliver a straight left hand to the face before he was forced to cover and retreat. The hammering of the great arms, hard as bronze, threatened to smash down his defense.

Feeling left his forearms. And while a clinch would have given him a breather, grappling was forbidden in the arena. A roar told him that he had retreated beyond the limits of the square, and he side-stepped nimbly to gain the center. Aulus floundered after him, and Morse saw that he had opened up a flowing wound above the eye and on the cheek bone. The Atlantean dashed the blood aside and charged with a thunderous growl, only to run into another straight jab. Morse ducked under a wild swing, and as the gladiator pivoted off balance he was pounded heavily below the heart.

Aulus' left eye was closing fast. He bellowed his rage at this agile opponent who fought in so unorthodox a manner. Morse danced in and out with quick, sharp

[p. 75]

blows, but he did not go untouched. Once a glancing swing had all but paralyzed his shoulder and left arm, and on another occasion the cestus had cut his cheek. He felt the blood dripping down as he countered to the lower ribs and once again got a responsive grunt of pain. Morse's arms ached from blocking punches, but Aulus' face was now a gory mask. And yet there was no weakening to the Atlantean's blows.

Aulus now stood in the center of the square, revolving like some clumsy turret as Morse moved around him. His unclosed eye glowered red with a venomous determination, and as Morse planted an uppercut squarely on his jaw, the gladiator shook off the blow with a laugh. The man appeared as invincible as an oak.

The sound from the benches seemed far away, as breaking waves on a distant beach, and the American found himself longing for Queensbury rules and the attention of deft seconds during a breathing spell.

With a third blow to the ribs Aulus staggered back, mouth open, face distorted, arms lowered. Morse leaped forward to press his attack. And suddenly the gladiator. regained his full strength, his features demoniac with anticipated triumph. Morse knew that he had been lured into the trap against which he had been warned. A smashing blow stung him sideways, and before he could regain his balance another pushed past his guard and caught him over the heart. His lungs failed; the air grew dark; he reeled dizzily. Only the absolute condition of his legs kept him on his feet as he crouched instinctively. Thunder sounded in his ears, and he felt that the end had come.

But no blows fell. The mist cleared away, and he looked out from under his guard. Aulus was on the ground. The force of the misjudged blow he had meant to end the combat had brought him crashing to the sand. Morse summoned all his reserve and sprang at him like a tiger. The gladiator was rising from his left knee, his right arm extended upward. There was a livid bruise on the ribs where Morse had made his target, and as Aulus straightened to full height the American punched with all his force to this spot. Aulus groaned and dropped his hands. The blow had cracked his ribs, sending the splintered bone inward. Morse's right hand went home

[p. 76]

to the jaw, his left to the Adam's apple.

The giant tottered. His knees sagged and he confusedly raised one arm to clear the blood from his eyes, now both blinded. Instinctively he tried to protect his head. Morse shifted all his weight to his left foot, and put every ounce of power into a final punch. It caught Aulus between the parting of the ribs, battering the force of its impact through the muscles of the diaphragm.

Morse caught the look of unfeigned agony on the chopped countenance and stepped back. The mighty bulk wavered, the coordination between brain and nerve and muscle failed, and he crashed to the ground, a palpitating mass.

Morse stood aside as the arena master hurried up. The air was rent with salvos of applause and cries of consternation and disbelief. The official beckoned to the American. Aulus was writhing in pain as Morse bent over him.

"It is enough!" he cried. "I am undone. Beaten and blind. Bear me away, Milo. I yield my wreath."

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IX--THE INITIATION

Morse was the new idol of the populace. Whenever he appeared, crowds made way for him with cries of admiration; while the maidens, who perpetually wore wreaths of heavy-scented blossoms, cast them before him so that his existence out of doors was almost a continued triumphal procession. And since the games, Rana had increased her attentions. She showered him with gifts and invitations, and all but openly declared herself willing to accept him as lover and husband.

Morse could admire her from a distance for she was unquestionably a beautiful woman. But his fascination for her was gone; she held no spell for him now. And he avoided her as much as possible. Finally, as the month drew to its close, he spoke to Laidlaw.

"Look," he said. "I can't take much more of this. I have to work at avoiding her. How soon are you going to be ready to leave?"

Laidlaw looked at him in bewildered surprise. "Leave! I haven't even begun my work here. Next

[p. 77]

week is the start of the month of Pasiphae; the month of Demeter follows. I must observe the festivals and their ritual. They may be close to those of three thousand years ago. This is an expedition into the past; you can't be serious about leaving at this time. I have six months' work in front of me--a year's."

So enamored was Laidlaw of his subject that he forgot Morse's appeal. "The only thing that bothers me is the lack of film for the camera. We should have brought a motion picture outfit, Morse. Think of it--tangible proof, the scientific value. Why didn't we bring one?"

"I don't want to interrupt your researches," said Morse in a tone that secured the scientist's wandering attention, "but we may have to get away from here in a . You know what Rana's attitude is. I don't think I can be diplomatic toward her much longer without insulting her. Our affairs are going to come to a crisis some day soon, and when I break with her there's going to be trouble.

"I dodged her last week by staying across the lake, and at that she sent me a letter each day and a jewel which she claims is a vital part of my costume. Rana is as clever as she is beautiful, Laidlaw. Ambitious, too, but she holds nothing for me. She spins a web of circumstance that puts us together, and she may want to make me her consort. But somewhere along the line she's going to try and do away with Kiron, and if this happens Ru is going to be right there. He's either going to control her, or failing that he's going to eliminate her just as she intends to eliminate Kiron."

Laidlaw nodded gravely, his work forgotten for the moment.

"You may be right. If Ru can  himself while we're still here, we're going to find ourselves out on the ledge with the vultures some morning, and there won't be any rescue party."

The scientist went on slowly. "I've often wondered how genuine her interest in you really is. In the beginning I thought it was feigned--completely so; that she and Ru were working hand in hand against Kiron and against us as well. Now, I'm not so sure about Rana. You're too strong of mind for her, and you baffle her. She's still power-hungry beyond belief, but she can't

[p. 78]

conquer you and I believe that this fascinates her.

"You know Kiron has been anxious to honor us by giving us the full citizenship he promised when we rescued him. Now, I think Rana has come over to this idea as well, while Ru has been quietly working against it all along. You see, if they initiate us to the level of nobles as Kiron intends, it would afford us a little more protection against anything that the old priest might have planned for us. Anyway, I think we have some sort of a conflict growing between Rana and Ru, and you may very well be the cause of it."

"Laidlaw, if you can see that much, you can see the problems facing us if we stay here."

Laidlaw nodded his head sadly. "You're right, of course. But I've got to have a month for my work. Somehow, you've got to smooth things over for that long. Morse, I implore you..."

Morse had to laugh at the other's seriousness. "All right, then. One month. It's not going to be easy. And don't say anything about our intention to depart. We'll have to fly at the last moment--with Kiron's aid if we can get it."

 

As the days passed, Rana took up the cause to ennoble Morse and Laidlaw. Since the former had defeated Aulus in the arena, her interest was--as Laidlaw sensed--more genuine. And when she finally, in a public speech, championed the honor due the visitors, Ruts powerful opposition fell silently away with the applause of the populace.

Morse was to receive the second degree of epoptae, and Laidlaw, by reason of his dwarfed and misshapen legs, was to receive the slightly lesser degree of mystae. (Morse wondered how much was due to his companion's imperfections and how much was due to Rana's interest in him.)

The initiation took place in the underground chambers of the Temple of the Double Ax, dedicated to the sun and moon gods, Minos and Pasiphae. It was midnight on the last day of the month of Minos when Morse and Laidlaw, clad in ceremonial robes, blindfolded, their ears muffled by a light bandage, another across their mouth and nostrils, were escorted by winding ways to

[p. 79]

the council chamber. Thirty silent forms wearing long-sleeved robes of gray that fell over their feet were grouped about a central figure occupying a throne carved from the rock wall. Oil lamps cast a flickering light upon the mute assembly. The silent figures all wore masks representing jaguars, human skulls, and the heads of great beaked birds.

The man on the throne was distinguished by a headgear representing a bull. Frescoes dimly showed upon the walls. In the semicircle formed by the initiates stood a glowing brazier supported upon upreared and intertwisting snakes. Incense rose from the green flames of a burning liquid. Morse and Laidlaw were led to a point directly behind it.

"Neophytes!" The voice, despite its resonance, had a strident quality that assured the Americans that Ru was speaking through a megaphone-like object in his mask. "You have been instructed in your behavior. Courage conquers all things. Fear breeds. weakness. This is the wedding night of Minos, son of Zeus, and god of the sun, and Pasiphae, the all-shining, goddess of the moon, deities of the double ax, founders of Atlantis."

As he spoke the altar flame changed first to orange, then to a vivid blue at the mention of the honored names.

"May you be found worthy in their sight to become as their children. Your sight--" (the bandages were removed from their eyes) "--your hearing and your speech--" (the other mufflings followed) "--have been taken from you to be restored as the trials shall prove you fit. Through darkness, danger, and through death the way shall lead back to light and life. Do not step from the trail or those who lurk close by will seize and destroy you."

The light in the brazier died down as the words ceased, flickering to a' creeping silver flame that suddenly leaped up and vanished, leaving the chamber in stygian darkness. By its last lambent effort the Americans could see that the chamber had emptied itself of other occupants in some mysterious fashion. The frescoes wavered on the solid walls as if they shook with the passing of the initiates. They caught a glimpse of the vacant throne before blackness enveloped them.

[p. 80]

A liquid substance began to drip--spat, spat--upon the pavement with a regularity that timed their pulses to its beat. The darkness thickened; the air grew oppressive with a salty tang--half scent, half flavor; the subtle essence of newly-spilled blood. There were whisperings about them, inarticulate chuckles, grotesque cacklings, and cold blasts of wind passed over them with the beat of invisible wings.

Suddenly eyes appeared in the darkness. They glowed weirdly, green and crimson, moved about them at various heights, and finally settled in two immovable rows, baleful and hypnotic. More ghoulish chuckling and laughter, and the eyes began to whirl. Finally, with an animal chorus of gnashing of teeth, scraping of claws, and fearful howls, silence came to the chamber.

"If we could work anything like that in the States," whispered Morse in English, "we'd have the Psychological Research Society at our feet."

"They've been working at it for thousands of years," replied Laidlaw. "Damned effective."

The dark slowly became less intense, the air laden with the delicate fragrance of spring blossoms. Black turned into purple, and purple became gray, and finally they could see the walls in front of them dissolving in whirls of mist.

Upon a couch lay the exquisite form of a sleeping woman, rounded breasts lifting with her gentle breathing, skin rosy with youth and health. As they gazed, a subtle change occurred. The curves lost their roundness, the flesh shriveled and became blue, the air grew rank with the smell of death.

Before their eyes the infinitely fair creature was falling away, disintegrating. The face became a skull as the flesh withered. The hair, bleached white, fell out in huge chunks; ribs and pelvis bones stood out in horrible distinction; the chamber reeked with the stench of a house. The bones fell away and crumbled, leaving only a little pile of dust from which a snake writhed away.

The wall resumed shape behind the gray veil, and a dazzling light enveloped them. From its center a voice sounded:

"The Eye of Minos witnesses and approves. Behind them another took up the ritual:

[p. 81]

"It is recorded. Turn and enter."

A narrow opening appeared to their vision. They crossed the threshold and a door clanged violently behind them. The room was filled with a tremulous blue radiance. At the farther end stood a statue of a woman wearing a helmet crested with the new moon. Hands were raised above its finely carved head, a twisted snake in each. About the statue's body was entwined the scaly coils of an enormous serpent, with its head resting upon the shoulder. Dull eyes gleamed like uncut emeralds. A sound of chanting came from beyond the walls:

"To thee, All-Shining One
  Goddess divine!
  Unto thy votaries
  Vouchsafe a sign.
  Let thy snakes twining
  Show us thou livest,
  Show us that Pasiphae
  Still mercy givest
  Shine on thy votaries
  Goddess benign."

"Serpents?" said Morse, a question in his voice.

"Pasiphae in her chthonian representation as 'Goddess of the Underworld,'" came the reply.

The light brightened with a brilliance that came in waves like the rays of the aurora borealis. In its shimmer the carven snakes seemed to quiver and the eyes of the great serpent grew brighter.

"Look out, Laidlaw!" cried Morse suddenly. "The brute's alive!"

The head of the ophidian raised from the shoulder of the statue and disappeared, to glide out from beneath the arm in a swift undulation, its jaws open, its tongue vibrating. A whisper of movement was heard as scales scraped over pavement.

The blood of the initiates ran cold as they waited for the reptile's attack. The obscene slithering was the only sound to be heard in the chamber, and they could only guess at its position.

"Ru!" snarled Morse.

Laidlaw kept silent. He had thought from the first

[p. 82]

glance that the snake was alive, but he believed it had been coiled about the statue in a sluggish state of coma. There was no question of its identity. More than thirty feet in length, it was the most powerful and ill-tempered of all the big serpents, the anaconda.

Suddenly Morse felt a coil encircle his lower leg in a lightning loop and mount to the thigh, compressing it until it seemed that the bone must break. He set his hands on the writhing, clammy body, trying to reach the head, but encountered only a continually thickening coil. He let out an exclamation and it was echoed by Laidlaw. The anaconda had attacked both Americans at the same time, using Morse as a support on which to base the leverage of its constriction.

The firm, unyielding body of the snake offered no hold. The coil about Morse's waist was as thick as his thigh, hard as a hempen cable, resistless, inexorable. His case was desperate, and both men were without weapons. A choking cry came from Laidlaw as Morse strove again to loosen the deadly twist that was slowly squeezing his leg into jelly, at the same time holding him powerless from moving.

"Laidlaw!" he cried.

The choking sound changed to a great sob of relief.

"Ah!" sounded Laidlaw, strength emanating from his voice. "I've got him! He had me about the waist. Now then!"

The long length of the snake whipped into wild action. Morse was thrown violently to the ground, and he felt Laidlaw close beside him. Between them, the infuriated reptile writhed and thrashed, dragging them over the hard stone floor. Laidlaw's breath came in great gasps as he exerted all his strength. Morse felt the coil about his thigh relax, and dragged at it until he freed himself. He tried to rise, but his leg refused to carry his weight. He half crawled toward Laidlaw.

"How can I help you?" he cried.

A grunt answered him. The snake's body lay across that of his friend, writhing more and more feebly. Laidlaw rolled over on top of it.

"I've choked the hellish thing," he gasped. "I think it's dead, but I don't dare let go of it."

A series of dull thuds came to their ears from outside

[p. 83]

the chamber. The chanting was taken up again:

"Hear us, O Shining One
  Grant our desire.
  Pasiphae! Pasiphae!
  Dread we thy ire
  One to the other
  O Bountiful Mother
  Accept the gifts we bring
  As at thy feet we cling,
  Pasiphae! Pasiphae!
  All-Shining One."

"I think we were intended to be the gifts," said Laidlaw. "That could well have been our funeral ode."

The flickering radiance was gradually returning, and Morse, now with his own weight on the lower half of the anaconda, saw Laidlaw battering its head, already a shapeless bloody stump, against the stone floor. One loose coil was about his middle, and Morse tugged until it came limply away. The two sat up and looked at each other as Laidlaw flung away the battered head, and Morse kicked at the convulsively twitching mass with his sound leg while he tried to rub the other back to sensibility.

"Cheerful little trick," he said angrily. "The snake of the goddess resenting the intrusion of strangers. That would have been the verdict, I suppose. Ru full of regrets and the snake full of us. Ugh! How did you manage to get hold of its neck?"

"Good luck! The devil has ruined my digestion forever, though."

Morse started to laugh, and Laidlaw found himself echoing him. In the reaction to their danger, they laughed half-hysterically until they could force themselves to their feet. The scientist rubbed his stomach. My  is jellied. How's your leg?"

Morse prodded it and winced. "It's sound, but it's sore as the devil."

"Well, if Ru planned this," said Laidlaw, "he did a good job. He had an alibi ready."

The mystic voice broke into the chamber:

"Advance, O neophytes!"

[p. 84]

A section of the wall slid downward and they passed through the opening into natural light, leaving the dying snake behind. At a junction of the low corridor, a gray and shapeless figure with a skull mask stood beckoning to them. Had this proved to be Ru, Morse felt that he could have done away with him then and there. But the voice of this sentinel quickly betrayed the presence as Kiron.

"The mystae to the right," he said, "your test has ended. Yours, epoptae, to the left," adding in a lower tone: "And courage, brother, even in darkness."

Laidlaw held back a moment, but Morse urged him on.

"If they plan to do us harm we can't escape it," he said, and took the left-hand passage. It ended almost before it had begun in another gloomy chamber that grew totally dark when the door closed behind his entrance. A voice like that of a ventriloquist, its source indeterminate, accosted him.

"Now comes the final choice, epoptae. Perhaps it lies with you. Who knows? Perhaps the gods direct. Yet it is on your action that the issue hangs. Gaze and ponder before your body answers to your settled will."

With a clang, a door slid back, and a gush of heat surged into the room. A fire glared in a passage beyond the door, pulsing with swift plays of molten orange and vermilion. The portal closed, and a second door revealed four leaping, maneless cat-creatures. Large as full-grown lions, they were skin-clad in ebony velvet, with topaz eyes, crimson mouths, and sabered ivory fangs. The beasts sprang at him and roared in frenzy as a barred gate rose up before them.

A third exit lifted, and a breath of night air, mingled with flower perfume and the clean smell of the lake, stole into his nostrils. The way lay open up a slight incline to a point where silver moonlight bathed an open causeway. As this was shut out, the voice came to him:

"Commend the prompting of your will unto the gods. As they judge you, so shall you go scatheless or to your doom."

The floor beneath him started to revolve slowly, not enough to disturb his balance, but acquiring speed enough to wipe out any lingering idea he might hold of

[p. 85]

the location of the respective doors.

Morse had entered the ordeal in the belief that the initiation was calculated to break the nerves of a superstitious man. The fight with the snake had disturbed his confidence; but his wrath, somewhat calmed by Kiron's friendly message, was still dominant enough to wish to put a swift end to what he still believed to be a combination of masquerade and optical illusion.

Without hesitation, he moved to the wall. One hand encountered a projection; the other, sliding over the vertical surface, passed from coolness to heat, slight but distinctly noticeable. He moved along the contour of the chamber until he felt a second knob, and bent, listening intently. Did he hear the faint sound of muffled growls? Morse wondered if the tests might hold real quality.

Swiftly he sought the third latch, found it, clutched and pulled. It resisted, but then slid readily before a side thrust. Before him rose the incline to the moonlit causeway, and pure air met him as he ran up the rise.

Gulping the sweet air into his lungs, he reached the causeway. Behind him the egress had closed, and the carven facade of the temple showed in gray and purple silence. Morse crossed the causeway to a balustrade and leaned upon it. The crescent moon faintly outlined the temple on the isle of Sele. Here was the realm of Leola, sister of Rana, and her Dianae.

A breeze blew off the lake, and suddenly Morse wondered if this beautiful Leola could hold any of the magical enchantment that her island did, there in the moonlight. Below him, a galley with oars supplementing a silvered sail reached silently for a wharf. He straightened from his thoughts, his arms folded on the wide baluster rail, then turned reluctantly to move away. A soft, thudding rush of feet sounded behind him. A cloth was thrown over his head, and the gathered folds pinned his arms to his sides.

Morse fought against the arms that sought to hold him and lift him from his feet. Coarse oaths came to his ears, sounding dimly through the muffling linen. Then, still struggling, he was lifted from his feet and borne away.

A voice rang out. It was high pitched and as sweetly

[p. 86]

clear as the sound of a silver trumpet. His captors paused and set him down.

"Who are you who dare to profane the bridal night of Pasiphae? Stand, before I turn you into stone!"

Morse heard the mumbling apologies of the men who had attacked him. The cloth was hastily removed, and he faced his rescuer.

It was a woman. She was slender and tall, clothed in garments that glittered, one arm raised . There was something strangely familiar about her face. It was clean-carven, imperious, set like a flower upon a neck that was as round and smooth as a column. Hair, piled high, glinted pale gold in the moonlight. Two eyes burned like azure stars.

The woman stood on the causeway. Behind her were a score of her fair sex, clad in white garments with ornaments that gleamed as they moved.

"Who are you?" she asked. "And why does this rabble molest you?"

The men who had seized him slunk away as Morse answered.

"I am one of the strangers to Atlantis." And as he spoke he knew that this was Leola. Her likeness to Rana could not be mistaken. But here was a refinement of feature, a majesty that the queen could not approach.

"I have no idea who these are who have attacked me," he continued, "though I might make a guess. The night has not been altogether fortunate for me--until now."

She surveyed him with a disdain that was tempered by a half-concealed curiosity.

"You are the one who conquered Aulus," she said, "and tonight you became an epoptae. Are you so enamored of Atlantis that you would forsake your own land?"

"I have never been enamored--until this moment," he answered truthfully, his eyes upon hers. Did her eyes waver?

"Your words are idle," she said.

"Yet I would thank you for my rescue."

"I would not willingly see even a man harmed," came the reply.

"Even a man!" Morse repeated the words out loud and smiled. "Still I thank you. And I thank the gods,

[p. 87]

[paragraph continues] Leola, that I am a man--and that you are a woman." Again her eyes seemed to waver.

"I do not read the meaning of your words," she said, and some of her assurance was gone.

"They are not hard to understand," he answered. "But the key lies not in the mind, but in the heart."

A knot of men was hurrying toward them, and a voice called his name. It was Laidlaw.

"Here are my friends," said Morse. "Again I thank you, Leola. We will meet again."

She made no answer save for an uptilt of that haughty head, and stepped backward, still facing him, until her women surrounded her. Only then did Morse turn to greet his friends.

"Le-o-la!" he said, just above his breath, testing the liquid syllables. "Le-o-la! The name fits her. It is like the murmur of moonlit ripples upon a silver beach."

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER X--THE ISLE OF SELE

Kiron came in upon the two Americans the next morning shortly after their plunge. Four automatic pistols and belts lay upon the low couch, and he picked up one of them.

"You expect trouble?" he asked seriously.

"We are going to start it, Kiron," answered Morse--"start it at the first hint that the other fellow is even thinking about it."

He buckled the belt about his waist. "After this, Laidlaw and I are going to feel a lot safer with these handy, and I'd appreciate it if you would send Maya and Xolo to us for some additional support. I've had enough of this sort of thing."

He exposed his leg, deep purple and yellow where the anaconda had crushed it.

"My middle's in the same shape," said Laidlaw. "Hereafter I've got a special grudge against snakes, including a certain two-legged one."

Kiron looked puzzled, and Morse related what had happened in the shrine of Pasiphae and the attempt to capture him afterward.

"There is no snake about the middle of the statue,"

[p. 88]

said the king. "It must have been placed there to destroy you."

He mused thoughtfully. "Ru might have said that the snake appeared to resist the profanation of the shrine by strangers. But since you passed the ordeal successfully, you have some measure of protection. I don't think you will be attacked on the street, though I will send your Indians to you.

"There are strange things working in Atlantis. Unseen politics, disaffection among the soldiers. With no outer enemies to fear, our military is recruited for police duty, though every noble keeps up the practice of arms. Ru and the priests control a force of Indians who have been well trained. It is plain they constitute a menace. There has been grumbling over taxes, which are light enough, and a disposition to break through old rules regarding nobility; almost all the elements of rebellion are slowly fermenting.

"But these are not your troubles," he added. "I should not burden you with them. I came to ask you to breakfast with me."

"My stomach is in sad condition," grinned Laidlaw, "but this is a good chance to test it. And one should never discuss politics on an empty stomach."

As they ate, Kiron outlined the festivities of the month of Pasiphae. It was the month of planting, the wedding of seeds with the earth--an occasion in which the priestesses of the moon goddess took a prominent part. Many gifts were thrown into the lake to propitiate the god that dwelt beneath the water, and these Kiron expected to be unusually valuable and numerous owing to the gradually increasing warmth of the water. The festivals would end with a joint service in worship of the double-ax deities.

"Not too many years ago the priests used to sacrifice maidens to Minos," said Kiron, "and youths to Pasiphae. But this custom is no longer practiced, for which I am thankful. Ru resents this loss and loses no opportunity to prophesy trouble in consequence. But the people are tired of innocent blood being spilled.

"By the way, Morse," asked Kiron, "did Leola speak to you?"

Morse felt his face grow hot. Even as Kiron had

[p. 89]

been speaking, his mind had been wandering to thoughts of this priestess. He had dreamt of her through the night, and he pondered a little that she had so filled his thoughts. At the same moment Kiron had questioned him, Morse was wondering if he had fallen in love.

"Yes," he answered, still embarrassed. "She did speak to me. As a matter of fact she referred to me as 'even a man,' as if she was issuing an order to her followers not to tread on worms."

"That's the way she feels about us," laughed Kiron. "I have a grudge against her myself. She won over the girl who was learning to return my love. Now she is Leola's first priestess."

"Who is she?" asked Laidlaw.

"Lycida," returned the king. "A beautiful creature, . and far more human than Leola. We'll see a good deal of both of them in the next day or so. If I were you,"--he looked warningly at Morse--"I wouldn't let Rana catch you looking in the direction of her younger sister. She's loved her a lot more since Leola took her stand against men and went off to Sele."

 

Rana welcomed Morse to the stand erected for the royal court upon the palace steps. She did not even acknowledge Laidlaw. Morse managed to conceal his limp, not caring to discuss its origin with her in front of Ru, who inquired after his health with a placid assurance of friendship. .

"After the festival," whispered Rana--she had a trick of making the most trivial utterances sound confidential--"I have planned an entertainment at my villa at the southern end of the lake. Cnidus, the poet, has written a drama--'The End of Eros,' he calls it--that is a satire on our affairs. And we are all going to take part in it. You and Kiron may go hunting the cave beast while we rehearse if you promise not to get hurt."

upon leaned toward him languorously, her breath upon his cheek, her bare arm, soft as satin, lightly touching the length of his. Morse felt unusually irritant. His leg throbbed, and he had much the same feeling that a bird has when its feet first stick to a lined twig. He answered shortly, and Rana drew back, half-offended.

"You are ill-tempered this morning," she said.

[p. 90]

[paragraph continues] "One would think you were your friend over there. Look at that sulky brute!"

Morse could not retain his smile as he glanced at Laidlaw, who was not in the least sulky.

"That's better," breathed Rana; "I had almost begun to hate you." She shot him a glance that held more than a hint of temper. Morse remembered his promise to Laidlaw and spurred himself to lighter talk, wondering in the meantime how he could escape the threatened visit to the villa.

The morning was magnificent. At the far end of the lake, twenty-five miles away, the crater was outlined in sharp relief. The water was a deep sapphire. Here and there boats carrying large numbers of spectators came on under sail and oar, straddling like giant water bugs. A ceremonial barge from Sele was midway to the shore, and the sweet voices of the priestesses came faintly to them. The causeway that bordered the lake was strewn ankle deep with flowers, and water bearers passed along refreshing them so that they might render their full fragrance as they were crushed beneath the feet of the procession.

A blare of trumpets came from the temple steps, and a company of priests in gleaming golden robes made their way to the landing to greet the priestesses of Pasiphae. Ru, after making his courtesies, had disappeared from the royal box.

The route was lined with spectators of all ages, and shifting colors from their bright-hued garments gave the effect of a flower garden in a breeze. Behind the palace the volcano cast its morning shadow across that quarter of Atlantis, and a fume of vapor issued from its snow cap in irregular puffs.

Silence fell as the spectators craned their necks. A long fanfare of trumpets ended, and the sound of chanting became more and more pronounced. The procession had started.

First to appear were a company of children, some of whom sang in shrill, sweet voices. Others played a simple tune upon a double pipe. Older youths and maidens followed, leading with garlands a snow-white bull with gilded horns and hoofs, a wreath about its massive neck--all that remained of the grisly minotaur worship

[p. 91]

once found in ancient Crete.

The priest's guard was headed by a giant Indian, of that strange race who were long servitors to the Atlanteans. Clad in jaguar skins, a crested helmet, and with a chain of gold upon his great chest, he glanced insolently about him. Forewarned by Kiron's talk at breakfast, Morse detected an arrogance, a swagger, dominating the entire bodyguard, and he believed that rebellion was contained here only by the prospect of license to come.

Ru rode in their center in an open litter, his head shaded by a heavily fringed canopy held by four slaves. Behind him marched a column of priests, carrying for a standard the emblem of the double ax. More of the Indian bodyguard appeared, with sullen jaguars held in check by short bronze chains. The front ranks of the spectators shrank back until a body of gladiators paraded before them. Among them was Aulus, who cast a malevolent glare at Morse as he passed.

Athletes of both sexes walked with the bulls of the arena. A break in the procession was closed by maidens strewing white-petaled, fresh flowers, and others carrying wicker cages from which they released white doves, emblems of Pasiphae. The Americans had an unpleasant reminder as a dozen girls marched by with serpents twining about their arms and throats and white bodies. But these snakes were boars, none over ten feet in length, and mild-dispositioned pets of the temple.

A hundred priestesses, dark hair bound with fillets of silver to uphold a crescent-moon disk, sleeveless garments shot with the same metal, swung by disdainfully, chanting as they went. Morse barely noticed them, waiting for the approach of the high priestess. He sat erect, his face alight, his eagerness unconcealed. Rana leaned back, watching him intently, as if suddenly suspicious of his interest. Kiron, too, was now alert, shaken from the usual  pose which he wore in public.

She came at last, abreast with two other litters of ivory on which her lieutenants reclined. Above them were silken awnings of azure, studded with silver stars. A single priestess dared a swift, shy glance at the court, then turned away as Kiron stirred in his seat.

[p. 92]

Leola lay indifferent to the crowd, her face as serene as the full moon, the exquisite outline of her form revealed by her clinging drapery. One bare, rounded arm lay so that the taper fingers drooped over the edge of the litter, one arched, silver-sandaled foot peeping from the brocaded hem of her robe.

There was confusion among the gladiators. Two of the bulls were out of control, and the procession halted. Irresistibly attracted, Morse gazed at Leola, his heart in his eyes. Slowly under his gaze the high priestess turned her head toward him as golden poppies turn toward the sun. The white lids--he could trace the tiny blue veins upon them--lifted, and her dark eyes looked into his. An invisible bridge was formed. Morse felt his spirit stealing out upon it, and knew that hers had come to meet it. A rosy blush transfused her face, the blush spreading to her neck and flooding the ivory of her army to the fingertips, like Pygmalion's marble Galatea slowly coming to life under the sculptor's compelling love.

Trumpets sounded and the procession resumed its march. Leola's litter passed. The connection established by their glances snapped as an electric current dies with the turn of a switch, and Morse gave an involuntary sigh that released the breath he had been holding in.

Beside him, he became suddenly conscious of Rana's presence; he turned. The queen's face was sphinxlike, and the spots of rouge she affected stood out against her pallor like crimson bruises. Her eyes were as hard and glittering as those of the anaconda at the shrine.

"So," she spoke slowly, picking her words, "you and. my sister seem attracted by each other! It is strange, indeed, for she has disavowed men both by preference and by oath. She may change one, but do not tempt her to break the other. It would mean death for both of you--unless--"

She stopped speaking, her hands shaking like a wintry leaf, her voice trembling! "You have seen her before?" she almost hissed.

Morse answered her quietly, wondering at his own calmness.

"She rescued me last night when some of your

[p. 93]

[paragraph continues]  cutthroats set upon me. I suspect I have her to thank for my life."

"Ah!" Rana relaxed, and some of the cruelty left her eyes, though suspicion still lurked in their depths. "Who were these men?"

"They came at me swiftly," he replied, "and later they slunk quietly into the shadows. They were Indians, but not slaves. They wore swords."

Rana's brows met, and she compressed her lips. "They shall be punished," she said aloud; and to herself: "And you, my sister, shall be watched."

The court rose after the procession had passed, making their way, first by litter and then by boats, to a great float roofed with silken curtains. Here they feasted and watched the ceremony of propitiation. Ru and his priests descended the water stairs of the temple, and as the men chanted, cast objects into the water that glittered as they whirled and shot out colored sparks from the gems that incrusted them. Then they ranged themselves on either side, as Leola and her attendants repeated the action. The populace lined the balustrade, waiting for a signal for their share in the sacrifice.

It came with a blast of trumpets, and a shower of ornaments rained into the lake. The trumpets were repeated, and at each blast gold and gems broke the water's surface. Kiron tossed in a miniature replica of the double ax, but Morse noticed that the nobles cast their share not overliberally.

"It is all a great waste," said Rana, as she slipped a magnificent bracelet from her wrist. Still, it satisfies the people and keeps the artificers busy. You, too, must sacrifice, now that you are a noble of Atlantis."

"I have nothing valuable but what you have given me," said Morse. He spoke as a matter of fact, but Rana smiled and laid her hand upon his arm with a lingering pressure.

"That was a courtier's speech," she said. "Give me that fibula."

He took the golden ornament that was strangely like an elaborate safety pin from his mantle and handed it to her. She plucked a silver cord from the fringe of her rainbow-plaided girdle and tied the pin to her bracelet, then turned and tossed the two offerings into the air

[p. 94]

together. The knot slipped, and the offerings fell apart before they reached the water. There was an involuntary silence among the nobles, and Kiron smiled. Rana shot him a murderous look, her face distorted like that of Medusa.

"Poseidon refuses your combination, cousin," mocked Kiron. "The omens are not favorable."

"I hate you!" she hissed. Kiron only laughed, and Rana bent an inscrutable look upon Morse. There was tragedy here, and apprehension, and a purpose that he could not quite understand.

"The ceremonial is over," she said abruptly. "It is useless to wait longer. Let us return to the palace."

She rose petulantly, summoning the boats, but she did not ask him to join her for the return. With open relief, Morse took a seat beside Laidlaw.

The conclusion of the ritual was a signal for the crowd to depart. This was done in a confusion of oars and sails that produced much laughter and shouting. Somehow, a lane was cleared for the ceremonial barge of the high priestess of Pasiphae, a cumbersome, top-heavy craft with a shrine built high upon its stern. It was towed by ropes from two galleys, rowed by lesser priestesses and neophytes.

A sudden wind blew from the cliffs and sent the cluster of boats into a hopeless entanglement. Laughter was replaced by cries of consternation. Morse saw that the royal float had been torn from its moorings, and, impelled by the strong wind upon its awnings and curtains, it bore down on the overladen boats.

The float was high out of water, and heavily built; it was a formidable engine of destruction as it drove before the fury of this sudden gale. Women and children screamed, and men fought hard to clear their boats from its path. It smashed into an open shallop, driving the craft beneath the water as its occupants were dragged aboard a larger vessel. A second float was destroyed, and the float now threatened the barge of the priestesses.

The oarswomen towing the barge faltered in their stroke, undecided as to a course of action. Morse, recognizing the frail construction of the barge, urged his rowers forward. In the face of imminent danger,

[p. 95]

[paragraph continues] Leola remained calm, but below her women huddled together in fear. The heavy float crashed into the stern of the barge, and the shrine, insecurely attached, first rocked and then toppled into the water amid the shrieks of the onlookers.

Leola moved suddenly as the platform tottered, springing to clear herself. As she reached the water, weighted down as she was by her heavy, silvered robes and ritual ornaments, she fought to swim away from the wreck, but the supports of the silken awning struck her and she sank below the surface.

A score of boats raced to the rescue of the high priestess, and the one which carried Morse and Laidlaw was as close as any. Morse flung off his outer garment and dived into the water. An oar struck him a glancing blow on the side of his head as he leaped, but it did not deter him. He surfaced, wiped the mingled blood and water from his eyes, and sought his direction.

The blue-and-silver awning floated thirty feet away, and there beyond it he made out a gleam of silver tissue And the clutching fingers of a hand that barely showed above the surface; then disappeared. Morse pushed himself through the water with frantic strokes, and, nearing the point where he had glimpsed the hand, he dove. Below him he saw a confused mass of garments outspread in the current, and streaming from them a mass of golden hair. He reached for the hair, seized it finally, and struggled upward. His lungs seemed about to burst before he broke the surface into the world of bright sunlight. For half a minute there was silence about him, and then a roar of excited cheers.

Morse turned on his back, paddling with his legs and one hand, letting go of the girl's hair and managing to throw his free arm about her shoulders. Leola's body, heavy with the soaked robes, dragged down, but her head was securely on his shoulder. Her face, pale as the petals of a water lily, dark eyes closed, lay turned toward his chest.

Laidlaw suddenly loomed above the couple, anchored squarely in the stern of the boat. A moment later, his powerful arms gathered in the limp form of Leola, and Morse was pulled over the side by two oarsmen.

"Row to the float!" Morse ordered gaspingly, as he

[p. 96]

fought for his breath. The sudden gale was over, and the big platform that had caused the damage had been secured. Now it swung on its broken cable, held by men in boats who had come up too late for the rescue.

Morse stepped onto the float and took Leola from Laidlaw's arms, laying her gently on the rugs and cushions that had been provided for the royal party. He knelt over her. There were no visible bruises. The support had struck the mass of her hair, tearing it from its combs and fastenings, but the thick pad of it had caused the blow to stun and not injure her. And her insensibility had prevented her from swallowing a dangerous amount of water.

As Morse knelt down, the blood from his scalp wound dropped upon her robe. He gently raised the ivory arms above her head and lowered them again to promote respiration. After a dozen motions, he was rewarded by a quiver of her eyelids and the slow, perceptible heave of her breast. Someone handed him a crystal flask, and he dropped a little of the pungent liquid between her slightly parted lips that disclosed the even, pearly teeth. Her eyes opened and gazed into his, blankly at first, before the light suddenly shone in them. She sighed.

Morse thought he distinguished some syllables and bent lower. He was not mistaken. It was his name that she murmured for a second time--not the harsh surname--but his first name, softened by the Greek tongue to "Stan-na-li." Then her eyes closed as he whispered her name in return. A faint tinge of rose appeared in her cheeks.

A group of protesting priestesses surrounded them. Two of them knelt, and Morse remembered one as the girl who had glanced up at Kiron from her litter. She pillowed Leola's head upon her lap and attempted to make her comfortable. Morse was surprised at the angry voices and glances that he drew, and allowed Laidlaw to draw him to one side where Kiron spoke to him.

"Come into my boat, both of you. You have done all you can; at least, all they'll let you do."

The barge had sunk. The priestesses had been taken in by the boats that had towed them, and they were now

[p. 97]

on the float seeking to shield their high priestess from the gaze of men.

"They seem to be angry that you saved her life," said Laidlaw, helping Morse bind a strip of linen about his head.

Kiron chuckled.

"They are," he said. "You have profaned the person of Pasiphae's representative. They will have- to hold votive ceremonies for a month to wipe out the ignominy of the touch of a man. I wish I'd had your chance, though," he added ruefully.

"With Leola?" asked Laidlaw.

"Not with Leola," admitted the king. And he went on: "Rana looks furious. I watched her during the rescue and I think she sensed your anxiety. If I were you, I'd make that wound of yours an excuse for staying away from the banquet tonight. Otherwise the praise that you are bound to receive from those who do not share the priestesses' view of profanation is going to provoke Rana into a display of temper. You're not hurt are you?"

"Nothing but a scrape," replied Morse. "Sorry if I called down the wrath of Pasiphae."

But he did not look very unhappy as he said it, and Kiron rallied him.

"Leola didn't raise any objection when she revived," he said with a smile.

Morse grinned in reply. "I'll send my excuses to Rana. Laidlaw, will you take them?"

Laidlaw grunted. "You need a nurse," he said.

 

Later, an hour after Laidlaw had departed for the banquet, Morse rose suddenly from the lounge on which he had been lying. Strange thoughts had been running through his mind--thoughts of Leola. Since their meeting, his nature seemed to have changed, developed into a condition that left him feverish and uncertain. He had never been in love; he avoided it; he had exposed himself little to its conditions. Occasionally, when he was in New York after wanderings in little-known lands, he would find it necessary to attend some elaborate function of relatives or family friends. But here he would remain the silent, almost unseen

[p. 98]

guest, lurking in some out-of-the-way corner and dreaming of his next exploration--much to the chagrin of many of the women whose main objective seemed to be "seeing Stanley married and securely tied down."

Morse knew that he was not cut out for  a life, that he was out of place in the society that bred him. But in Le-ol-a, priestess of Pasiphae, there was much to lure him. Le-ol-a, mentally alert, throwing out a challenge to men that, failing her standard, she would have none of; blessed with a beauty that was flawlessly alien to the women he knew; possessing an element of the very mystery that drew him irresistibly, time and again, to the unexplored and unknown. Leola...

From the first moment of meeting he had sensed the magic, the electricity between them. Now he knew what he had not seen before, hidden as it had been by this new feeling: that Leola must become his mate ... jungle or civilization, it made no difference. And he knew, too, that he had pierced the armor of her reserve. Her eyes, the flush on her cheeks, the murmur of his name upon her lips; they told him.

But Morse did not blind himself. Rana was jealous. Leola was a priestess with vows that excluded men from her life. Love for him would expose her to a scorn--perhaps more--from the priestesses of Sele, and perhaps the virulence of Ru. Yet, if she loved him? His soul kindled at the thought. He loved her. She was the mystery that he had sought unknowingly over all the world. He would win her.

And Kiron would aid him. The king, beneath his practiced indifference, was a man, and he hid a passion for another priestess of that woman's isle. They would flee Atlantis, its intrigues and threat of revolution.

Morse's thoughts could not wait. Before him was a night of freedom. Unseen, he could slip across to the isle of Sele, forbidden though it was to men, and confront Leola in the very shrine of Pasiphae, if that were necessary.

He dressed himself with scrupulous care and lingered before the metal mirror in a fashion that would have been laughable to the Morse of a day before.

[p. 99]

[paragraph continues] It had been only twenty-four hours since he had first seen her. Since then she had looked at him with eyes that hinted at understanding and spoken with lips that had betrayed her.

He called Maya and Xolo and cautioned them to tell any inquirers that he was asleep--that he could not be disturbed. These bronzed watchmen could be relied upon in case a message came from Rana. Then he slipped away toward the water stairs.

The night was brilliant, the deserted causeway illuminated by moon and stars. The nobles were at the palace fete; the populace, tired with the day's excitement, in their homes.

Kiron had given him the key to a bronze lock that chained a light boat, and Morse stepped into it. He took up the strange, square-bladed oars and rowed the shallop swiftly from the shore, sending wavelets back along the calm surface. As the boat left the landing, two forms, clad in the tawny kilts of the priest's guard, rose from the shadow and slipped away in the direction of the palace.

Morse turned his head and saw the isle of Sele, its temple columns white beneath the moon. A bluish ray, made more conspicuous by the smoke that curled in the spreading shaft of light, lifted from behind the pillars. The lake was destitute of other craft, and an almost invisible mist hung over it in patches. Morse ran his hand through the water and was startled at the temperature. It had been warm when he rescued Leola, but now it seemed to be almost the temperature of blood.

As he approached the island, the sound of singing came to his ears. It was the chant of women's voices in a simple, pleasing harmony carried to him on the breeze. He faced the city, gray against the background of trees and cliff. The snowy cone of the volcano appeared silver, and from it came great puffs of cloud, Purple-bodied, laced at the edges by the moonlight. Morse noticed that they were on the increase from the morning.

Soon he was in the shadow of the isle. The water was deep close up to the steep and rocky shore which was thickly set with tall trees and a profusion of palms

[p. 100]

and semi-tropical undergrowth. Flowers grew everywhere--on the ground--amid the shrubbery, in the treetops, and between them the vivid blossoms of orchids swung free, hanging from branches or trailing along the lianas.

Morse avoided the main landing, and paddled along easily, looking for a place to step ashore. The chanting came faintly through the trees, and above them the blue, vaporous ray showed ominously. He was aware of the danger of being discovered on the sacred island, and remembered the anger of the priestesses after his rescue of Leola. These women were trained in the use of arms, Kiron had said, and boasted of their ability to equal man in all athletic pursuits. Morse was inclined to believe in their capability. Yet, he reflected, they had screamed and shown signs of indecision in their alarm at the float. Perhaps they were unable to banish all feminine attributes.

A long, narrow cove appeared, and he headed into it silently. At its extreme the surface was covered with enormous circular leaves, the size of a table-top, among which floated huge, pink water lilies. Morse stepped ashore to a velvety turf, secured the boat, and moved through a wood in the direction of the singing. The trees were thick, and it took him a long time to make his way through the dense underbrush in the extreme darkness. Finally he broke through, and only by gripping some stout creepers did he hold himself back from a fall that would have meant instant discovery.

Morse had reached the rim of a grassy bowl that sloped before him in a sharp incline toward an oval of level ground at its center. The grass in the bowl was starred with gorgeous, night-blooming flowers. At one end of the oval twelve exquisitely carved columns were set in a circle. They were unroofed and unconnected and fashioned so skillfully and elaborately that they seemed to be shafts of magical growth, rather than pillars of solid stone. In the center of their circle stood an altar upon which burned the flame that formed the blue ray. Two priestesses stood beside it, one pouring oil occasionally into the reservoir that fed the flame, while the other from time to time cast into it a powder that produced the color and gave out a resinous

[p. 101]

pungent perfume.

In the open space before the shrine, a figure, clad only in a diaphanous robe, postured within a group of priestesses who lay motionless on the ground, their vestments covering them in filmy folds. Surrounding them in double ranks were the singers, waving long branches of palm in rhythm to their chant. The sound of strings and notes of piping arose from somewhere in their midst.

Brilliant moonlight illumined the scene almost as vividly as by day, yet invested it with a mystery that caused it to seem unreal, the vision of a dream.

Crouched in the thicket, his gaze fixed on the center figure whose limbs moved with exquisite grace, Morse listened to the words of the song:

"Mother of Life and Love,
  Thou the All Giving
  Shine on us from above
  Our faults forgiving.
  Thou who divinest
  All our desires;
  Note, as thou shinest,
  Thy altar fires.
  Virgin and cold as we,
  In emulation
  Strive we to copy thee
  With adoration.
  Thy beams, descending,
  Enter our hearts;
  Pour prayers ascending
  Mount on our darts.
  Hear us, O Pasiphae
  Being divine!
  Smile on us, Pasiphae
  Shine, goddess, shine!"

The chant ended, and the prostrate votaries arose. With arms aloft, they wove in and out the measures of a stately dance about their high priestess who stood in an attitude of appeal. Her arms were extended to the moon, its beams full upon her face, subduing the pale gold of her hair to frosted silver. Faster and faster

[p. 102]

moved the dancers, their garments streaming with the pace until they formed a continuous, swiftly moving chain of shimmering silk, lowering their arms to shoulder level and linking fingers, while their naked feet seemed hardly to touch the ground.

The motion was reversed, the steps slackened, and the chain broke into separate links, each with a silent, motionless figure of supplication. The palm branches were raised moonward. The altar attendants left their fire and advanced toward Leola. From one of them she took a bow, and from the other four arrows. Impaled upon the latter, close to the points, were strips of papyrus. Leola bent the bow, and the first shaft sped upward, glittering as it curved in a graceful arc to fall beyond the rim of the basin among the trees.

The high priestess turned as she loosed one of the prayer-bearing messengers to each quarter of the heavens. The last arrow dropped within a few feet of Morse, its head buried in the turf. He reached out cautiously, secured it, and placed it within the folds of his chiton.

The altar fire was dying down. The singers and musicians had formed ranks and marched toward a path that led through the forest to their temple. The dancers followed. Only Leola remained.

When the oval was deserted, she moved slowly toward the shrine and knelt beside the altar. The flame fluttered and vanished. The high priestess regained her feet, passed her hands across her brows, then raised them toward the moon. Morse caught the sound of a faint sigh. The procession had disappeared. The words of the chant to which they marched were scarcely audible:

"Smile on us, Pasiphae!
  Shine, goddess, shine!"

He cupped his hands and called softly but distinctly. "Le-ol-a!"

The high priestess started, set a swift hand to her heart, and looked toward him as he repeated her name. He stepped free of the thicket and advanced down the slope toward the shrine. She came toward him, her

[p. 103]

arms motioning him away.

"Go back!" she cried. "You must not be seen-here. It means death. Go back!"

Morse's heart gave a sudden leap. She did not want him discovered. She wanted to shield him, high priestess though she was.

"I will not go back unless you come with me," he said simply.

"With you--where?" she answered, a little wildly.

"To the edge of the forest, where your last arrow fell at my feet."

"Where my last arrow fell?" she repeated slowly, a strange look of awe upon her face.

"Yes," he insisted. "Come!"

He held out his hand, and she slipped her cool fingers into it unresistingly. Instantly he thrilled to her touch, and knew that she shared the emotion.

At the fringe of the thicket she paused and attempted to withdraw her hand.

"I must not, I will not!" she cried. "What magic have you wrought on me, O stranger?"

"Not a stranger, but 'Stan-na-li,'" he said. The moonlight could not efface the rosy color that stole into her face. "As for the magic, it was not I who used it; it was you, Leola."

"I?"

"You. For never until now did I know for what I have been seeking. As you have lived without need of man, Leola, so did I live without need of woman--until I met you. Then, as the seed breaks through the dark earth and bears a blossom, my spirit flowered. But the flower blooms only for you."

"You must not talk to me this way," she said. "I spoke to you--I came this far with you only to repay the life you saved this afternoon."

"Only for that, Leola? Swear to me that it was for that reason alone, and I will believe you and go." He forced her to meet his gaze.

"You are not kind," she murmured.

"Listen," said Morse. "I heard the words of the chant to Pasiphae."

She drew back with a gleam of anger in her eyes. "You dared--"

[p. 104]

"I dared," he answered quietly. "And you know why I dared, Leola. It was not to witness forbidden rites. But I heard the last of the singing. You asked the moon goddess to receive the prayers impaled upon your darts. You believe that she can answer them?"

"Surely."

He took the arrow from his robe and read the linear script inscribed upon the papyrus:

"Grant, O Pasiphae, the dearest wish of our hearts."

"It fell at my feet," he said. "Your hand guided its upward flight, but surely the goddess directed its descent. Am I not the answer?"

He had dared a great deal, and resentment flamed in her glance. Then it softened.

"I do not know why I stay here talking with you," she said. "My vows--"

The moonlight faded. Clouds formed from the vapors of the volcano were being driven across the face of the planet by a breeze which was beginning to stir the tree tops in back of them.

"Look!" said Morse. "Pasiphae is mighty, but Eros conquers her and veils her face. Love has come to both of us, Leola. It spoke from our eyes as they met when the procession halted. Was it for nothing that you came ashore last night as I was being captured, for nothing that I found you in the waters of the lake and rescued you? It was the will of the gods, Leola. Fate mocks at vows, except the ones she prompts; and Fate vowed you and I to each other long ago when she willed that we should meet, though half the world divided us."

A heavy mass of vapor completely shrouded the moon and chased the watchful shadows. Morse placed his arms about her and drew her to him. For a moment she resisted, then suddenly accepted the embrace. Her face was lifted slowly to his, as if fighting against surrender. He set his palm against the masses of her hair and bent his lips to her. They were tremulous, but warm with life, and met his in a kiss that joined them irrevocably.

Men broke through the undergrowth, seized Morse from behind, and tore Leola from his arms. Her hair

[p. 105]

caught upon a trailing vine and showered down in a rain of pale gold as the moon's disk cleared. Morse struggled in silence as more men flung themselves upon him, but Leola shook off the lighter grasp of the two that held her.

"How dare you!" she gasped. "How dare you! One cry and my followers will come and slay you for your profanation!"

A man took a step from the band. He was bearded and dressed in priestly vestments. Morse recognized him as one of Ru's advisers.

"You have no followers, Leola," he said sternly. "It is you who have profaned your own shrine. Do you think the priestesses of Pasiphae will obey one who has forsworn her vows and brought the worship of the goddess into disrepute?"

Leola was silenced. Rude hands were clapped across Morse's mouth before he could prevent it. The next moment he was trussed and helpless, and being carried to the cove where he had landed. Beside his shallop was a galley manned by slaves. He was tossed into its stern like a bundle, and the next moment Leola, also bound and gagged, was laid beside him.

Morse was sick at the thought of what he had brought upon the woman he loved, and he twisted until the hide strips sank into his flesh. His arm rested against Leola's, and her fingers interlaced themselves in his with a pressure that was forgiveness perhaps, perhaps love.

The galley was poled out of the cove, and under lusty strokes raced toward the mainland. As Morse lay there, the wind lifted a fragrant tress of Leola's hair, and it fell across his face like a caress. He touched it with his lips.

The boat glided against the landing, and the prisoners were lifted out silently and carried up the water stairs. Morse saw the cone of the volcano lifting its peak against the stars, its hoary crest gleaming frostily. The puffs of vapor had turned into an uninterrupted flow of smoke that funneled out to a dense mass, part of which streamed leeward like a dusty, pointing finger. The lower part of the cloud was tinged with a lurid, pulsating glow.

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 106]

  

CHAPTER XI--THE JUDGMENT OF RU

The palace festival hall was a blaze of light as the prisoners were ushered in. Its tables were arranged in a wide U, and the diners had apparently rearranged their places in expectation of something to come. Ru sat by the side of Rana, and back of them were ranged the priests of Minos. The guard was heavily disposed inside the door.

Morse looked around, first for Kiron and then for Laidlaw, but both men were absent.

Morse and Leola had been placed upon their feet outside the entrance, their lower bonds loosened in order that they might walk, and then forced into the dining hall by their captors. Rana regarded them with the eyes of a basilisk, and Ru with more complacency but none the less assurance.

"So, my sister," said Rana fiercely, "it seems that you are more human than we thought. You--the woman who styled the other sex stupid--have succumbed to the seduction of a stranger."

Leola surveyed the queen calmly, as if she had not spoken, and Ru took up the denunciation.

"Priestess of Pasiphae, you are forsworn," he said, and the nobles about the tables craned their necks to listen. "The fire mountain shows the anger of the gods. The lake itself is an emblem of their growing wrath. We have consulted the oracles with anxious questionings, and they have answered."

In the silence that fell upon the hall as Ru paused, the heavy breathing of the audience betrayed their fear and superstition. Ru looked at them with the air of an animal trainer who had been doubtful whether his performers had forgotten their tricks, but now he knew that they were held well in hand.

"The oracle has said: 'From fire and water was Atlantis born. When fire and water mingle, then the beginning shall be the end. Watch carefully, lest destruction come from without. Desert not the gods, lest in time of peril they in turn desert you.'

"'When fire and water mingle!' The lake will soon begin to boil unless the danger can be averted. Vapor hangs over it tonight--vapor born of the mingling of

[p. 107]

the elements. 'Watch carefully, lest destruction come from without.' Within our midst, in the very center of our age-old worship of the eternal gods--Leola has been unfaithful to her vows, a priestess who has flouted the gods and made a mockery of them before their own altars!"

A muttering broke out along the line of tables. Rana alone said nothing, but she bent a venomous gaze upon her sister who looked through her as if she had not been present.

"From the outside have come strangers with talk of peoples who are so much more powerful than Atlantis. If they are so great and wise, why do they come to spy upon us? Why are they not content to remain in their own land as we are in Atlantis? Yet, we would have treated them courteously, but they have conspired with this recreant priestess to pollute our sacred shrines. Their penalty must be death!"

The mutterings grew louder, but under Ru's piercing stare no one dared show signs of dissent.

"And simple death cannot atone for, nor avert, the gathering displeasure of the gods. Sacrifice alone will appease them!"

A slight tremor rocked the building, and the lamps swung on the chains that supported them. Ru's eyes blazed with triumph.

"See!" he cried. "The gods answer and accept!"

The mutterings changed to audible exclamations of awe and wonder. Into the faces of the nobles, men and women alike, crept the look that they had worn in the amphitheater. Their eyes hardened and their mouths grew cruel. There had been no human sacrifices in Atlantis for some time; it would be a rare spectacle.

"The false priestess shall stand upon the Spot of Sacrifice while Re touches with his shining finger the rays of his emblem," said Ru. "As for the stranger, let him learn the embrace of the Bull of Minos."

Morse, wondering what horrors might lie in the fate decreed for Leola, dimly sensed what his own would be. He knew the ancient torture of the Minoans described in the frescoes of Cnossus, where strangers were "presented" to the bull, shut up within the belly of a brazen image made red-hot to receive them. Doomed

[p. 108]

and without hope as he believed them, strangely, death seemed far away, unfathomable. His mind was misty, and idly, without feeling, he wondered what they would do to Laidlaw, and if the scientist had already been condemned.

Dimly he heard the thrill, almost the pleasure, in the tones of the nobles as they repeated: "The Bull of Minos!"

He turned to Leola, and her eyes held an open avowal of love before they saddened to farewell.

"Forgive me," he said hoarsely. The mist was clearing from his mind as the hands of the guards took hold of him.

"There is nothing to forgive," Leola answered quietly. "You have given me love, and that is more than life!"

"Silence, you wanton!" It was the shrill voice of Rana, cracking in its malignity and unsuppressed anger. The queen had risen, and her face was convulsed with a deadly hatred. Ru laid a restraining hand upon her arm.

Leola smiled. "Yours is a hollow victory, my sister. I win far more than I lose, and you lose what you could never have won."

Rana snatched a sharp-cutting dagger from the table and threw it with all her strength and fury. Hate thwarted her aim, and the blade sank into the shoulder of a guard who stood close by.

Ru motioned the captives away.

There was a sudden rush of sandaled feet, and the hall was filled with the indignant priestesses of Pasiphae. Their heads were topped with crested helmets, their waists girdled with swords. Some carried long shields that covered their bodies and bore spears, while the remainder were armed with bows and arrows. They surrounded Leola, the feathered shafts threatening Rana and Ru. The guards fell back sullenly; the determination of these women warriors was not to be held lightly.

One of the two priestesses who had been carried abreast of Leola in the afternoon procession--it was not the girl who had glanced at Kiron--advanced halfway the length of the tables and addressed Ru.

[p. 109]

"By what right," she demanded, in a tone of arrogance and anger, "do your guards seize the person of our high priestess upon the isle of Sele, within the holy borders of the shrine?"

Ru answered evenly:

"The priests of Minos have always held the right of entry upon Sele. But wait--" he cried, as the priestess started to bring up her spear. "Hear me out. We followed in the footsteps of this stranger, believing that he intended to violate the sacred precincts of the isle to keep a tryst with Leola."

There was a movement of disbelief, of repulsion, among the priestesses, and their gaze fastened on Leola's face.

"We found her," continued Ru, "in his embrace. She cannot deny it. Ask her," he cried, as the priestesses protested in indignation.

The spokeswoman turned to Leola, half-fearfully. The unasked question was in her silent glance.

"It is true," the high priestess admitted calmly.

As swiftly as waves retreat from a sloping beach, the priestesses of Pasiphae drew back from Leola as a thing abhorred, whose touch would befoul them. Only one remained close to her; it was the one whom Kiron had called Lycida. She hesitated for a moment as the others moved away sullenly. Then she stepped to Leola's side, lifting her head fearlessly, and checked the high priestess before she could speak.

"Then I, too," she said, looking scornfully at her fellows, "abjure my vows. My respect for her is stronger than my devotion to Pasiphae. The vows of friendship to flesh and blood are stronger than those to a goddess in the souls of whose followers humanity is as lifeless as the flame that died last night upon the altar of the shrine."

Her voice rang out fearlessly, and her dark eyes flashed.

"So be it," said Ru grimly. "You have cast your lot with flesh and blood, and your fate is entwined with the fate of Leola. The gods will appreciate another offering. Tomorrow, at dawn, you may have cause for regret when you face an offended Pasiphae at the entrance of the underworld."

[p. 110]

Lycida shivered, but stood as straight as an arrow.

"We will give them into your keeping," continued Ru to the priestesses. "We will await you in the Hall of Sacrifice an hour before sunrise."

It was a shrewd move that allied the irate votaries of Pasiphae with him in the judgment that he had declared. He had no wish to offend them at the present. There was time enough for that later on.

The first priestess, whose eyes already held a look of satisfied ambition, hesitated for only a moment. At a sign from her, the armed priestesses closed in about Leola and her companion and led them from the hall.

The sound of their departure had barely died away when there was a noise of confusion in the antechamber. The clang of a shield, the quick clatter of weapons, and the imperious voice of Kiron ordered the guards to stand aside.

A little phalanx of nobles entered, swords in hand. They were armored in helmets, breastplates, and greaves, and their sword arms were protected from wrist to elbow by plates of bronze. With them were the personal attendants of the young king, the Indians Maya and Xolo who flanked Laidlaw, and Kiron himself. The scientist and the two Indians held rifles. Thrusting the guards aside, they surrounded Morse, their shields welded into an unbreakable barrier.

"This time, Ru, you have usurped your prerogatives," said Kiron. "This man and this"--he indicated Morse and Laidlaw--"can hardly be called strangers. On the contrary, they are citizens and nobles of Atlantis, members of the Brotherhood of Kol, epoptae and mystae of the ritual over which you presided. They can be judged only by the will of the people."

Ru's face grew scarlet, and the veins on his forehead stood out as if he had been lashed.

"This we will not countenance!" he shrieked. "Our shrines have been profaned. Their lives are forfeit. Be careful that you do not involve yourself!"

He struck a gong that hung upon a tripod close by him. Above its sound broke a heavy detonation, and again the palace shook to its foundations.

"Listen to the voice of Minos," cried Ru. "Atlantis

[p. 111]

is shaken. We lie in the hollow of his palm. Beware or he will close it and crush us."

In answer to the sound of the gong, a company of guards appeared behind Ru to strengthen his position. Consternation reigned among the feasters. The violence of the tremor and the ferocity of Ru's speech frightened them, and the priest was quick to recognize this. The terror of the moment had invested him with all the ancient powers of his office.

"Seize them!" he cried, and the guards rushed at the little force who stood firm to the attack, outnumbered though they were. A clash of bronze upon bronze sounded as Kiron and his men fiercely resisted the crush of men who sought to cut them down by shear weight of numbers.

Morse and Laidlaw, joined by Maya and Xolo, forced their way into the front ranks, and opened fire, the first use of firearms that the Atlanteans had ever witnessed. The noise of the rifles and automatics was almost lost in the fierce combat, but Ru's guards saw the spitting fire and shrank back before the stream of lead that smashed through flesh and bone and left a dozen of their number on the floor.

Morse caught a glimpse of the head and shoulders of Ru behind the mass of guards, and he fired without taking aim. The bullet smashed against the golden headpiece that the high priest wore and sent it banging to the floor. Ru bobbed low with surprising alacrity and kept out of sight behind his guards.

"Quickly!" shouted Kiron, as the attack slackened. "Before they can cut us off."

Still facing their opponents, the little band backed slowly through the door and then hastened along the corridor to Kiron's quarters. A few of the party had been wounded in the short conflict, and these were treated as Kiron revealed his doings to the Americans.

"I sent a messenger to your apartments and learned from the Indians that you had left instructions not to be disturbed. After a little while Ru was interrupted by some of his men who talked excitedly, although I could not hear what was said. An evil but satisfying look came over his face as he exchanged a word with Rana,

[p. 112]

and then his men rushed off with new instructions.

"As soon as the opportunity presented itself, I slipped away to your apartments. Maya admitted that you were not there, and I set out to find you. The boat that I had lent you was gone, and a little distance from there I found a fisherman who told me of an incoming barge that held prisoners from Sele. Messages were sent to Laidlaw and these men whom I felt certain I could count on, and we armed ourselves. You know the rest. What do you know of Leola?"

Morse told him and the king's face became pale and hard as he heard of the devotion of the priestess, Lycida.

"They left the palace by another way," he said slowly. "If I had met them..." he paused and let his sentence go unfinished, fighting deep emotion. Finally he gained control of himself.

"We cannot stay here indefinitely. The doors are solid, but Ru will inflame all of Atlantis against us. They are already in mortal fear from the earth tremors. The fisherman told me that the western waters are white with dead fish, and the paint on his boat was blistered with the heat. The volcanic cloud is red with the reflection of fire."

He turned to the nobles who had fought for him. "I do not wish to embroil you in this quarrel, my friends. Yet, I am afraid that you are already marked men."

"Your cause is ours, Kiron," one of them answered for all.

"Good! If I can get word to my villa, there are fifty men there who are well-trained in the use of arms. But our numbers will still remain too few," he mused sadly.

"Leola and her friend must be rescued," interposed Morse quietly but firmly. "Ru plans to sacrifice them at dawn. We must reach them somehow. A raid on Sele--"

"We would be cut down before we reached the boats," said Kiron.

"Then a bold stroke in the temple. Can you gain us entrance somehow? If we could hide ourselves until the right moment, seize the girls, and fight out way to the tunnel, we might have a chance. The guns will hold

[p. 113]

them off if we can take them by surprise."

Kiron looked at Morse doubtfully.

"It is the only thing we can do," he agreed finally. "It is a desperate chance. Your death tubes may aid us to win through, but I think Ru will be certain to guard the tunnel. But I can gain access to the temple by the royal entrance. It opens only to my touch, and even Ru does not have the secret. The passage leads from here to the chamber of Tele, the astrologer. He will help us, for he has no love for Ru. The priests hate him because he will not read the stars to suit their will."

A fierce hammering sounded on the metal doors that shut off the wing from the rest of the palace. Maya appeared to tell them that Ru's forces had mustered for an attack.

"If the doors will hold them for awhile, " said Morse, "we can collect our ammunition and make our way to your astrologer."

On the outside, men battered savagely at the doors. It took only a few moments to secure the arms, the flashlights, and the field glasses. They stepped into the large room that housed the king's pool, and Kiron moved to its side, reaching for some unseen object beneath the water's surface. There was a rush of water, and the pool emptied rapidly.

Kiron turned and motioned them down a flight of steps.

Along the side of the pool, a series of bronze rings were set for handholds. The king inspected them carefully, selected one, and gave it a peculiar twist to the side. A low door appeared, and they passed through, followed by the nobles who had cast their lot with the king. The passage was pitch dark. Laidlaw switched on his flashlight and by its light Kiron found a lever set in the wall. As he pulled it, the door behind them closed quickly, and the sound of water was easily distinguishable. The pool was being refilled.

"The doors should hold them," said Kiron hopefully. "I made sure that they were well built. By the time they have them down, the pool will have reached its normal level. Let me lead. There are other tricks that make this hidden way secure."

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 114]

  

CHAPTER XII--THE HALL OF SACRIFICE

The hidden way led downward with sudden dips and turns. Along the route they passed through two ancient doors, both several inches thick and encased in metal. They were opened only after Kiron had spoken through a tube and set in motion delicately balanced machinery that was controlled by the action of a diaphragm. Finally, they came to the end of the passage--to face a blank wall.

Silencing his companions, Kiron blew into a pipe that ran into the wall. For a minute nothing happened, and then a soft, muffled whistle penetrated back through the tube. Laidlaw and Morse exchanged glances as Kiron spoke swiftly into the tube and stepped back. The wall slid silently away, and they crowded into a room that was almost filled by the numbers of their party.

An old man, bowed nearly double, so that his straggling beard swept the floor, greeted them. The men of the king's party moved a step backward, involuntarily, awed to be in the presence of the astrologer who could read in the stars the secrets of their life and death.

The stargazer wore a black robe emblazoned with rayed disks worked in gold and silver. On his breast was the representation of the sun, centered by an opal that changed color at every laboring breath. His hands shook palsiedly. The wrinkled skin of his face held the unhealthy pallor of shadowed fungi. Only his two eyes lived, and they mated the opal of the ornament.

His first words halted the king's speech. "I expected you, Kiron," he said simply, in a deep voice that was astonishingly vibrant. "You and the strangers. The stars have told me." He pointed to a circular stone on which was engraved a mass of symbols.

"In the month of Pasiphae, in this generation, disaster shall come to Atlantis. Disaster from within and without. The appointed time is here. As the stars are born in flame and perish in dead ashes, so nations rise and fall as the gods have appointed.

"Still, the children of Atlantis will not perish in entirety. In an alien land, you"--he pointed a wavering finger at Kiron--"will survive with the priestess

[p. 115]

you love. In the far days to come, your son's son shall once again rule the people of Minos. And you"--he fixed his lustrous eyes upon a fascinated Morse--"you, too shall breed those who will restore the ancient glory of Atlantis.

"Last night, I read the Stars. Soon you will travel beneath constellations I have never seen; yet ones I know well. You will tread a path laid out aeons before you drew your first breath. I have prophesized this to Ru and his priests, but because I have refused to twist the inexorable law that is written in the sky to their ambitions, I am discredited.

"What is your will?"

Kiron explained quickly, and the sage nodded.

"Rest in the best manner that you can until I call you," he said. "I go to read the symbols of the night. No one will suspect your presence here. Will you come with me, man of another land?" he asked Laidlaw. "My time is short, and yet I would exchange knowledge with you. The brain may die, but knowledge is incorruptible. When we return I will place you behind the calendar disk in a hollow that is unknown to Ru. The disk is pierced in its carving, and you can observe all that passes, and at the chosen moment enter the temple.

"The way is difficult, and the omens tell of hardship and death. Yet courage will take you to your end."

Laidlaw and the astrologer disappeared up a narrow, winding stair, and the party relaxed as far as cramped quarters would permit. There could be no thought of sleep in the anxiety of what was to come,: and presently Kiron arose.

"The way should be clear now," he said. "I will return to my quarters by the way that we entered, and then leave the palace in disguise. We can use the men who are at my villa. I think the tunnel to the outer world will be guarded, but there is an old exit at the northern end of the lake that was closed many years ago. Still, we may be able to open it--if we can get that far."

Morse tried to dissuade him, but the king was resolute.

"We must have more men," he said, and Morse reluctantly acknowledged this. Even with the advantage

[p. 116]

given them by their firearms, they would be smothered quickly by the sheer weight of the numbers opposing them.

Kiron departed, and the moments dragged until Tele and Laidlaw returned.

"There are two hours left before daylight," said Laidlaw, "and the night is almost as bright as day with the reflection from the volcano. Unless I miss my guess, we're going to see an eruption within twenty-four hours. We counted four shocks while we were on the parapet, and the city is beginning to awaken. Ru has sent messengers out to keep the people informed."

"Damn him!" said Morse. "I won't miss the next time I get a shot at him. Did you see anything of Kiron?"

"We didn't see him, and we were careful not to expose ourselves," said Laidlaw, once Morse had explained the king's errand. "There are many boats on the lake. The priestesses from Sele have arrived, and we heard them chanting."

Aside to Morse, he said: "Tele has cast his lot with us. By giving us sanctuary he will be linked to us the moment we show ourselves from behind the calendar stone. He is a rare mixture of shrewdness and more than a smattering of real science. I hope we can take him back with us. I like him. You haven't brought anything along to eat, have you?"

"Not I," Morse answered. "Didn't you satisfy yourself at the feast?"

"My mouth was filled with words when it should have been full of meat," said Laidlaw wryly.

"I'm afraid you'll be long hungry before our next meal. We've got to be moving."

They filed down a slanting corridor to find themselves in a circular chamber closed by a great circle of stone slitted with deep carving on its unexposed side. The flashlight showed a bronze pipe that was fitted with a mouthpiece leading to a box-like affair above the stone.

"Tele's private megaphone by which he spouts his oracles," guessed Laidlaw. He switched off his flashlight at the astrologer's directive.

They crowded around the openings that looked into

[p. 117]

the Hall of Sacrifice. The darkness harbored them, and they waited, fingering their weapons nervously.

Suddenly, lights appeared in the inner chamber. The hall was revealed in all its vastness, a forbidding place carved from solid rock. Frescoes of frightening sacrificial rites decorated the walls. Directly in line with the calendar stone was an altar, a high platform built of massive blocks on which rested a golden flower, its petals closed upon its center. Above it loomed the savage figure of the deity, cross-legged, clad in a loin cloth, a mighty idol with the head of a bull. Its eyes glowed crimson, and one hand held a torch that spouted a flame of natural gas. The other held a golden goblet. Steps led up to the altar, and on either side stood two thrones of marble.

A murmur of voices reached the ears of the hidden people. Before them Ru and his attendants entered the chamber and prostrated themselves before the altar. They were clad in ceremonial vestments that fairly coruscated with gems and polished metal.

Morse's finger itched on the trigger of his pistol. Only the knowledge that a shot would destroy all chances of saving Leola restrained him.

A priest advanced to a pillar that was hewn in rough semblance of a human figure with bowed shoulders that supported the roof of the chamber. He pressed a center spot in the carved figure. Slowly the petals of the flower lifted and fell back until they formed the rays of the sun about a transparent center of crystal through which shone a ruddy glow. Another man worked a lever from behind one of the thrones. A grating noise could be heard; Ru and the priests stepped rapidly aside as a portion of floor opened before them, and the chamber was filled with the glare and heat of a roaring furnace, Tongues of fierce flame increased the temperature perceptibly before the opening closed again.

"The Spot of Sacrifice," whispered Laidlaw. "Connected by a shaft with the volcano itself, I think. At dawn, the sun shines through a crack that penetrates the roof and faces the east. The  is the finger of Minos which stirs his emblem, the sun flower, to life. With its opening the shaft is uncovered, and the victim is hot into the incandescent lava.

[p. 118]

"Of course the sunbeam is a theatrical trick. The devilish invention works mechanically. But the finger of Minos is a vital part of the ritual that ties it to the supernatural. And Tele declares it will not pierce the slit today, though there is no eclipse due. He thinks the smoke from the volcano will veil the sun, and he's probably right. It should put a hitch in Ru's ceremonial."

"I hope so," said Morse anxiously. "I'm afraid something may have happened to Kiron. He's got to be here before daylight to do us any good or to avoid discovery."

Ru and his followers, satisfied that the hellish  was in working order, departed. The lights still burned in the Hall of Sacrifice, and from beyond the walls the silent watchers could hear the faint sound of chanting.

After a time, a column of guards filed in and fixed ropes to keep back the populace who were never allowed too close to the "divine" mysteries. When this was completed, some of the men took up stations by the main entrance, and the crowd swarmed in. Their murmur of conversation was subdued in the presence of the god and the nature of the circumstance.

Finally, Ru and his train made their entrance. In another part of the chamber, a door opened, and the sound of chanting became clear and loud. The priestesses of Pasiphae, their white and silver vestments changed for robes of somber purple that was almost a black marched toward the altar. In their midst Leola and Lycida walked with heads erect.

Four of the priests received the victims, as the priestesses took up a station to the right of the altar, standing opposite to the attendants of Ru. There was a long pause.

In the  cavity behind the calendar stone, Morse and Laidlaw could hear the beating of their hearts as they prayed for Kiron's coming. They counted a double company of guards within the Hall of Sacrifice, and another detachment entered in company with Rana, who passed by Leola with a look of triumph. She seated herself majestically on one of the thrones, while the other--the throne of Kiron--

[p. 119]

remained empty.

The priests of Minos began a sacred song to the sun. Ru stood in an expectant attitude, glancing above him to the cut in the roof through which the sunbeam would fall. The four priests bound the feet of the victims, and Leola was left standing on the Spot of Sacrifice.

At Tele's bidding, the little company grouped to one side behind the calendar stone. The astrologer readied himself to touch the mechanism that would swing the stone on a pivot, watching Morse intently. Morse, in turn, watched every move of the priests for the first suggestion of a movement that would cause the flower to open.

But Ru cast anxious looks at the slot above him. The lights had been lowered to make the appearance of the sunbeam more effective, but nothing happened. Twice the priests repeated the final phrases of their chant:

"The Sun God comes in flame.
  Hail unto Re, all hail!
  Acclaim his sacred name
  To Re, all hail!"

No finger of light appeared. The people shifted uneasily, and a deep voice sounded:

"Re refuses the sacrifice.
  He shines not upon deeds that are unjust."

It was the voice of the Oracle. For a moment even Ru was startled. Morse could see the frightened eyes of the guards as Tele's impressive voice boomed through his megaphone. He had confided the secret of the sunbeam's non-appearance. The earthquake had loosened courses from the roof, but, with characteristic mystery, reserved this knowledge until it became necessary to use every second of delay.

Ru grew furious, aware that his own tricks were being used against him. He faced the people knowing that he must act without delay.

"By Re and Minos," he cried, "the Oracle speaks falsely. The sun is veiled by the smoke from the volcano.

[p. 120]

[paragraph continues] But its power can pierce the cloud. Look! The sun flower opens!"

A priest had moved silently to the pillar and touched the hidden stud. The rays began to lift. A second priest advanced toward the lever that would precipitate Leola into the shaft as the heart of the flower was disclosed.

The calendar stone revolved on its edge, and Morse, Laidlaw, and their band swept into the temple. Laidlaw fired at the priest, who dodged unhurt behind Rana's throne as soon as he caught sight of them. Morse caught Leola to his side, while Rana, maddened by rage and jealousy, leaped at her sister with an upraised knife. From behind the throne Ru cried out to stop her, but the queen gave him not so much as a look. At that moment a portion of the floor rolled back, and a great tongue of flame shot almost to the temple roof. Rana shrieked, dropped her weapon, and covered her face with her hands, seared and blinded with the leaping flames. She tottered and fell forward with a hideous shriek into the shaft of death.

The temple became a bedlam. The guards fell back momentarily, then attacked the band with fury, pressing them back toward the calendar stone. Suddenly, Kiron appeared behind them with a body of fifty men, and the guards fell back before these new reinforcements. The king moved forward swiftly and pulled Lycida from the arms of a pair of Ru's henchmen who had sought to push her into the flames.

For a moment, there was a lull in the fighting, and then Ru's strong voice called out. He urged the multitude to avenge their queen and the profanation of the temple, and the spectators, who had been silent spectators to the fierce battle, looked at each other dumbly. Ru's urging was renewed, and then with a thunderous roar the mob surged forward. Morse had time to set Leola behind the stone, and then joined Laidlaw and the two Indians in a fusillade at their attackers. But the wave could not be stopped; the numbers were too great.

Tele was down, gasping his life away with a great wound in his breast. And Kiron himself was hard pressed until Laidlaw, noticing the king's peril, shot two of his closest adversaries. Ru, his passion kindled by the overpowering rush of the multitude, forgot his

[p. 121]

danger in the impending victory. He moved from his sanctuary behind the throne, shrieking his hate. And for just a moment he was revealed to Morse.

The American steadied himself and his aim was true. A crimson star blazed on the forehead of the high priest, and he screamed, spun wildly, and plunged headlong into the fiery pit.

In the next minute the band was behind the great stone, and Kiron fumbled for the hidden spring. He found it, and the ponderous mass shut out the furious attackers.

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIII--THE END OF ATLANTIS

For what seemed like hours, but what was in reality only a few minutes, Kiron and his companions traversed unused passages until they had reached the street. As they emerged from the palace, the earth shook violently, and a number of men were thrown to the ground. The sky was leaden where the great pall of the volcano shifted above the city, lit up by sudden flashes. The lake was covered with waves in which fish floated by the thousands, and steam hung above the surface like a low fog.

Here and there along the causeway sections of cornices had fallen. Apparently tremors, which had gone unnoticed in the low level of the temple during the intense fighting, had been occurring with greater frequency.

Kiron led them to the boats in which he had landed his men. As the band showed themselves on the main causeway, howls of rage greeted them. Behind them, they saw the first ranks of the infuriated populace, some of the guards, and a few of the bolder priests, who burst from the temple entrance like angry hornets.

The boats were boarded and pushed into the lake with less than a hundred feet to spare, but the pursuers poured into other vessels, and their oars lashed the water to a frenzied foam. Morse, Laidlaw, and the two Indians sought to discourage them with their rifles, but the odds were too great. And many of the pursuing craft, with two tiers of oars, were gradually overhauling

[p. 122]

them.

"We'll have to land on Sele," shouted Kiron. "We can fight them from the water stairs and have the temple to fall back to."

"We'll have to watch out or they'll flank us," said Morse, remembering the cove. "Are there any other landing places besides that one they used to capture us?" he asked Leola.

"There are none," she answered.

"Then Maya and Xolo can guard the cove with a dozen men and their guns. If only we had more rifles!"

The little group moved away quickly, following the Indians. There was little time for talk, barely time to range themselves upon the shallow steps of Sele, before the leading galley moved alongside, and the fight was on again.

Morse and Laidlaw checked the first attack, but ammunition was running low. Moreover, their opponents were now fully convinced that the volcanic eruption and earthquake were caused by the actions of the priestess and the outsiders, and they fought desperately. Soon, the lower steps were covered with dead and dying, but the attack did not waver. Step by step the little force retreated, fighting tenaciously. Behind shields set edge to edge, they wielded their swords, while those in the second line flung short javelins or thrust with long spears.

The defenders held the advantage of the steps which had been hewn from the rocky bed of the island. Yet, they were rolled back inevitably toward the temple. Three galleys had landed, and in the distance additional ships were leaving the city.

The guards, trained fighters that they were, fought like fiends. Their giant leader appeared invulnerable as he swung his ax with frightful and deadly dexterity, changing it to either hand as the occasion demanded and shouting wild cries to which his henchmen responded. Kiron attacked him and was beaten to his knees, recovering under the prompt covering of friendly shields.

At last the little band of defenders found themselves unable to retreat--they had been backed against the columns of the temple. Laidlaw and Morse were close

[p. 123]

beside each other when they fired their last cartridges. Morse stooped to secure a spear, and, as he rose, the giant guardsman, cleaving a way through the wavering ranks, charged at him. His swift leap evaded Morse's spearthrust, and with a shout of triumph he leaped in, ax swinging high. Morse was off-balance, and there was no aid at hand. Laidlaw was throttling an assailant in his powerful hands, and the balance of Kiron's men were reeling in near-exhaustion. Before Morse could ready himself for a defense, something whistled past his ear. The giant guardsman, with a look of astonishment, dropped his ax and flung up both arms.

From his broad chest protruded the feathered shaft of an arrow. Others began to fly, two in a volley, straight to their marks. Morse secured the bronze battleax that had threatened him and turned to see Leola and her companion, Lycida, loosing arrow after arrow against their attackers. There were no bows to be used in retaliation. The weapon had become almost obsolete and was used only by the priestesses of Pasiphae as a sacred symbol.

Morse waved at Leola, and she called out encouragement. Laidlaw had found a sword and was swinging it around him with unquenchable fury, the great scientist lost in a berserk madness. Morse, ax in hand, fought to his side, and together they inspired a rally that drove back the attackers. As the fighting ceased, Maya and Xolo came up on the run, followed closely by the men who had been dispatched to guard the other landing. They reported that an earthquake had closed the cove, squeezing the rocks into a high dike. These reinforcements were welcome, particularly the weapons with the few remaining cartridges.

But it could only be the beginning of the end. Less than a dozen of the initial force remained on their feet. The survivors were wounded, bruised, almost too weary to lift their weapons. Twenty boats were on the lake, bringing certain death closer at every oar pull.

In the breathing space  by fate they greeted each other with grim smiles. The two priestesses stood close to the men they had chosen over their vows, and Laidlaw surveyed them with looks of kindly sympathy. The scientist looked like a Viking warrior,

[p. 124]

with his hair and beard in a ruffled mane. Bare from the waist, his body was splotched with blood, and there was a nasty cut on one forearm. He had set a helmet on his head, and a gory sword was still clutched in one hand.

"It's a good way to go out," he grinned. "I've always thought I'd like to be in one good, smashing fight. And we've had it. Ey! Here they come!"

The lovers embraced for a final time. The flotilla was less than a hundred yards away, and shouts of vengeance carried from them. The three galleys that had first pursued them floated idly, covered with dead and dying, a monument to the bravery of the hunted. But less than twenty remained able to give battle to an enemy numbering more than a thousand.

A frightful roar came from the volcano. The cloud pall shook and scattered as flame shot up. The crate . r lip became a molten mass that slowly moved down the steep slopes, erasing the snow. The island quivered, shook. Behind them temple columns toppled and crashed down. The water stairs were split in two, the edges grinding and working hungrily against each other. A great wave suddenly slapped at the land and sent its scalding spray among them. The men in the boats ceased to row. A second lava overflow spilled from the crater in time with a second shock.

Leola clutched at Morse's arm.

"Look!" she cried, pointing to the northern shore. The wall of the lake was opening! The mountain dissolved before their eyes, a great wedge splitting below the water line. Clouds of fine ash began to fall, covering the lake with scum and the land with fine powder that choked them., The boats were now rowing frantically for the farther shore.

"They'll never make it," said Laidlaw. "The current will grip them. They'll go over that Niagara--listen to the sound of it. The lake's emptying! Damn these ashes; my mouth's full of them!"

They climbed the shattered steps and entered the half-ruined temple. Leola led them to an inner chamber where they found food and drink. And somehow they ate by the light of a pair of torches. The temple lights had been destroyed, and the sifting ashes turned

[p. 125]

the day to a choking twilight. The volcanic dust became unbearable, and they descended into the temple crypts, where flashlight rays exposed rows of skeletons in niches hollowed from the rock.

Laidlaw examined the latter.

"Lava," he said. "The whole island's built out of it. These tunnels are of volcanic formation. I'm afraid that we and Atlantis are going to go out together."

Morse took Leola in his arms. "Are you afraid?" he asked.

"Afraid? Of what? No matter where the path leads, we go down it together."

"I believe we'll get clear," said Kiron optimistically. "Do you remember Tele's prediction? That with courage we would win through? I have faith in that last Oracle of his. He was generally too correct to be popular."

Encouraged by Kiron, they fought the hours in silence. No ashes reached them, but the air grew foul and hot. Twice earth tremors of lessening violence loosened ancient skeletons upon them. Gradually the temperature increased until they could endure it no longer.

"Lava rising in the old channels," announced Laidlaw. "But the shocks seem to have ended. Suppose we take a look."

 

The world on which they gazed was new to them. The wan rays of the setting sun shone tired and old upon a gray landscape. The volcanic ash had ceased to fall, but everywhere there was a fine dust--uprooted trees, damaged buildings, all powdered to the same dreary shade. The water stairs--what was left of them--ended in a sheer drop to what had been the lake. The water had fallen thirty feet, and the turbid current swirled slowly toward the gap in the mountains through which it still poured with the noise of a distant cataract. There was not a boat to be seen.

The city of Dor stood upon cliffs. Many of its buildings had fallen, and its palace and temple were on fire. Little remained that had escaped nature's hand of destruction. Nor was there any sign of human survival. The volcano vomited its pall of smoke, black above,

[p. 126]

blood-red below, and the slow lava stream had almost reached the line of trees. Everything was dull with the gray film that floated in patches upon the dying lake. Here was the abomination of desolation.

"Not a cheerful outlook," said Morse. "But it is an outlook!"

"There are no boats," said Kiron.

"There are trees," Morse answered. "We can build a raft."

 

Three months later there was talk across the table in Morse's dining room.

"I think I'll go back to Atlantis," said Laidlaw. Kiron made a face. "Haven't you had enough of destruction?" he asked.

Laidlaw smiled. "I don't think you four have been married long enough for me to coax away the grooms, but I want to finish my researches, and with Kiron's permission I'm going to form a company."

"A company for what?" asked Kiron. "And why with my permission?"

"Because you should have the first claim on it. The lake bottom off the temple water stairs ought to be high and dry by now. There's a fortune lying there in gold and jewels to be picked up."

"Getting a mercenary streak, Laidlaw?" laughed Morse.

"Money is always useful, if only to leave to godchildren," answered the scientist. "I'll use most of it for archeological researches, with the exception of the possible legacies just mentioned. Want to come with me, Kiron?"

The late king of Atlantis shook his head.

"We haven't started on what you call our honeymoon yet. Better come with us, Laidlaw. We are going to spend it in Crete."

"A lot of company you'd be to me, or I to you," said the scientist. "I prefer Atlantis. How about you, Morse? Think of the treasure-trove we can uncover."

"I think," said Morse, as his hand closed over that of Leola's, "that as far as I'm concerned, I have the treasure of Atlantis."

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 127]

  

Advertisement

The following period advertisement followed the text of this book in the proof edition. It has been transcribed for completeness.

  

The Pathless Trail

  

SWASHBUCKLING JUNGLE ADVENTURE

In the year 1925, the controversial Englishman, Colonel P. H. Fawcett disappeared into the remote mountain country of Brazil to a fate that baffled a curious world. Colonel Fawcett had excited archeologists and armchair adventurers with his quest for a lost prehistoric city which he believed to exist in this unexplored hinterland.

Three years earlier, a lone American--a teller of tales and a searcher after truth--ventured into the dangerous and unknown region of the Brazilian-Venezuelan border on a quest of his own. The land that he entered was the most fearsome in the world--the land of the sixty-foot sucuruju (anaconda), ruthless cannibals, and jungle disease; a land which a Conan or a Solomon Kane might think twice about entering. Yet Arthur Olney Friel entered this world seeking the truth behind the many legends and tales of white Indians in the back of beyond. And he returned to chronicle his adventures and his deductions in the poetically

(continued on next page)

[p. 128]

titled non-fiction volume, THE RIVER OF SEVEN STARS.

But Friel was best known in those days for his fiction. A prolific and accomplished writer, he wrote his novels of high adventure about the fearsome jungle that he knew first hand, and which he flavored with his own fertile imagination.

THE PATHLESS TRAIL is a fitting novel to initiate the "Time-Lost" series from Centaur Press. It is a swashbuckler; heroic, fastmoving, and loaded to the hilt with savage creatures and men of the unexplored jungle. It is a book of conflict, and its heroes are men of conflict.

THE PATHLESS TRAIL is the first of a quartet of books that grow progressively more imaginative with each title. Historically, these novels appeared as long serials in the grand old pulp magazine of the 1920's, Adventure, prior to appearing in book form in both this country and in England. Other Adventure stalwarts of the period included Talbot Mundy, Harold Lamb, Hugh Pendexter, and Arthur D. Howden Smith; an array that influenced a youthful Robert E. Howard and enthralled many thousands of readers.

Featuring white Indians, weird creatures, and dreams of empire, the series has lain half-forgotten, half-buried, its once great popularity in the shadow of almost fifty years. But to this day it remains an exciting and powerful series for the armchair adventurer.

Watch for these other Centaur Press books by Arthur O. Friel:

TIGER RIVER

THE KING OF NO MAN'S LAND

MOUNTAINS OF MYSTERY

The Treasure of Atlantis, by J. Allan Dunn, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

Back cover copy

"WHY "TIME-LOST?"

During the first half of the Twentieth Century, the popular fiction magazines of the day--the "pulps"--played a major role in the development of new writing talents. They were a perfect apprenticeship for the young author, and a means of supplying a thirsty public with escape literature. Of the thousands of stories written for the pulps in this era, a respectable number went into book form.

Today, however, these stories are, in part, forgotten. Castaways of time... "Time-Lost."

After many years of research, the editors of Centaur Press have selected the best of these and fitted them into a new series. The stories themselves have defied time, and somehow have a flavor that is generally missing from contemporary fiction. This is another dimension of writing. Here is a high adventure series with direction!

WHAT ARE "TIME-LOST" BOOKS?

The basic premise of "Time-Lost" books is swashbuckling high adventure and heroic action. The setting is almost always in a realm that is strange to civilization. It may be the fearsome jungle of Brazil, flavored by the fertile imagination of Arthur O. Friel as in THE PATHLESS TRAIL. Or it may be the sword and sorcery exploits of Solomon Kane in Atlantean Negari as in Robert E. Howard's THE MOON OF SKULLS.

"TIME-LOST" BOOKS from CENTAUR PRESS

THE PATHLESS TRAIL by Arthur O. Friel

THE MOON OF SKULLS by Robert E. Howard

THE TREASURE OF ATLANTIS by J. Allan Dunn

THE HAND OF KANE by Robert E. Howard

TIGER RIVER by Arthur O. Friel

THE BOWL OF BAAL by Robert Ames Bennet

SWORDSMEN & SUPERMEN "Time-Lost" anthology

CAESAR DIES by Talbot Mundy

THE KING OF NO MAN'S LAND by Arthur O. Friel

SOLOMON KANE by Robert E. Howard

 

 

 

    
